                             NONRESIDENT
                               TRAINING
                               COURSE




Navy Electricity and
Electronics Training
Series
Module 8—Introduction to Amplifiers

NAVEDTRA 14180




  DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
                                             PREFACE
About this course:

This is a self-study course. By studying this course, you can improve your professional/military knowledge,
as well as prepare for the Navywide advancement-in-rate examination. It contains subject matter about day-
to-day occupational knowledge and skill requirements and includes text, tables, and illustrations to help you
understand the information. An additional important feature of this course is its reference to useful
information in other publications. The well-prepared Sailor will take the time to look up the additional
information.

Any errata for this course can be found at https://www.advancement.cnet.navy.mil under Products.

Training series information:

This is Module 8 of a series. For a listing and description of the entire series, see NAVEDTRA 12061,
Catalog of Nonresident Training Courses, at https://www.advancement.cnet.navy.mil.

History of the course:

•    Sep 1998: Original edition released.
•    Oct 2003: Administrative update released. Entered administrative updates. Technical content was
    not reviewed or revised.



                                            Published by
                                NAVAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING
                                 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
                                   AND TECHNOLOGY CENTER
                                  https://www.cnet.navy.mil/netpdtc



              POINTS OF CONTACT                                       ADDRESS
•    E-mail: fleetservices@cnet.navy.mil               COMMANDING OFFICER
•    Phone:                                            NETPDTC N331
    Toll free: (877) 264-8583                          6490 SAUFLEY FIELD ROAD
    Comm: (850) 452-1511/1181/1859                     PENSACOLA FL 32559-5000
    DSN: 922-1511/1181/1859
    FAX: (850) 452-1370



                                                                 NAVSUP Logistics Tracking Number
                                                                                  0504-LP-026-8330
                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS

 CHAPTER                                                                                                                                        PAGE

                1. Amplifiers ..............................................................................................................      1-1

                2. Video and RF Amplifiers .......................................................................................                2-1

                3. Special Amplifiers..................................................................................................           3-1



APPENDIX

                I. Glossary .................................................................................................................    AI-1

INDEX.........................................................................................................................................INDEX-1


                                           ASSIGNMENT QUESTIONS follow Index.
                                               CHAPTER 1

                                            AMPLIFIERS

                                         LEARNING OBJECTIVES

     Learning objectives are stated at the beginning of each chapter. These learning objectives serve as a
preview of the information you are expected to learn in the chapter. The comprehensive check questions
are based on the objectives. By successfully completing the OCC/ECC, you indicate that you have met
the objectives and have learned the information. The learning objectives are listed below.

     Upon completion of this chapter, you will be able to:

     1. Define amplification and list several common uses; state two ways in which amplifiers are
        classified.

     2. List the four classes of operation of, four methods of coupling for, and the impedance
        characteristics of the three configurations of a transistor amplifier.

     3. Define feedback and list the two types of feedback.

     4. Describe and state one use for a phase splitter.

     5. State a common use for and one advantage of a push-pull amplifier.



                                              INTRODUCTION

     This chapter is a milestone in your study of electronics. Previous modules have been concerned more
with individual components of circuits than with the complete circuits as the subject. This chapter and the
other chapters of this module are concerned with the circuitry of amplifiers. While components are
discussed, the discussion of the components is not an explanation of the working of the component itself
(these have been covered in previous modules) but an explanation of the component as it relates to the
circuit.

    The circuits this chapter is concerned with are AMPLIFIERS. Amplifiers are devices that provide
AMPLIFICATION. That doesn't explain much, but it does describe an amplifier if you know what
amplification is and what it is used for.

WHAT IS AMPLIFICATION?

      Just as an amplifier is a device that provides amplification, amplification is the process of providing
an increase in AMPLITUDE. Amplitude is a term that describes the size of a signal. In terms of a.c.,
amplitude usually refers to the amount of voltage or current. A 5-volt peak-to-peak a.c.signal would be
larger in amplitude than a 4-volt peak-to-peak a.c. signal. "SIGNAL" is a general term used to refer to any
a.c. or d.c. of interest in a circuit; e.g., input signal and output signal. A signal can be large or small, ac. or
d.c., a sine wave or nonsinusoidal, or even nonelectrical such as sound or light. "Signal" is a very general
term and, therefore, not very descriptive by itself, but it does sound more technical than the word "thing".
It is not very impressive to refer to the "input thing" or the "thing that comes out of this circuit."



                                                       1-1
     Perhaps the concept of the relationship of amplifier-amplification-amplitude will be clearer if you
consider a parallel situation (an analogy). A magnifying glass is a magnifier. As such, it provides
magnification which is an increase in the magnitude (size) of an object. This relationship of magnifier-
magnification-magnitude is the same as the relationship of amplifier-amplification-amplitude. The
analogy is true in one other aspect as well. The magnifier does not change the object that is being
magnified; it is only the image that is larger, not the object itself. With the amplifier, the output signal
differs in amplitude from the input signal, but the input signal still exists unchanged. So, the object (input
signal) and the magnifier (amplifier) control the image (output signal).

     An amplifier can be defined as a device that enables an input signal to control an output signal. The
output signal will have some (or all) of the characteristics of the input signal but will generally be larger
than the input signal in terms of voltage, current, or power.

USES OF AMPLIFICATION

    Most electronic devices use amplifiers to provide various amounts of signal amplification. Since
most signals are originally too small to control or drive the desired device, some amplification is needed.

     For example, the audio signal taken from a record is too small to drive a speaker, so amplification is
needed. The signal will be amplified several times between the needle of the record player and the
speaker. Each time the signal is amplified it is said to go through a STAGE of amplification. The audio
amplifier shown connected between the turntable and speaker system in figure 1-1 contains several stages
of amplification.




                                    TURNTABLE




                                  AMPLIFIER


                                                                   SPEAKER

                                                                             NTS080101




                               Figure 1-1.—Amplifier as used with turntable and speaker.

     Notice the triangle used in figure 1-1 to represent the amplifier. This triangle is the standard block
diagram symbol for an amplifier.

     Another example of the use of an amplifier is shown in figure 1-2. In a radio receiver, the signal
picked up by the antenna is too weak (small) to be used as it is. This signal must be amplified before it is
sent to the detector. (The detector separates the audio signal from the frequency that was sent by the
transmitter. The way in which this is done will be discussed later in this training series.)




                                                      1-2
                             ANTENNA
                                                                   DETECTOR
                                                            (SEPARATES AUDIO FROM
                                                               RADIO FREQUENCY)




                                      AMPLIFIER
                                  (RADIO FREQUENCY)




                                 AMPLIFIER
                             (AUDIO FREQUENCY)                  SPEAKER
                                                                              NTS080102



                                  Figure 1-2.—Amplifiers as used in radio receiver.

    The audio signal from the detector will then be amplified to make it large enough to drive the
speaker of the radio.

      Almost every electronic device contains at least one stage of amplification, so you will be seeing
amplifiers in many devices that you work on. Amplifiers will also be used in most of the NEETS modules
that follow this one.

  Q-1. What is amplification?

  Q-2. Does an amplifier actually change an input signal? Why or why not?

  Q-3. Why do electronic devices use amplifiers?



                                 CLASSIFICATION OF AMPLIFIERS

     Most electronic devices use at least one amplifier, but there are many types of amplifiers. This
module will not try to describe all the different types of amplifiers. You will be shown the general
principles of amplifiers and some typical amplifier circuits.

     Most amplifiers can be classified in two ways. The first classification is by their function. This
means they are basically voltage amplifiers or power amplifiers. The second classification is by their
frequency response. In other words what frequencies are they designed to amplify?

     If you describe an amplifier by these two classifications (function and frequency response) you will
have a good working description of the amplifier. You may not know what the exact circuitry is, but you
will know what the amplifier does and the frequencies that it is designed to handle.

VOLTAGE AMPLIFIERS AND POWER AMPLIFIERS

     All amplifiers are current-control devices. The input signal to an amplifier controls the current output
of the amplifier. The connections of the amplifying device (electron tube, transistor, magnetic amplifier,


                                                     1-3
etc.) and the circuitry of the amplifier determine the classification. Amplifiers are classified as voltage or
power amplifiers.

     A VOLTAGE AMPLIFIER is an amplifier in which the output signal voltage is larger than the input
signal voltage. In other words, a voltage amplifier amplifies the voltage of the input signal.

     A POWER AMPLIFIER is an amplifier in which the output signal power is greater than the input
signal power. In other words, a power amplifier amplifies the power of the input signal. Most power
amplifiers are used as the final amplifier (stage of amplification) and control (or drive) the output device.
The output device could be a speaker, an indicating device, an antenna, or the heads on a tape recorder.
Whatever the device, the power to make it work (or drive it) comes from the final stage of amplification
which is a power amplifier.

     Figure 1-3 shows a simple block diagram of a voltage amplifier with its input and output signals and
a power amplifier with its input and output signals. Notice that in view (A) the output signal voltage is
larger than the input signal voltage. Since the current values for the input and output signals are not
shown, you cannot tell if there is a power gain in addition to the voltage gain.




                              IN                                                  OUT



                                   INPUT SIGNAL                   OUTPUT SIGNAL
                               200 mV PEAK-TO-PEAK               4 V PEAK-TO-PEAK
                                                       A


                              IN                                                 OUT




                                    INPUT SIGNAL                 OUTPUT SIGNAL
                                 10 V PEAK-TO-PEAK              5 V PEAK-TO-PEAK
                               100 mA (1W OF POWER)            2 A (10W OF POWER)
                                                       B
                                   VOLTAGE AND POWER AMPLIFIERS
                                                                             NTS080103




                              Figure 1-3.—Diagram of voltage and power amplifiers.



    In view (B) of the figure the output signal voltage is less than the input signal voltage. As a voltage
amplifier, this circuit has a gain of less than 1. The output power, however, is greater than the input
power. Therefore, this circuit is a power amplifier.

     The classification of an amplifier as a voltage or power amplifier is made by comparing the
characteristics of the input and output signals. If the output signal is larger in voltage amplitude than the
input signal, the amplifier is a voltage amplifier. If there is no voltage gain, but the output power is greater
than the input power, the amplifier is a power amplifier.




                                                      1-4
FREQUENCY RESPONSE OF AMPLIFIERS

     In addition to being classified by function, amplifiers are classified by frequency response. The
frequency response of an amplifier refers to the band of frequencies or frequency range that the amplifier
was designed to amplify.

     You may wonder why the frequency response is important. Why doesn't an amplifier designed to
amplify a signal of 1000 Hz work just as well at 1000 MHz? The answer is that the components of the
amplifier respond differently at different frequencies. The amplifying device (electron tube, transistor,
magnetic amplifier, etc.) itself will have frequency limitations and respond in different ways as the
frequency changes. Capacitors and inductors in the circuit will change their reactance as the frequency
changes. Even the slight amounts of capacitance and inductance between the circuit wiring and other
components (interelectrode capacitance and self-inductance) can become significant at high frequencies.
Since the response of components varies with the frequency, the components of an amplifier are selected
to amplify a certain range or band of frequencies.

     NOTE: For explanations of interelectrode capacitance and self-inductance see NEETS Modules 2—
Introduction to Alternating Current and Transformers; 6—Introduction to Electronic Emission, Tubes,
and Power Supplies; and 7—Introduction to Solid-State Devices and Power Supplies.

   The three broad categories of frequency response for amplifiers are AUDIO AMPLIFIER, RF
AMPLIFIER, and VIDEO AMPLIFIER.

     An audio amplifier is designed to amplify frequencies between 15 Hz and 20 kHz. Any amplifier that
is designed for this entire band of frequencies or any band of frequencies contained in the audio range is
considered to be an audio amplifier.

     In the term rf amplifier, the "rf" stands for radio frequency. These amplifiers are designed to amplify
frequencies between 10 kHz and 100,000 MHz. A single amplifier will not amplify the entire rf range, but
any amplifier whose frequency band is included in the rf range is considered an rf amplifier.

     A video amplifier is an amplifier designed to amplify a band of frequencies from 10 Hz to 6 MHz.
Because this is such a wide band of frequencies, these amplifiers are sometimes called WIDE-BAND
AMPLIFIERS. While a video amplifier will amplify a very wide band of frequencies, it does not have the
gain of narrower-band amplifiers. It also requires a great many more components than a narrow-band
amplifier to enable it to amplify a wide range of frequencies.

  Q-4. In what two ways are amplifiers classified?

  Q-5. What type of amplifier would be used to drive the speaker system of a record player?

  Q-6. What type of amplifier would be used to amplify the signal from a radio antenna?



                                      TRANSISTOR AMPLIFIERS

     A transistor amplifier is a current-control device. The current in the base of the transistor (which is
dependent on the emitter-base bias) controls the current in the collector. A vacuum-tube amplifier is also
a current-control device. The grid bias controls the plate current. These facts are expanded upon in
NEETS Module 6, Introduction to Electronic Emission, Tubes and Power Supplies, and Module 7,
Introduction to Solid-State Devices and Power Supplies.




                                                     1-5
     You might hear that a vacuum tube is a voltage-operated device (since the grid does not need to draw
current) while the transistor is a current-operated device. You might agree with this statement, but both
the vacuum tube and the transistor are still current-control devices. The whole secret to understanding
amplifiers is to remember that fact. Current control is the name of the game. Once current is controlled
you can use it to give you a voltage gain or a power gain.

    This chapter will use transistor amplifiers to present the concepts and principles of amplifiers. These
concepts apply to vacuum-tube amplifiers and, in most cases, magnetic amplifiers as well as transistor
amplifiers. If you wish to study the vacuum-tube equivalent circuits of the transistor circuits presented, an
excellent source is the EIMB, NAVSEA 0967-LP-000-0120, Electronics Circuits.

     The first amplifier concept that is discussed is the "class of operation" of an amplifier.

AMPLIFIER CLASSES OF OPERATION

     The class of operation of an amplifier is determined by the amount of time (in relation to the input
signal) that current flows in the output circuit. This is a function of the operating point of the amplifying
device. The operating point of the amplifying device is determined by the bias applied to the device.
There are four classes of operation for an amplifier. These are: A, AB, B and C. Each class of operation
has certain uses and characteristics. No one class of operation is "better" than any other class. The
selection of the "best" class of operation is determined by the use of the amplifying circuit. The best class
of operation for a phonograph is not the best class for a radio transmitter.

Class A Operation

      A simple transistor amplifier that is operated class A is shown in figure 1-4. Since the output signal
is a 100% (or 360º) copy of the input signal, current in the output circuit must flow for 100% of the input
signal time. This is the definition of a class A amplifier. Amplifier current flows for 100% of the input
signal.

                                          +                    R1
                                     V
                                         CC

                                                                 OUT



                                                                 Q1




                                                    IN
                                                                R2




                                                                    VEE




                                                                 NTS080104

                                   Figure 1-4.—A simple class A transistor amplifier.
   The class A amplifier has the characteristics of good FIDELITY and low EFFICIENCY. Fidelity
 means that the output signal is just like the input signal in all respects except amplitude. It has the same

                                                         1-6
shape and frequency. In some cases, there may be a phase difference between the input and output signal
(usually 180º), but the signals are still considered to be "good copies." If the output signal is not like the
input signal in shape or frequency, the signal is said to be DISTORTED. DISTORTION is any undesired
change in a signal from input to output.

     The efficiency of an amplifier refers to the amount of power delivered to the output compared to the
power supplied to the circuit. Since every device takes power to operate, if the amplifier operates for 360º
of input signal, it uses more power than if it only operates for 180º of input signal. If the amplifier uses
more power, less power is available for the output signal and efficiency is lower. Since class A amplifiers
operate (have current flow) for 360º of input signal, they are low in efficiency. This low efficiency is
acceptable in class A amplifiers because they are used where efficiency is not as important as fidelity.
 Class A B Operation
     If the amplifying device is biased in such a way that current flows in the device for 51% - 99% of the
input signal, the amplifier is operating class AB. A simple class AB amplifier is shown in figure 1-5.


                                        +                      R1
                                     V CC


                                                                 OUT



                                                                 Q1




                                                   IN
                                                                R2




                                                                    VEE




                                                                    NTS080105
                                 Figure 1-5.—A simple class AB transistor amplifier.
      Notice that the output signal is distorted. The output signal no longer has the same shape as the input
signal. The portion of the ou tput signal that appears to be cut off is caused by the lack of current through
the transistor. When the emitter becomes positive enough, the transistor cannot conduct because the base-
to-emitter junction is no longer forward biased. Any further increase in input signal will not cause an
increase in output signal voltage.

    Class AB amplifiers have better efficiency and poorer fidelity than class A amplifiers. They are used
when the output signal need not be a complete reproduction of the input signal, but both positive and
negative portions of the input signal must be available at the output.

     Class AB amplifiers are usually defined as amplifiers operating between class A and class B because
class A amplifiers operate on 100% of input signal and class B amplifiers (discussed next) operate on
50% of the input signal. Any amplifier operating between these two limits is operating class AB.



                                                        1-7
Class B Operation

    As was stated above, a class B amplifier operates for 50% of the input signal. A simple class B
amplifier is shown in figure 1-6.


                                             +                         R1
                                         V CC


                                                                         OUT



                                                                         Q1

                                   V
                                    BB



                                                         IN
                                                                        R2




                                                                            VEE




                                                                            NTS080106
                                   Figure 1-6.—A simple class B transistor amplifier.
     In the circuit shown in figure 1-6, the base-emitter bias will not allow the transistor to conduct
whenever the input signal becomes positive. Therefore, only the negative portion of the input signal is
reproduced in the output signal. You may wonder why a class B amplifier would be used instead of a
simple rectifier if only half the input signal is desired in the output. The answer to this is that the rectifier
does not amplify. The output signal of a rectifier cannot be higher in amplitude than the input signal. The
class B amplifier not only reproduces half the input signal, but amplifies it as well.

    Class B amplifiers are twice as efficient as class A amplifiers since the amplifying device only
conducts (and uses power) for half of the input signal. A class B amplifier is used in cases where exactly
50% of the input signal must be amplified. If less than 50% of the input signal is needed, a class C
amplifier is used.

Class C Operation

       Figure 1-7 shows a simple class C amplifier. Notice that only a small portion of the input signal is
present in the output signal. Since the transistor does not conduct except during a small portion of the
input signal, this is the most efficient amplifier. It also has the worst fidelity. The output signal bears very
little resemblance to the input signal.




                                                       1-8
                                        +                    R1
                                     V CC


                                                               OUT



                                                               Q1

                               V
                                BB



                                                  IN
                                                              R2




                                                                  VEE




                                                                    NTS080107


                                  Figure 1-7.—A simple class C transistor amplifier.

     Class C amplifiers are used where the output signal need only be present during part of one-half of
the input signal. Any amplifier that operates on less than 50% of the input signal is operated class C.

  Q-7. What determines the class of operation of an amplifier?

  Q-8. What are the four classes of operation of a transistor amplifier?

  Q-9. If the output of a circuit needs to be a complete representation of one-half of the input signal,
       what class of operation is indicated?

Q-10. Why is class C operation more efficient than class A operation?

Q-11. What class of operation has the highest fidelity?

AMPLIFIER COUPLING

     Earlier in this module it was stated that almost every electronic device contains at least one stage of
amplification. Many devices contain several stages of amplification and therefore several amplifiers.
Stages of amplification are added when a single stage will not provide the required amount of
amplification. For example, if a single stage of amplification will provide a maximum gain of 100 and the
desired gain from the device is 1000, two stages of amplification will be required. The two stages might
have gains of 10 and 100, 20 and 50, or 25 and 40. (The overall gain is the product of the individual
stages-10 × 100 = 20 × 50 = 25 × 40 = 1000.)

     Figure 1-8 shows the effect of adding stages of amplification. As stages of amplification are added,
the signal increases and the final output (from the speaker) is increased.




                                                       1-9
                                          AMPLI-
                                           FIER
                       TURNTABLE

                                                            SPEAKER


                                          AMPLI-           AMPLI-
                                           FIER             FIER
                      TURNTABLE
                                                                              SPEAKER

                                                                             SPEAKER


                                          AMPLI-           AMPLI-
                                           FIER             FIER
                      TURNTABLE




                                               AMPLI-
                                                FIER


                                                                SPEAKER     NTS080108




                                     Figure 1-8.—Adding stages of amplification.




     Whether an amplifier is one of a series in a device or a single stage connected between two other
devices (top view, figure 1-8), there must be some way for the signal to enter and leave the amplifier. The
process of transferring energy between circuits is known as COUPLING. There are various ways of
coupling signals into and out of amplifier circuits. The following is a description of some of the more
common methods of amplifier coupling.

Direct Coupling

     The method of coupling that uses the least number of circuit elements and that is, perhaps, the easiest
to understand is direct coupling. In direct coupling the output of one stage is connected directly to the
input of the following stage. Figure 1-9 shows two direct-coupled transistor amplifiers.




                                                    1-10
                                                                               13V
                                           VBB   7V            Q2
                                                                                  OUTPUT

                                    R1
                                            Q1                      R2
                                                                                     R3


                                   INPUT



                                                  R4     R5              R6               Vcc

                                                  6V          10V              15V

                                                                              NTS080109




                                  Figure 1-9.—Direct-coupled transistor amplifier.



     Notice that the output (collector) of Q1 is connected directly to the input (base) of Q2. The network
of R4, R5, and R6 is a voltage divider used to provide the bias and operating voltages for Q1 and Q2. The
entire circuit provides two stages of amplification.

     Direct coupling provides a good frequency response since no frequency-sensitive components
(inductors and capacitors) are used. The frequency response of a circuit using direct coupling is affected
only by the amplifying device itself.

     Direct coupling has several disadvantages, however. The major problem is the power supply
requirements for direct-coupled amplifiers. Each succeeding stage requires a higher voltage. The load and
voltage divider resistors use a large amount of power and the biasing can become very complicated. In
addition, it is difficult to match the impedance from stage to stage with direct coupling. (Impedance
matching is covered a little later in this chapter.)

     The direct-coupled amplifier is not very efficient and the losses increase as the number of stages
increase. Because of the disadvantages, direct coupling is not used very often.

RC Coupling

      The most commonly used coupling in amplifiers is RC coupling. An RC-coupling network is shown
in figure 1-10.




                                                       1-11
                                                                        Q2
                                                                                    OUTPUT


                                                    C1
                           Q1
                                               R1                  R2


                  INPUT



                                         + Vcc

                                                                             NTS080110

                                    Figure 1-10.—RC-coupled transistor amplifier.

    The network of R1, R2, and C1 enclosed in the dashed lines of the figure is the coupling network.
You may notice that the circuitry for Q1 and Q2 is incomplete. That is intentional so that you can
concentrate on the coupling network.

     R1 acts as a load resistor for Q1 (the first stage) and develops the output signal of that stage. Do you
remember how a capacitor reacts to ac and dc? The capacitor, C1, "blocks" the dc of Q1's collector, but
"passes" the ac output signal. R2 develops this passed, or coupled, signal as the input signal to Q2 (the
second stage). This arrangement allows the coupling of the signal while it isolates the biasing of each
stage. This solves many of the problems associated with direct coupling.

     RC coupling does have a few disadvantages. The resistors use dc power and so the amplifier has low
efficiency. The capacitor tends to limit the low-frequency response of the amplifier and the amplifying
device itself limits the high-frequency response. For audio amplifiers this is usually not a problem;
techniques for overcoming these frequency limitations will be covered later in this module.

    Before you move on to the next type of coupling, consider the capacitor in the RC coupling. You
probably remember that capacitive reactance (X C) is determined by the following formula:
                                                          1
                                               XC =
                                                       2 πfC

     This explains why the low frequencies are limited by the capacitor. As frequency decreases, XC
increases. This causes more of the signal to be "lost" in the capacitor.

    The formula for XC also shows that the value of capacitance (C) should be relatively high so that
capacitive reactance (XC) can be kept as low as possible. So, when a capacitor is used as a coupling
element, the capacitance should be relatively high so that it will couple the entire signal well and not
reduce or distort the signal.

Impedance Coupling

     Impedance coupling is very similar to RC coupling. The difference is the use of an impedance device
(a coil) to replace the load resistor of the first stage.




                                                     1-12
     Figure 1-11 shows an impedance-coupling network between two stages of amplification. L1 is the
load for Q1 and develops the output signal of the first stage. Since the d.c. resistance of a coil is low, the
efficiency of the amplifier stage is increased. The amount of signal developed in the output of the stage
depends on the inductive reactance of L1. Remember the formula for inductive reactance:

                                           X L = 2 πfL


                                                                      Q2
                                                                                OUTPUT


                                                         C1
                                 Q1
                                                                 R2
                                                    L1

                         INPUT



                                            + Vcc

                                                                           NTS080111



                                 Figure 1-11.—Impedance-coupled transistor amplifier.

     The formula shows that for inductive reactance to be large, either inductance or frequency or both
must be high. Therefore, load inductors should have relatively large amounts of inductance and are most
effective at high frequencies. This explains why impedance coupling is usually not used for audio
amplifiers.

     The rest of the coupling network (C1 and R1) functions just as their counterparts (C1 and R2) in the
RC-coupling network. C1 couples the signal between stages while blocking the d.c. and R1 develops the
input signal to the second stage (Q2).

Transformer Coupling

     Figure 1-12 shows a transformer-coupling network between two stages of amplification. The
transformer action of T1 couples the signal from the first stage to the second stage. In figure 1-12, the
primary of T1 acts as the load for the first stage (Q1) and the secondary of T1 acts as the developing
impedance for the second stage (Q2). No capacitor is needed because transformer action couples the
signal between the primary and secondary of T1.




                                                         1-13
                                                                Q2           OUTPUT
                                     Q1
                                                         T1


                                INPUT




                                                     + VCC
                                                                        NTS080112




                                Figure 1-12.—Transformer-coupled transistor amplifier.

      The inductors that make up the primary and secondary of the transformer have very little dc
resistance, so the efficiency of the amplifiers is very high. Transformer coupling is very often used for the
final output (between the final amplifier stage and the output device) because of the impedance-matching
qualities of the transformer. The frequency response of transformer-coupled amplifiers is limited by the
inductive reactance of the transformer just as it was limited in impedance coupling.

Q-12. What is the purpose of an amplifier-coupling network?

Q-13. What are four methods of coupling amplifier stages?

Q-14. What is the most common form of coupling?

Q-15. What type coupling is usually used to couple the output from a power amplifier?

Q-16. What type coupling would be most useful for an audio amplifier between the first and second
      stages?

Q-17. What type of coupling is most effective at high frequencies?

IMPEDANCE CONSIDERATIONS FOR AMPLIFIERS

     It has been mentioned that efficiency and impedance are important in amplifiers. The reasons for this
may not be too clear. You have been shown that any amplifier is a current-control device. Now there are
two other principles you should try to keep in mind. First, there is no such thing as "something for
nothing" in electronics. That means every time you do something to a signal it costs something. It might
mean a loss in fidelity to get high power. Some other compromise might also be made when a circuit is
designed. Regardless of the compromise, every stage will require and use power. This brings up the
second principle-do things as efficiently as possible. The improvement and design of electronic circuits is
an attempt to do things as cheaply as possible, in terms of power, when all the other requirements
(fidelity, power output, frequency range, etc.) have been met.

     This brings us to efficiency. The most efficient device is the one that does the job with the least loss
of power. One of the largest losses of power is caused by impedance differences between the output of
one circuit and the input of the next circuit. Perhaps the best way to think of an impedance difference
(mismatch) between circuits is to think of different-sized water pipes. If you try to connect a one-inch
water pipe to a two-inch water pipe without an adapter you will lose water. You must use an adapter. A


                                                     1-14
impedance-matching device is like that adapter. It allows the connection of two devices with different
impedances without the loss of power.

     Figure 1-13 shows two circuits connected together. Circuit number 1 can be considered as an a.c.
source (ES) whose output impedance is represented by a resistor (R1). It can be considered as an a.c.
source because the output signal is an a.c. voltage and comes from circuit number 1 through the output
impedance. The input impedance of circuit number 2 is represented by a resistor in series with the source.
The resistance is shown as variable to show what will happen as the input impedance of circuit number 2
is changed.



                             CIRCUIT NO.1                           CIRCUIT NO. 2
                               OUTPUT
                             IMPEDANCE
                                1K Ω




                                   ES = 10V

                                                                                   R2
                                   R1 = 1K Ω



                              R2               I
                                               I I   E R2       P R1        P R2

                              100Ω         9mA       900mV     82.6mW      8.3mW

                             200 Ω       8.3mA        1.67V    69.4mW     13.9mW

                              500 Ω      6.7mA        3.33V    44.4mW     22.2mW

                               1k Ω        5mA           5V      25mW       25mW

                               2k Ω      3.3mA        6.67V    11.1mW     22.2mW

                               5k Ω      1.7mA        8.33V     2.7mW     13.9mW

                              10k Ω       .9mA        9.09V      .9mW      8.3mW
                                                                           NTS0801I-11



                       Figure 1-13.—Effect of impedance matching in the coupling of two circuits.

     The chart below the circuit shows the effect of a change in the input impedance of circuit number 2
(R2) on current (I), signal voltage developed at the input of circuit number 2 (ER2), the power at the output
of circuit number 1 (PR1), and the power at the input to circuit number 2 (PR2).

     Two important facts are brought out in this chart. First, the power at the input to circuit number 2 is
greatest when the impedances are equal (matched). The power is also equal at the output of circuit
number 1 and the input of circuit number 2 when the impedance is matched. The second fact is that the
largest voltage signal is developed at the input to circuit number 2 when its input impedance is much
larger than the output impedance of circuit number 1. However, the power at the input of circuit number 2




                                                      1-15
is very low under these conditions. So you must decide what conditions you want in coupling two circuits
together and select the components appropriately.

     Two important points to remember about impedance matching are as follows. (1) Maximum power
transfer requires matched impedance. (2) To get maximum voltage at the input of a circuit requires an
intentional impedance mismatch with the circuit that is providing the input signal.

Impedance Characteristics of Amplifier Configurations

      Now that you have seen the importance of impedance matching the stages in an electronic device,
you may wonder what impedance characteristics an amplifier has. The input and output impedances of a
transistor amplifier depend upon the configuration of the transistor. In Module 7, Introduction to
Solid-State Devices and Power Supplies, you were introduced to the three transistor configurations; the
common emitter, the common base, and the common collector. Examples of these configurations and
their impedance characteristics are shown in figure 1-14.

                                                                VCC           MEDIUM OUTPUT Z
                                                                                30k Ω - 50k Ω

                                       MEDIUM INPUT Z
                                        500 Ω - 1500 Ω




                                        INPUT



                                                               VBB

                                                 COMMON EMITTER

                                                                            HIGH OUTPUT Z
                                                         VCC                  250Ω - 550 Ω




                                     LOW INPUT Z
                                     30k Ω - 60k Ω




                                                                        VEE
                                         INPUT



                                                     COMMON BASE
                                                                     V CC


                                      HIGH INPUT Z
                                        2 Ω - 500Ω
                                                                            LOW OUTPUT Z
                                                                             50k Ω - 1500k Ω




                                       INPUT

                                                                                 OUTPUT
                                                         VEE

                                                 COMMON COLLECTOR
                                                                                 NTS080114
                Figure 1-14.—Transistor amplifier configurations and their impedance characteristics.

     NOTE: Only approximate impedance values are shown. This is because the exact impedance values
will vary from circuit to circuit. The impedance of any particular circuit depends upon the device
(transistor) and the other circuit components. The value of impedance can be computed by dividing the
signal voltage by the signal current. Therefore:



                                                           1-16
                                       Input Signal Impedance =

                                          Input Signal Voltage
                                          Input Signal Current
                                                    and
                                      Output Signal Impedance =
                                         Output Signal Voltage
                                         Output Signal Current



     The common-emitter configuration provides a medium input impedance and a medium output
impedance. The common-base configuration provides a low input impedance and a high output
impedance. The common-collector configuration provides a high input impedance and a low output
impedance. The common-collector configuration is often used to provide impedance matching between a
high output impedance and a low input impedance.

     If the amplifier stage is transformer coupled, the turns ratio of the transformer can be selected to
provide impedance matching. In NEETS Module 2, Introduction to Alternating Current and
Transformers, you were shown the relationship between the turns ratio and the impedance ratio in a
transformer. The relationship is expressed in the following formula:

                                                NP   ZP
                                                   =
                                                NS   ZS
                                Where:
                                N P = Number of turns in the primary
                                NS = Number of turns in the secondary
                                Z P = Impedance of the primary
                                ZS = Impedance of the secondary

    As you can see, impedance matching between stages can be accomplished by a combination of the
amplifier configuration and the components used in the amplifier circuit.

Q-18. What impedance relationship between the output of one circuit and the input of another circuit
      will provide the maximum power transfer?

Q-19. If maximum current is desired at the input to a circuit, should the input impedance of that circuit
      be lower than, equal to, or higher than the output impedance of the previous stage?

Q-20. What are the input- and output-impedance characteristics of the three transistor configurations?

Q-21. What transistor circuit configuration should be used to match a high output impedance to a low
      input impedance?

Q-22. What type of coupling is most useful for impedance matching?



                                                    1-17
AMPLIFIER FEEDBACK

     Perhaps you have been around a public address system when a squeal or high-pitched noise has
come from the speaker. Someone will turn down the volume and the noise will stop. That noise is an
indication that the amplifier (at least one stage of amplification) has begun oscillating. Oscillation is
covered in detail in NEETS Module 9, Introduction to Wave-Generation and Wave-Shaping Circuits. For
now, you need only realize that the oscillation is caused by a small part of the signal from the amplifier
output being sent back to the input of the amplifier. This signal is amplified and again sent back to the
input where it is amplified again. This process continues and the result is a loud noise out of the speaker.
The process of sending part of the output signal of an amplifier back to the input of the amplifier is called
FEEDBACK.

    There are two types of feedback in amplifiers. They are POSITIVE FEEDBACK, also called
REGENERATIVE FEEDBACK, and NEGATIVE FEEDBACK, also called DEGENERATIVE
FEEDBACK. The difference between these two types is whether the feedback signal is in phase or out of
phase with the input signal.

     Positive feedback occurs when the feedback signal is in phase with the input signal. Figure 1-15
shows a block diagram of an amplifier with positive feedback. Notice that the feedback signal is in phase
with the input signal. This means that the feedback signal will add to or "regenerate" the input signal. The
result is a larger amplitude output signal than would occur without the feedback. This type of feedback is
what causes the public address system to squeal as described above.




                                          FEEDBACK            FEED-
                                           SIGNAL             BACK
                                                            NETWORK




                           INPUT SIGNAL                             OUTPUT SIGNAL

                                                                                NTS080115



                                   Figure 1-15.—Positive feedback in an amplifier.

     Figure 1-16 is a block diagram of an amplifier with negative feedback. In this case, the feedback
signal is out of phase with the input signal. This means that the feedback signal will subtract from or
"degenerate" the input signal. This results in a lower amplitude output signal than would occur without
the feedback.




                                                     1-18
                                            FEEDBACK           FEED-
                                             SIGNAL             BACK
                                                              NETWORK




                              INPUT                                       OUTPUT
                             SIGNAL                                       SIGNAL

                                                                                   NTS080116




                                   Figure 1-16.—Negative feedback in an amplifier.

     Sometimes feedback that is not desired occurs in an amplifier. This happens at high frequencies and
limits the high-frequency response of an amplifier. Unwanted feedback also occurs as the result of some
circuit components used in the biasing or coupling network. The usual solution to unwanted feedback is a
feedback network of the opposite type. For example, a positive feedback network would counteract
unwanted, negative feedback.

     Feedback is also used to get the ideal input signal. Normally, the maximum output signal is desired
from an amplifier. The amount of the output signal from an amplifier is dependent on the amount of the
input signal. However, if the input signal is too large, the amplifying device will be saturated and/or cut
off during part of the input signal. This causes the output signal to be distorted and reduces the fidelity of
the amplifier. Amplifiers must provide the proper balance of gain and fidelity.

     Figure 1-17 shows the way in which feedback can be used to provide the maximum output signal
without a loss in fidelity. In view A, an amplifier has good fidelity, but less gain than it could have. By
adding some positive feedback, as in view B, the gain of the stage is increased. In view C, an amplifier
has so much gain and such a large input signal that the output signal is distorted. This distortion is caused
by the amplifying device becoming saturated and cutoff. By adding a negative feedback system, as in
view D, the gain of the stage is decreased and the fidelity of the output signal improved.




                                                                           NTS080117A




                                      Figure 1-17A.-Feedback uses in amplifiers.



                                                     1-19
                                                        POSITIVE
                                                       FEEDBACK
                                                       NETWORK




                                   Figure 1-17B.—Feedback uses in amplifiers.        NTS080117B




                                                                           NTS080117C




                                   Figure 1-17C.—Feedback uses in amplifiers.


                                                         NEGATIVE
                                                         FEEDBACK
                                                         NETWORK




                                                                                NTS080117D

                                    Figure 1-17D.—Feedback uses in amplifiers.

     Positive and negative feedback are accomplished in many ways, depending on the reasons requiring
the feedback. A few of the effects and methods of accomplishing feedback are presented next.

Positive Feedback

     As you have seen, positive feedback is accomplished by adding part of the output signal in phase
with the input signal. In a common-base transistor amplifier, it is fairly simple to provide positive
feedback. Since the input and output signals are in phase, you need only couple part of the output signal
back to the input. This is shown in figure 1-18.


                                                    1-20
      The feedback network in this amplifier is made up of R2 and C2. The value of C2 should be large so
that the capacitive reactance (X C) will be low and the capacitor will couple the signal easily. (This is also
the case with the input and output coupling capacitors C1 and C3.) The resistive value of R2 should be
large to limit the amount of feedback signal and to ensure that the majority of the output signal goes on to
the next stage through C3.


                                         FEEDBACK
                                         NETWORK


                                                   R2
                                                                                  C3

                                                                         R3
                                              C2                                       OUTPUT
                                                               Q1



                                                                           V CC


                                    C1
                                                               R1


                               INPUT

                                                                V EE




                                                                               NTS080118



                                Figure 1-18.—Positive feedback in a transistor amplifier.

     A more common configuration for transistor amplifiers is the common-emitter configuration.
Positive feedback is a little more difficult with this configuration because the input and output signals are
180º out of phase. Positive feedback can be accomplished by feeding a portion of the output signal of the
second stage back to the input of the first stage. This arrangement is shown in figure 1-19.




                                                        1-21
                        Figure 1-19.—Positive feedback in two stages of transistor amplification.

     The figure shows that each stage of amplification has a 180º phase shift. This means that the output
signal of Q2 will be in phase with the input signal to Q1. A portion of the output signal of Q2 is coupled
back to the input of Q1 through the feedback network of C3 and R3. R3 should have a large resistance to
limit the amount of signal through the feedback network. C3 should have a large capacitance so the
capacitive reactance is low and the capacitor will couple the signal easily.

     Sometimes positive feedback is used to eliminate the effects of negative feedback that are caused by
circuit components. One way in which a circuit component can cause negative feedback is shown in
figure 1-20.

     In view (A) a common-emitter transistor amplifier is shown. An emitter resistor (R2) has been
placed in this circuit to provide proper biasing and temperature stability. An undesired effect of this
resistor is the development of a signal at the emitter in phase with the input signal on the base. This signal
is caused by the changing current through the emitter resistor (R2) as the current through the transistor
changes. You might think that this signal on the emitter is a form of positive feedback since it is in phase
with the input signal. But the emitter signal is really negative feedback. Current through the transistor is
controlled by the base-to-emitter bias. If both the base and emitter become more positive by the same
amount at the same time, current will not increase. It is the difference between the base and emitter
voltages that controls the current flow through the transistor.

     To eliminate this negative feedback caused by the emitter resistor, some way must be found to
remove the signal from the emitter. If the signal could be coupled to ground (decoupled) the emitter of the
transistor would be unaffected. That is exactly what is done. A DECOUPLING CAPACITOR (C3 in
view B) is placed between the emitter of Q1 and ground (across the emitter resistor). This capacitor
should have a high capacitance so that it will pass the signal to ground easily. The decoupling capacitor
(C3) should have the same qualities as the coupling capacitors (C1 and C2) of the circuit. Decoupling
capacitors are also called bypass capacitors.




                                                       1-22
                                                                            C2

                                                                     R3
                                                           Q1               OUTPUT

                              C1
                                            R1
                                                                          VCC
                                                        R2
                          INPUT

                                               VBB



                                                       A

                                                                            C2

                                                                     R3
                                                           Q1                   OUTPUT

                               C1
                                             R1
                                                   R2           C3        VCC

                           INPUT

                                                 VBB

                                                       B
                                                                           NTS080120




                        Figure 1-20A-B.—Decoupling (bypass) capacitor in a transistor amplifier.

    Regardless of the method used to provide positive feedback in a circuit, the purpose is to increase the
output signal amplitude.

Negative Feedback

     Negative feedback is accomplished by adding part of the output signal out of phase with the input
signal. You have seen that an emitter resistor in a common-emitter transistor amplifier will develop a
negative feedback signal. Other methods of providing negative feedback are similar to those methods
used to provide positive feedback. The phase relationship of the feedback signal and the input signal is the
only difference.

     Figure 1-21 shows negative feedback in a common-emitter transistor amplifier. The feedback
network of C2 and R2 couples part of the output signal of Q1 back to the input. Since the output signal is
180º out of phase with the input signal, this causes negative feedback.




                                                       1-23
                              Figure 1-21.—Negative feedback in a transistor amplifier.

      Negative feedback is used to improve fidelity of an amplifier by limiting the input signal. Negative
feedback can also be used to increase the frequency response of an amplifier. The gain of an amplifier
decreases when the limit of its frequency response is reached. When negative feedback is used, the
feedback signal decreases as the output signal decreases. At the limits of frequency response of the
amplifier the smaller feedback signal means that the effective gain (gain with feedback) is increased. This
will improve the frequency response of the amplifier.

Q-23. What is feedback?

Q-24. What are the two types of feedback?

Q-25. What type feedback provides increased amplitude output signals?

Q-26. What type feedback provides the best fidelity?

Q-27. If the feedback signal is out of phase with the input signal, what type feedback is provided?

Q-28. What type feedback is provided by an unbypassed emitter resistor in a common-emitter
      transistor amplifier?



                                         AUDIO AMPLIFIERS

    An audio amplifier has been described as an amplifier with a frequency response from 15 Hz to 20
kHz. The frequency response of an amplifier can be shown graphically with a frequency response curve.
Figure 1-22 is the ideal frequency response curve for an audio amplifier. This curve is practically "flat"
from 15 Hz to 20 kHz. This means that the gain of the amplifier is equal between 15 Hz and 20 kHz.
Above 20 kHz or below 15 Hz the gain decreases or "drops off" quite rapidly. The frequency response of
an amplifier is determined by the components in the circuit.




                                                     1-24
                         Figure 1-22.—Ideal frequency response curve for an audio amplifier.

    The difference between an audio amplifier and other amplifiers is the frequency response of the
amplifier. In the next chapter of this module you will be shown the techniques and components used to
change and extend the frequency response of an amplifier.

    The transistor itself will respond quite well to the audio frequency range. No special components are
needed to extend or modify the frequency response.

      You have already been shown the purpose of all the components in a transistor audio amplifier. In
this portion of the chapter, schematic diagrams of several audio amplifiers will be shown and the
functions of each of the components will be discussed.

SINGLE-STAGE AUDIO AMPLIFIERS

     The first single-stage audio amplifier is shown in figure 1-23. This circuit is a class A,
common-emitter, RC-coupled, transistor, audio amplifier. C1 is a coupling capacitor that couples the
input signal to the base of Q1. R1 is used to develop the input signal and provide bias for the base of Q1.
R2 is used to bias the emitter and provide temperature stability for Q1. C2 is used to provide decoupling
(positive feedback) of the signal that would be developed by R2. R3 is the collector load for Q1 and
develops the output signal. C3 is a coupling capacitor that couples the output signal to the next stage. VCC
represents the collector-supply voltage. Since the transistor is a common-emitter configuration, it provides
voltage amplification. The input and output signals are 180º out of phase. The input and output impedance
are both medium.




                                                     1-25
                                      Figure 1-23.—Transistor audio amplifier.

    There is nothing new presented in this circuit. You should understand all of the functions of the
components in this circuit. If you do not, look back at the various sections presented earlier in this
chapter.

     The second single-stage audio amplifier is shown in figure 1-24. This circuit is a class A,
common-source, RC-coupled, FET, audio amplifier. C1 is a coupling capacitor which couples the input
signal to the gate of Q1. R1 is used to develop the input signal for the gate of Q1. R2 is used to bias the
source of Q1. C2 is used to decouple the signal developed by R2 (and keep it from affecting the source of
Q1). R3 is the drain load for Q1 and develops the output signal. C3 couples the output signal to the next
stage. VDD is the supply voltage for the drain of Q1. Since this is a common-source configuration, the
input and output signals are 180º out of phase.




                                        Figure 1-24.—FET audio amplifier.




                                                    1-26
    If you do not remember how a FET works, refer to NEETS Module 7 Introduction to Solid-State
Devices and Power Supplies.

     The third single-stage audio amplifier is shown in figure 1-25. This is a class A, common-emitter,
transformer-coupled, transistor, audio amplifier. The output device (speaker) is shown connected to the
secondary winding of the transformer. C1 is a coupling capacitor which couples the input signal to the
base of Q1. R1 develops the input signal. R2 is used to bias the emitter of Q1 and provides temperature
stability. C2 is a decoupling capacitor for R2. R3 is used to bias the base of Q1. The primary of T1 is the
collector load for Q1 and develops the output signal. T1 couples the output signal to the speaker and
provides impedance matching between the output impedance of the transistor (medium) and the
impedance of the speaker (low).




                                     Figure 1-25.—Single-stage audio amplifier.

PHASE SPLITTERS

     Sometimes it is necessary to provide two signals that are equal in amplitude but 180º out of phase
with each other. (You will see one use of these two signals a little later in this chapter.) The two signals
can be provided from a single input signal by the use of a PHASE SPLITTER. A phase splitter is a device
that produces two signals that differ in phase from each other from a single input signal. Figure 1-26 is a
block diagram of a phase splitter.




                                                                               NTS080126


                                   Figure 1-26.—Block diagram of a phase splitter.

     One way in which a phase splitter can be made is to use a center-tapped transformer. As you may
remember from your study of transformers, when the transformer secondary winding is center-tapped,
two equal amplitude signals are produced. These signals will be 180º out of phase with each other. So a
transformer with a center-tapped secondary fulfills the definition of a phase splitter.


                                                     1-27
      A transistor amplifier can be configured to act as a phase splitter. One method of doing this is shown
in figure 1-27.




                                  Figure 1-27.—Single-stage transistor phase splitter.

     C1 is the input signal coupling capacitor and couples the input signal to the base of Q1. R1 develops
the input signal. R2 and R3 develop the output signals. R2 and R3 are equal resistances to provide equal
amplitude output signals. C2 and C3 couple the output signals to the next stage. R4 is used to provide
proper bias for the base of Q1.

     This phase splitter is actually a single transistor combining the qualities of the common-emitter and
common-collector configurations. The output signals are equal in amplitude of the input signal, but are
180º out of phase from each other.

     If the output signals must be larger in amplitude than the input signal, a circuit such as that shown in
figure 1-28 will be used.

     Figure 1-28 shows a two-stage phase splitter. C1 couples the input signal to the base of Q1. R1
develops the input signal and provides bias for the base of Q1. R2 provides bias and temperature stability
for Q1. C2 decouples signals from the emitter of Q1. R3 develops the output signal of Q1. Since Q1 is
configured as a common-emitter amplifier, the output signal of Q1 is 180º out of phase with the input
signal and larger in amplitude. C3 couples this output signal to the next stage through R4. R4 allows only
a small portion of this output signal to be applied to the base of Q2. R5 develops the input signal and
provides bias for the base of Q2. R6 is used for bias and temperature stability for Q2. C4 decouples
signals from the emitter of Q2. R7 develops the output signal from Q2. Q2 is configured as a
common-emitter amplifier, so the output signal is 180º out of phase with the input signal to Q2 (output
signal from Q1). The input signal to Q2 is 180º out of phase with the original input signal, so the output
from Q2 is in phase with the original input signal. C5 couples this output signal to the next stage. So the
circuitry shown provides two output signals that are 180º out of phase with each other. The output signals
are equal in amplitude with each other but larger than the input signal.




                                                      1-28
                                                 C3

                                  R1
                                          Q1
                           C1                                                  C5
                                                 R3          R5
                                                      R4
                                                                           R7
                                           + VCC                    Q2


                                    C2      R2                      R6
                                                      C4
                                                                       + VCC

                                                                                NTS080128




                                   Figure 1-28.—Two-stage transistor phase splitter.

Q-29. What is a phase splitter?

PUSH-PULL AMPLIFIERS

     One use of phase splitters is to provide input signals to a single-stage amplifier that uses two
transistors. These transistors are configured in such a way that the two outputs, 180º out of phase with
each other, combine. This allows more gain than one transistor could supply by itself. This "push-pull"
amplifier is used where high power output and good fidelity are needed: receiver output stages, public
address amplifiers, and AM modulators, for example.

     The circuit shown in figure 1-29 is a class A transistor push-pull amplifier, but class AB or class B
operations can be used. Class operations were discussed in an earlier topic. The phase splitter for this
amplifier is the transformer T1, although one of the phase splitters shown earlier in this topic could be
used. R1 provides the proper bias for Q1 and Q2. The tapped secondary of T1 develops the two input
signals for the bases of Q1 and Q2. Half of the original input signal will be amplified by Q-1, the other
half by Q-2. T2 combines (couples) the amplified output signal to the speaker and provides impedance
matching.




                                  Figure 1-29.—Class A transistor push-pull amplifier.


                                                      1-29
Q-30. What is one use for a splitter?

Q-31. What is a common use for a push-pull amplifier?

Q-32. What is the advantage of a push-pull amplifier?

Q-33. What class of operation can be used with a push-pull amplifier to provide good fidelity output
      signals?



                                                SUMMARY

     This chapter has presented some general information that applies to all amplifiers, as well as some
specific information about transistor and audio amplifiers. All of this information will be useful to you in
the next chapter of this module and in your future studies of electronics.

     An AMPLIFIER is a device that enables an input signal to control an output signal. The output
signal will have some (or all) of the characteristics of the input signal but will generally be larger than the
input signal in terms of voltage, current, or power. A basic line diagram of an amplifier is shown below.

                           ANTENNA
                                                                    DETECTOR
                                                             (SEPARATES AUDIO FROM
                                                                RADIO FREQUENCY)




                                     AMPLIFIER
                                 (RADIO FREQUENCY)




                               AMPLIFIER
                           (AUDIO FREQUENCY)                     SPEAKER
                                                                               NTS08010I-1



     Amplifiers are classified by FUNCTION and FREQUENCY RESPONSE. Function refers to an
amplifier being a VOLTAGE AMPLIFIER or a POWER AMPLIFIER. Voltage amplifiers provide
voltage amplification and power amplifiers provide power amplification. The frequency response of an
amplifier can be described by classifying the amplifier as an AUDIO AMPLIFIER, RF AMPLIFIER, or
VIDEO (WIDE-BAND) AMPLIFIER. Audio amplifiers have frequency response in the range of 15 Hz to
20 kHz. An rf amplifier has a frequency response in the range of 10 kHz to 100,000 MHz. A video
(wide-band) amplifier has a frequency response of 10 Hz to 6 MHz.


                                                     1-30
     The CLASS OF OPERATION of a transistor amplifier is determined by the percent of time that
current flows through the transistor in relation to the input signal.

    In CLASS A OPERATION, transistor current flows for 100% (360º) of the input signal. Class A
operation is the least efficient class of operation, but provides the best fidelity.




     In CLASS AB OPERATION, transistor current flows for more than 50% but less than 100% of the
input signal.




                                               1-31
    In CLASS B OPERATION, transistor current flows for 50% of the input signal.




    In CLASS C OPERATION, transistor current flows for less than 50% of the input signal. Class C
operation is the most efficient class of operation.




                                               1-32
    COUPLING is used to transfer a signal from one stage to another.

     DIRECT COUPLING is the connection of the output of one stage directly to the input of the next
stage. This method is not used very often due to the complex power supply requirements and impedance-
matching problems.




     RC COUPLING is the most common method of coupling and uses a coupling capacitor and
signal-developing resistors.



                                                1-33
    IMPEDANCE COUPLING uses a coil as a load for the first stage but otherwise functions just as
RC coupling. Impedance coupling is used at high frequencies.




                                                                Q2
                                                                          OUTPUT


                                                    C1
                              Q1
                                                           R1
                                               L1


                      INPUT



                                       + Vcc

                                                                     NTS0801I-9




    TRANSFORMER COUPLING uses a transformer to couple the signal from one stage to the next.
Transformer coupling is very efficient and the transformer can aid in impedance matching.




                                                    1-34
      MAXIMUM POWER TRANSFER occurs between two circuits when the output impedance of the
first circuit matches the input impedance of the second circuit.

     A MAXIMUM VOLTAGE INPUT SIGNAL is present when the input impedance of the second
circuit is larger than the output impedance of the first circuit (mismatched).




                                          1-35
   The COMMON-EMITTER configuration of a transistor amplifier has MEDIUM INPUT and
MEDIUM OUTPUT IMPEDANCE.



                                             VCC    MEDIUM OUTPUT Z
                                                      30k Ω - 50k Ω

                     MEDIUM INPUT Z
                      500 Ω - 1500 Ω



                                                              OUTPUT

                     INPUT



                                        VBB

                                COMMON EMITTER
                                                          NTS0801I-12



   The COMMON-BASE configuration of a transistor amplifier has LOW INPUT and HIGH
OUTPUT IMPEDANCE.


                                                     HIGH OUTPUT Z
                                       VCC             250Ω - 550 Ω




                    LOW INPUT Z
                    30k Ω - 60k Ω
                                                            OUTPUT




                                                    VEE
                        INPUT



                                    COMMON BASE
                                                           NTS0801I-13

The COMMON-COLLECTOR (EMITTER FOLLOWER) configuration of a transistor amplifier as
HIGH INPUT and LOW OUTPUT IMPEDANCE.




                                             1-36
                                                       V CC


                        HIGH INPUT Z
                         2k Ω - 500k Ω
                                                              LOW OUTPUT Z
                                                                50 Ω -1500 Ω




                        INPUT

                                                                   OUTPUT
                                           VEE

                                   COMMON COLLECTOR
                                                                 NTS0801I-14


    FEEDBACK is the process of coupling a portion of the output signal back to the input of an
amplifier.

     POSITIVE (REGENERATIVE) FEEDBACK is provided when the feedback signal is in phase
with the input signal. Positive feedback increases the gain of an amplifier.




     NEGATIVE (DEGENERATIVE) FEEDBACK is provided when the feedback signal is 180º out
of phase with the input signal. Negative feedback decreases the gain of an amplifier but improves fidelity
and may increase the frequency response of the amplifier.




                                                   1-37
     The IDEAL FREQUENCY RESPONSE of an audio amplifier is equal gain from 15 Hz to 20 kHz
with very low gain outside of those limits.




    A PHASE SPLITTER provides two output signals that are equal in amplitude but different in phase
from a single input signal. Phase splitters are often used to provide input signals to a push-pull amplifier.




                                                                        NTS0801I-18




     A PUSH-PULL AMPLIFIER uses two transistors whose output signals are added together to
provide a larger gain (usually a power gain) than a single transistor could provide. Push-pull amplifiers
can be operated class A, class AB or class B.


                                                    1-38
                                                                   T2
                           T1            Q1


                                 R1              + V CC


                                         Q2




                                                                           NTS0801I-19




                          ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS Q1. THROUGH Q33.

 A-1. Amplification is the control of an output signal by an input signal so that the output signal has
      some (or all) of the characteristics of the input signal. The output signal is generally larger than
      the input signal in terms of voltage, current, or power.

 A-2. No, the input signal is unchanged, the output signal is controlled by the input signal but does not
      effect the actual input signal.

 A-3. To amplify the input signal to a usable level.

 A-4. By function and frequency response.

 A-5. An audio power amplifier.

 A-6. An rf voltage amplifier.

 A-7. The amount of time (in relation to the input signal) in which current flows in the output circuit.

 A-8. A, AB, B, C.

 A-9. Class B operation.

A-10. The amplifier operates (and therefore uses power) for less time in class C than in class A.

A-11. Class A operation.

A-12. To transfer energy (a signal) from one stage to another.

A-13. Direct, RC, impedance, and transformer coupling.

A-14. RC coupling.

A-15. Transformer coupling.

A-16. RC coupling.


                                                    1-39
A-17. Impedance coupling.

A-18. Equal impedance.

A-19. Lower than.

A-20. Common emitter-medium input, medium output; common base-low input, high output; common
      collector-high input, low output.

A-21. Common collector.

A-22. Transformer coupling.

A-23. The process of coupling a portion of the output of a circuit back to the circuit input.

A-24. Positive and negative or regenerative and degenerative.

A-25. Positive (regenerative) feedback.

A-26. Negative (degenerative) feedback.

A-27. Negative (degenerative) feedback.

A-28. Negative (degenerative) feedback.

A-29. A device that provides two output signals that differ in phase from a single input signal.

A-30. A phase splitter is used to provide the input signals to a push-pull amplifier.

A-31. A push-pull amplifier is used when high power output and good fidelity are needed.

A-32. A push-pull amplifier provides more gain than a single transistor amplifier.

A-33. Class A, Class AB or Class B operation.




                                                    1-40
                                             CHAPTER 2

                          VIDEO AND RF AMPLIFIERS

                                       LEARNING OBJECTIVES

     Upon completion of this chapter, you will be able to:

     1. Define the term "bandwidth of an amplifier."

     2. Determine the upper and lower frequency limits of an amplifier from a frequency-response
        curve.

     3. List the factors that limit frequency response in an amplifier.

     4. List two techniques used to increase the high-frequency response for a video amplifier.

     5. State one technique used to increase the low-frequency response of a video amplifier.

     6. Identify the purpose of various components on a schematic of a complete typical video amplifier
        circuit.

     7. State the purpose of a frequency-determining network in an rf amplifier.

     8. State one method by which an rf amplifier can be neutralized.

     9. Identify the purpose of various components on a schematic of a complete typical rf amplifier.



                                            INTRODUCTION

      In this chapter you will be given information on the frequency response of amplifiers as well as
specific information on video and rf amplifiers. For all practical purposes, all the general information you
studied in chapter 1 about audio amplifiers will apply to the video and rf amplifiers which you are about
to study.

      You may be wondering why you need to learn about video and rf amplifiers. You need to understand
these circuits because, as a technician, you will probably be involved in working on equipment in which
these circuits are used. Many of the circuits shown in this and the next chapter are incomplete and would
not be used in actual equipment. For example, the complete biasing network may not be shown. This is
done so you can concentrate on the concepts being presented without being overwhelmed by an
abundance of circuit elements. With this idea in mind, the information that is presented in this chapter is
real, practical information about video and rf amplifiers. It is the sort of information that you will use in
working with these circuits. Engineering information (such as design specifications) will not be presented
because it is not needed to understand the concepts that a technician needs to perform the job of circuit
analysis and repair. Before you are given the specific information on video and rf amplifiers, you may be
wondering how these circuits are used.

     Video amplifiers are used to amplify signals that represent video information. (That’s where the term
"video" comes from.) Video is the "picture" portion of a television signal. The "sound" portion is audio.


                                                    2-1
Although the Navy uses television in many ways, video signals are used for more than television. Radar
systems (discussed later in this training series) use video signals and, therefore, video amplifiers. Video
amplifiers are also used in video recorders and some communication and control devices. In addition to
using video amplifiers, televisions use rf amplifiers. Many other devices also use rf amplifiers, such as
radios, navigational devices, and communications systems. Almost any device that uses broadcast, or
transmitted, information will use an rf amplifier.

     As you should recall, rf amplifiers are used to amplify signals between 10 kilohertz (10 kHz) and
100,000 megahertz (100,000 MHz) (not this entire band of frequencies, but any band of frequencies
within these limits). Therefore, any device that uses frequencies between 10 kilohertz and 100,000
megahertz will most likely use an rf amplifier.

     Before you study the details of video and rf amplifiers, you need to learn a little more about the
frequency response of an amplifier and frequency-response curves.



                               AMPLIFIER FREQUENCY RESPONSE

     In chapter 1 of this module you were shown the frequency-response curve of an audio amplifier.
Every amplifier has a frequency-response curve associated with it. Technicians use frequency-response
curves because they provide a "picture" of the performance of an amplifier at various frequencies. You
will probably never have to draw a frequency-response curve, but, in order to use one, you should know
how a frequency-response curve is created. The amplifier for which the frequency-response curve is
created is tested at various frequencies. At each frequency, the input signal is set to some predetermined
level of voltage (or current). This same voltage (or current) level for all of the input signals is used to
provide a standard input and to allow evaluation of the output of the circuit at each of the frequencies
tested. For each of these frequencies, the output is measured and marked on a graph. The graph is marked
"frequency" along the horizontal axis and "voltage" or "current" along the vertical axis. When points have
been plotted for all of the frequencies tested, the points are connected to form the frequency-response
curve. The shape of the curve represents the frequency response of the amplifier.

     Some amplifiers should be "flat" across a band of frequencies. In other words, for every frequency
within the band, the amplifier should have equal gain (equal response). For frequencies outside the band,
the amplifier gain will be much lower.

     For other amplifiers, the desired frequency response is different. For example, perhaps the amplifier
should have high gain at two frequencies and low gain for all other frequencies. The frequency-response
curve for this type of amplifier would show two "peaks." In other amplifiers the frequency-response curve
will have one peak indicating high gain at one frequency and lower gain at all others.

    Note the frequency-response curve shown in figure 2-1. This is the frequency-response curve for an
audio amplifier as described in chapter 1. It is "flat" from 15 hertz (15 Hz) to 20 kilohertz (20 kHz).




                                                     2-2
                              Figure 2-1.—Frequency response curve of audio amplifier.

     Notice in the figure that the lower frequency limit is labeled f1 and the upper frequency limit is
labeled f2. Note also the portion inside the frequency-response curve marked "BANDWIDTH." You may
be wondering just what a "bandwidth" is.

BANDWIDTH OF AN AMPLIFIER

     The bandwidth represents the amount or "width" of frequencies, or the "band of frequencies," that
the amplifier is MOST effective in amplifying. However, the bandwidth is NOT the same as the band of
frequencies that is amplified. The bandwidth (BW) of an amplifier is the difference between the
frequency limits of the amplifier. For example, the band of frequencies for an amplifier may be from 10
kilohertz (10 kHz) to 30 kilohertz (30 kHz). In this case, the bandwidth would be 20 kilohertz (20 kHz).
As another example, if an amplifier is designed to amplify frequencies between 15 hertz (15 Hz) and 20
kilohertz (20 kHz), the bandwidth will be equal to 20 kilohertz minus 15 hertz or 19,985 hertz (19,985
Hz). This is shown in figure 2-1.

     Mathematically:
                                           BW = f 2    f1

                                           BW = 20 kHz 15 Hz

                                           BW = 20,000 Hz 15 Hz

                                           BW = 19,985 Hz

     You should notice on the figure that the frequency-response curve shows output voltage (or current)
against frequency. The lower and upper frequency limits (f1 and f2) are also known as HALF-POWER
POINTS. The half-power points are the points at which the output voltage (or current) is 70.7 percent of
the maximum output voltage (or current). Any frequency that produces less than 70.7 percent of the
maximum output voltage (or current) is outside the bandwidth and, in most cases, is not considered a
useable output of the amplifier.

     The reason these points are called "half-power points" is that the true output power will be half (50
percent) of the maximum true output power when the output voltage (or current) is 70.7 percent of the
maximum output voltage (or current), as shown below. (All calculations are rounded off to two decimal
places.)

     As you learned in NEETS, Module 2, in an a.c. circuit true power is calculated using the resistance
(R) of the circuit, NOT the impedance (Z). If the circuit produces a maximum output voltage of 10 volts
across a 50-ohm load, then:

                                                      2-3
                                                            E2
                                        True Power =
                                                            R
                                                           (10V) 2
                                        True Power =
                                                            50Ω
                                                           100
                                        True Power =           watts
                                                            50

                                        True Power = 2 watts


    When the output voltage drops to 70.7 percent of the maximum voltage of 10 volts, then:




                                                            E2
                                          True Power =
                                                            R
                                                           (7.07V) 2
                                          True Power =
                                                             50Ω
                                                            50
                                           True Power =        watts
                                                            50

                                           True Power = 1 watts



     As you can see, the true power is 50 percent (half) of the maximum true power when the output
voltage is 70.7 percent of the maximum output voltage. If, instead, you are using the output current of the
above circuit, the maximum current is




    The calculations are:                  True Power = I 2 R

                                           True Power = (.2A) 2 (50Ω)

                                           True Power = (.04) (50) watts

                                           True Power = 2 watts
    At 70.7 percent of the output current (.14 A):




                                                     2-4
                                       True Power = I 2 R

                                       True Power = (.14A) 2 (50Ω)

                                       True Power = (.02 x 50) watts

                                       True Power = 1 watts


     On figure 2-1, the two points marked f 1 and f2 will enable you to determine the frequency-response
limits of the amplifier. In this case, the limits are 15 hertz (15 Hz) and 20 kilohertz (20 kHz). You should
now see how a frequency-response curve can enable you to determine the frequency limits and the
bandwidth of an amplifier.

READING AMPLIFIER FREQUENCY-RESPONSE CURVES

      Figure 2-2 shows the frequency-response curves for four different amplifiers. View (A) is the same
frequency-response curve as shown on page 5-6, figure 2-1. View (B) is the frequency-response curve of an
amplifier that would also be classified as an audio amplifier, even though the curve is not "flat" from 15
hertz to 20 kilohertz and does not drop off sharply at the frequency limits. From the curve, you can see
that the lower frequency limit of this amplifier (f 1) is 100 hertz. The upper frequency limit (f2) is 10
kilohertz. Therefore, the bandwidth of this amplifier must be 10 kilohertz minus 100 hertz or 9900 hertz.
Most amplifiers will have a frequency-response curve shaped like view (B) if nothing is done to modify
the frequency-response characteristics of the circuit. (The factors that affect frequency response and the
methods to modify the frequency response of an amplifier are covered a little later in this chapter.)




                                                    2-5
 E                                                                               E
OR                                                                              OR
                                                                                                   f1                   f2
 I                                                                               I

O                                                                               O                         BANDWIDTH
U        f1                              f2                                     U                           9900 Hz
T                                                                               T
P                  BANDWIDTH                                                    P
U                   19985 Hz                                                    U
T                                                                               T




     0   10   50   100   1K        10K         100K      1M         10M              0   10   50    100     1K        10K     100K         1M         10M

                              FREQUENCY (Hz)                                                                 FREQUENCY (Hz)
                                   A                                                                                B




                                              f1               f2                             f1                                           f2
 E                                                                               E
OR                                                                              OR
 I                                                 BANDWIDTH                     I                               BANDWIDTH
                                                     900 Hz                                                        170 Hz
O                                                                               O
U                                                                               U
T                                                                               T
P                                                                               P
U                                                                               U
T                                                                               T




     0   10   50   100   1K        10K         100K      1M         10M              0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90            100     200           500 1K

                              FREQUENCY (Hz)                                                                 FREQUENCY (Hz)
                                   C                                                                               D                            NTS080202




                                          Figure 2-2.—Frequency response curves, A THROUGH D.




                                                                          2-6
      Now look at view (C). This frequency-response curve is for an rf amplifier. The frequency limits of
this amplifier are 100 kilohertz (f1) and 1 megahertz (f2); therefore, the bandwidth of this amplifier is 900
 kilohertz (kHz).

      View (D) shows another audio amplifier. This time the frequency limits are 30 hertz (f1) and 200
hertz (f2). The bandwidth of this amplifier is only 170 hertz. The important thing to notice in view (D) is
that the frequency scale is different from those used in other views. Any frequency scale can be used for a
frequency-response curve. The scale used would be determined by what frequencies are most useful in
presenting the frequency-response curve for a particular amplifier.

Q-1. What is the bandwidth of an amplifier?

Q-2. What are the upper and lower frequency limits of an amplifier?

Q-3. What are the upper and lower frequency limits and the bandwidth for the amplifiers that have
     frequency-response curves as shown in figure 2-3?




                                                     2-7
 E
OR
 I

O
U
T
P
U
T




     0 10 20 30 40 50   100 1K         5K       10K       50K      100K

                            FREQUENCY (Hz)
                                   A

 E
OR
 I

O
U
T
P
U
T




     0 10 20 30 40 50   100 1K         5K       10K       50K      100K

                            FREQUENCY (Hz)                          NTS080203
                                   B

                  Figure 2-3B.—Frequency-response curves for Q3.




                                    2-8
FACTORS AFFECTING FREQUENCY RESPONSE OF AN AMPLIFIER

     In chapter 1 of this module, the fact was mentioned that an audio amplifier is limited in its frequency
response. Now you will see why this is true.

      You should recall that the frequency response of an a.c. circuit is limited by the reactive elements
(capacitance and inductance) in the circuit. As you know, this is caused by the fact that the capacitive and
inductive reactances vary with the frequency. In other words, the value of the reactance is determined, in
part, by frequency. Remember the formulas:
                                                                     1
                                                       XC =
                                                                  2 πfC

                                                       X L = 2 πfL

     If you ignore the amplifying device (transistor, electron tube, etc.), and if the amplifier circuit is
made up of resistors only, there should be no limits to the frequency response. In other words, a totally
resistive circuit would have no frequency limits. However, there is no such thing as a totally resistive
circuit because circuit components almost always have some reactance. In addition to the reactance of
other components in the circuit, most amplifiers use RC coupling. This means that a capacitor is used to
couple the signal in to and out of the circuit. There is also a certain amount of capacitance and inductance
in the wiring of the circuit. The end result is that all circuits are reactive. To illustrate this point, figure 2-4
shows amplifier circuits with the capacitance and inductance of the wiring represented as "phantom"
capacitors and inductors. The reactances of the capacitors (XC) and the inductors (XL) are shown as
"phantom" variable resistors. View (A) shows the circuit with a low-frequency input signal, and view (B)
shows the circuit with a high-frequency input signal.

                                                                               X L2            X C3
                             X C1     X L1


           LOW
                                                      Q1
        FREQUENCY
                                                                                L2
                                                                                               C3
                                        L1                                R3
                            C1

                                                       R1
                                                                       +VCC

                                                                                      C5              X C5
                                                    +VBB
                           C4                X C4
                                                           R2     C2           X C2




                                                                   A

                            Figure 2-4A.—Amplifiers showing reactive elements and reactance.




                                                            2-9
                                                                             X L2          X C3
                        X C1       X L1


        HIGH
                                                   Q1
     FREQUENCY
                                                                              L2
                                                                                            C3
                                     L1                                 R3
                        C1

                                                    R1
                                                                     +VCC

                                                                                    C5             X C5
                                                 +VBB
                       C4                 X C4
                                                        R2     C2            X C2




                                                                    B                            NTS080204




                             Figure 2-4B.—Amplifiers showing reactive elements and reactance.

     The actual circuit components are: C1, C2, C3, R1, R2, R3, and Q1. C1 is used to couple the input
signal. R1 develops the input signal. R2, the emitter resistor, is used for proper biasing and temperature
stability. C2 is a decoupling capacitor for R2. R3 develops the output signal. C3 couples the output signal
to the next stage. Q1 is the amplifying device.

     The phantom circuit elements representing the capacitance and inductance of the wiring are: L1, L2,
C4, and C5. L1 represents the inductance of the input wiring. L2 represents the inductance of the output
wiring. C4 represents the capacitance of the input wiring. C5 represents the capacitance of the output
wiring.

     In view (A) the circuit is shown with a low-frequency input signal. Since the formulas for capacitive
reactance and inductive reactance are:
                                                                       1
                                                         XC =
                                                                    2 πfC

                                                         X L = 2 πfL

You should remember that if frequency is low, capacitive reactance will be high and inductive reactance
will be low. This is shown by the position of the variable resistors that represent the reactances. Notice
that XL1 and XL2 are low; therefore, they do not "drop" very much of the input and output signals. XC4
and XC5 are high; these reactances tend to "block" the input and output signals and keep them from going
to the power supplies (VBB and VCC). Notice that the output signal is larger in amplitude than the input
signal.

     Now look at view (B). The input signal is a high-frequency signal. Now XC is low and XL is high.
XL1 and XL2 now drop part of the input and output signals. At the same time X C4 and XC5 tend to "short"
or "pass" the input and output signals to signal ground. The net effect is that both the input and output
signals are reduced. Notice that the output signal is smaller in amplitude than the input signal.

    Now you can see how the capacitance and inductance of the wiring affect an amplifier, causing the
output of an amplifier to be less for high-frequency signals than for low-frequency signals.




                                                             2-10
      In addition to the other circuit components, an amplifying device (transistor or electronic tube),
itself, reacts differently to high frequencies than it does to low frequencies. In earlier NEETS modules you
were told that transistors and electronic tubes have interelectrode capacitance. Figure 2-5 shows a portion
of the interelectrode capacitance of a transistor and the way in which this affects high- and low-frequency
signals.




                               LOW                                       HIGH
                                                 R2                   FREQUENCY           R2
                            FREQUENCY
     C BC                     INPUT                                     INPUT




     C EB                                        R1                                       R1




               A                                        B                                      C       NTS080205



                              Figure 2-5.—Interelectrode capacitance of a transistor.

    In view (A) a transistor is shown with phantom capacitors connected to represent the interelectrode
capacitance. CEB represents the emitter-to-base capacitance. CBC represents the base-to-collector
capacitance.

      For simplicity, in views (B) and (C) the capacitive reactance of these capacitors is shown by variable
resistors R1 (for CEB) and R2 (for CBC). View (B) shows the reactance as high when there is a
low-frequency input signal. In this case there is very little effect from the reactance on the transistor. The
transistor amplifies the input signal as shown in view (B). However, when a high-frequency input signal
is applied to the transistor, as in view (C), things are somewhat different. Now the capacitive reactance is
low (as shown by the settings of the variable resistors). In this case, as the base of the transistor attempts
to go positive during the first half of the input signal, a great deal of this positive signal is felt on the
emitter (through R1). If both the base and the emitter go positive at the same time, there is no change in
emitter-base bias and the conduction of the transistor will not change. Of course, a small amount of
change does occur in the emitter-base bias, but not as much as when the capacitive reactance is higher (at
low frequencies). As an output signal is developed in the collector circuit, part of this signal is fed back to
the base through R2. Since the signal on the collector is 180 degrees out of phase with the base signal,
this tends to drive the base negative. The effect of this is to further reduce the emitter-base bias and the
conduction of the transistor.During the second half of the input signal, the same effect occurs although the
polarity is reversed. The net effect is a reduction in the gain of the transistor as indicated by the small
output signal. This decrease in the amplifier output at higher frequencies is caused by the interelectrode
capacitance. (There are certain special cases in which the feedback signal caused by the interelectrode
capacitance is in phase with the base signal. However, in most cases, the feedback caused by
interelectrode capacitance is degenerative and is 180 degrees out of phase with the base signal as
explained above.)

Q-4. What are the factors that limit the frequency response of a transistor amplifier?


                                                      2-11
Q-5. What type of feedback is usually caused by interelectrode capacitance?

Q-6. What happens to capacitive reactance as frequency increases?

Q-7. What happens to inductive reactance as frequency increases?



                                         VIDEO AMPLIFIERS

     As you have seen, a transistor amplifier is limited in its frequency response. You should also
remember from chapter 1 that a VIDEO AMPLIFIER should have a frequency response of 10 hertz (10
Hz) to 6 megahertz (6 MHz). The question has probably occurred to you: How is it possible to "extend"
the range of frequency response of an amplifier?

HIGH-FREQUENCY COMPENSATION FOR VIDEO AMPLIFIERS

     If the frequency-response range of an audio amplifier must be extended to 6 megahertz (6 MHz) for
use as a video amplifier, some means must be found to overcome the limitations of the audio amplifier.
As you have seen, the capacitance of an amplifier circuit and the interelectrode capacitance of the
transistor (or electronic tube) cause the higher frequency response to be limited.

     In some ways capacitance and inductance can be thought of as opposites. As stated before, as
frequency increases, capacitive reactance decreases, and inductive reactance increases. Capacitance
opposes changes in voltage, and inductance opposes changes in current. Capacitance causes current to
lead voltage, and inductance causes voltage to lead current.

     Since frequency affects capacitive reactance and inductive reactance in opposite ways, and since it is
the capacitive reactance that causes the problem with high-frequency response, inductors are added to an
amplifier circuit to improve the high-frequency response. This is called HIGH-FREQUENCY
COMPENSATION. Inductors (coils), when used for high-frequency compensation, are called PEAKING
COILS. Peaking coils can be added to a circuit so they are in series with the output signal path or in
parallel to the output signal path. Instead of only in series or parallel, a combination of peaking coils in
series and parallel with the output signal path can also be used for high-frequency compensation.

     As in all electronic circuits, nothing comes free. The use of peaking coils WILL increase the
frequency response of an amplifier circuit, but it will ALSO lower the gain of the amplifier.

Series Peaking

     The use of a peaking coil in series with the output signal path is known as SERIES PEAKING.
Figure 2-6 shows a transistor amplifier circuit with a series peaking coil. In this figure, R1 is the
input-signal-developing resistor. R2 is used for bias and temperature stability of Q1. C1 is the bypass
capacitor for R2. R3 is the load resistor for Q1 and develops the output signal. C2 is the coupling
capacitor which couples the output signal to the next stage. "Phantom" capacitor COUT represents the
output capacitance of the circuit, and "phantom" capacitor CIN represents the input capacitance of the next
stage.




                                                    2-12
                                   V CC


                                 R3
                                                                         C2
                                                            L1

                            Q1                                                         CIN
                                                            R4
                                                      COUT


                           R1


                                R2              C1



                                                                                NTS080206



                                           Figure 2-6.—Series peaking coil.

      You know that the capacitive reactance of COUT and CIN will limit the high-frequency response of the
circuit. L1 is the series peaking coil. It is in series with the output-signal path and isolates COUT from CIN.
R4 is called a "swamping" resistor and is used to keep L1 from overcompensating at a narrow range of
frequencies. In other words, R4 is used to keep the frequency-response curve flat. If R4 were not used
with L1, there could be a "peak" in the frequency-response curve. (Remember, L1 is called a peaking
coil.)

Shunt Peaking

     If a coil is placed in parallel (shunt) with the output signal path, the technique is called SHUNT
PEAKING. Figure 2-7 shows a circuit with a shunt peaking coil. With the exceptions of the "phantom"
capacitor and the inductor, the components in this circuit are the same as those in figure 2-6. R1 is the
input-signal-developing resistor. R2 is used for bias and temperature stability. C1 is the bypass capacitor
for R2. R3 is the load resistor for Q1 and develops the output signal. C2 is the coupling capacitor which
couples the output signal to the next stage.




                                                     2-13
                                            Figure 2-7.—Shunt peaking coil.

    The "phantom" capacitor, CT, represents the total capacitance of the circuit. Notice that it tends to
couple the output signal to ground.

     L1 is the shunt peaking coil. While it is in series with the load resistor (R3), it is in parallel (shunt)
with the output-signal path.

     Since inductive reactance increases as frequency increases, the reactance of L1 develops more output
signal as the frequency increases. At the same time, the capacitive reactance of CT is decreasing as
frequency increases. This tends to couple more of the output signal to ground. The increased inductive
reactance counters the effect of the decreased capacitive reactance and this increases the high-frequency
response of the amplifier.

Combination Peaking

     You have seen how a series peaking coil isolates the output capacitance of an amplifier from the
input capacitance of the next stage. You have also seen how a shunt peaking coil will counteract the
effects of the total capacitance of an amplifier. If these two techniques are used together, the combination
is more effective than the use of either one alone. The use of both series and shunt peaking coils is known
as COMBINATION PEAKING. An amplifier circuit with combination peaking is shown in figure 2-8. In
figure 2-8 the peaking coils are L1 and L2. L1 is a shunt peaking coil, and L2 is a series peaking coil.




                                                      2-14
                                      +VCC



                                             R3



                                      L1
                                                                       C2
                                                             L2

                                 Q1
                                                                                     C IN
                                                        CT


                              R1


                                   R2              C1



                                                                         NTS080208


                                           Figure 2-8.—Combination peaking.

    The "phantom" capacitor CT represents the total capacitance of the amplifier circuit. "Phantom"
capacitor CIN represents the input capacitance of the next stage. Combination peaking will easily allow an
amplifier to have a high-frequency response of 6 megahertz (6 MHz).

 Q-8. What is the major factor that limits the high-frequency response of an amplifier circuits?

 Q-9. What components can be used to increase the high-frequency response of an amplifier?

Q-10. What determines whether these components are considered series or shunt?

Q-11. What is the arrangement of both series and shunt components called?

LOW-FREQUENCY COMPENSATION FOR VIDEO AMPLIFIERS

    Now that you have seen how the high-frequency response of an amplifier can be extended to 6
megahertz (6 MHz), you should realize that it is only necessary to extend the low-frequency response to
10 hertz (10 Hz) in order to have a video amplifier.

     Once again, the culprit in low-frequency response is capacitance (or capacitive reactance). But this
time the problem is the coupling capacitor between the stages.

     At low frequencies the capacitive reactance of the coupling capacitor (C2 in figure 2-8) is high. This
high reactance limits the amount of output signal that is coupled to the next stage. In addition, the RC
network of the coupling capacitor and the signal-developing resistor of the next stage cause a phase shift
in the output signal. (Refer to NEETS, Module 2, for a discussion of phase shifts in RC networks.) Both of
these problems (poor low-frequency response and phase shift) can be solved by adding a parallel RC
network in series with the load resistor. This is shown in figure 2-9.




                                                      2-15
                                Figure 2-9.—Low frequency compensation network.

     The complete circuitry for Q2 is not shown in this figure, as the main concern is the
signal-developing resistor (R5) for Q2. The coupling capacitor (C2) and the resistor (R5) limit the
low-frequency response of the amplifier and cause a phase shift. The amount of the phase shift will
depend upon the amount of resistance and capacitance. The RC network of R4 and C3 compensates for
the effects of C2 and R5 and extends the low-frequency response of the amplifier.

     At low frequencies, R4 adds to the load resistance (R3) and increases the gain of the amplifier. As
frequency increases, the reactance of C3 decreases. C3 then provides a path around R4 and the gain of the
transistor decreases. At the same time, the reactance of the coupling capacitor (C2) decreases and more
signal is coupled to Q2.

     Because the circuit shown in figure 2-9 has no high-frequency compensation, it would not be a very
practical video amplifier.

TYPICAL VIDEO-AMPLIFIER CIRCUIT

     There are many different ways in which video amplifiers can be built. The particular configuration of
a video amplifier depends upon the equipment in which the video amplifier is used. The circuit shown in
figure 2-10 is only one of many possible video-amplifier circuits. Rather than reading about what each
component does in this circuit, you can see how well you have learned about video amplifiers by
answering the following questions. You should have no problem identifying the purpose of the
components because similar circuits have been explained to you earlier in the text.




                                                  2-16
                                       Figure 2-10.—Video amplifier circuit.

     The following questions refer to figure 2-10.

Q-12. What component in an amplifier circuit tends to limit the low-frequency response of the amplifier?

Q-13. What is the purpose of L3?

Q-14. What is the purpose of C1?

Q-15. What is the purpose of R4?

Q-16. What is the purpose of L2?

Q-17. What is the purpose of R5?

Q-18. What component(s) is/are used for high-frequency compensation for Q1?

Q-19. What component(s) is/are used for low-frequency compensation for Q2?



                                RADIO-FREQUENCY AMPLIFIERS

    Now that you have seen the way in which a broadband, or video, amplifier can be constructed, you
may be wondering about radio-frequency (rf) amplifiers. Do they use the same techniques? Are they just
another type of broadband amplifier?

    The answer to both questions is "no." Radio-frequency amplifiers use different techniques than video
amplifiers and are very different from them.




                                                     2-17
     Before you study the specific techniques used in rf amplifiers, you should review some information
on the relationship between the input and output impedance of an amplifier and the gain of the amplifier
stage.

AMPLIFIER INPUT/OUTPUT IMPEDANCE AND GAIN

    You should remember that the gain of a stage is calculated by using the input and output signals. The
formula used to calculate the gain of a stage is:

                                                    output signal
                                        gain =
                                                     input signal

     Voltage gain is calculated using input and output voltage; current gain uses input and output current;
and power gain uses input and output power. For the purposes of our discussion, we will only be
concerned with voltage gain.

    Figure 2-11 shows a simple amplifier circuit with the input- and output-signal-developing
impedances represented by variable resistors. In this circuit, C1 and C2 are the input and output coupling
capacitors. R1 represents the impedance of the input circuit. R2 represents the input-signal-developing
impedance, and R3 represents the output impedance.




                                 Figure 2-11.—Variable input and output impedances.

     R1 and R2 form a voltage-divider network for the input signal. When R2 is increased in value, the
input signal to the transistor (Q1) increases. This causes a larger output signal, and the gain of the stage
increases.

     Now look at the output resistor, R3. As R3 is increased in value, the output signal increases. This
also increases the gain of the stage.

      As you can see, increasing the input-signal-developing impedance, the output impedance, or both
will increase the gain of the stage. Of course there are limits to this process. The transistor must not be
overdriven with too high an input signal or distortion will result.

     With this principle in mind, if you could design a circuit that had maximum impedance at a specific
frequency (or band of frequencies), that circuit could be used in an rf amplifier. This FREQUENCY-
DETERMINING NETWORK could be used as the input-signal-developing impedance, the output
impedance, or both. The rf amplifier circuit would then be as shown in figure 2-12.




                                                     2-18
                                    Figure 2-12.—Semiblock diagram of rf amplifier.

     In this "semi-block" diagram, C1 and C2 are the input and output coupling capacitors. R1 represents
the impedance of the input circuit. The blocks marked FDN represent the frequency-determining
networks. They are used as input-signal-developing and output impedances for Q1.

FREQUENCY-DETERMINING NETWORK FOR AN RF AMPLIFIER

     What kind of circuit would act as a frequency-determining network? In general, a frequency-
determining network is a circuit that provides the desired response at a particular frequency. This
response could be maximum impedance or minimum impedance; it all depends on how the frequency-
determining network is used. You will see more about frequency-determining networks in NEETS,
Module 9—Introduction to Wave-Generation and Shaping Circuits. As you have seen, the frequency-
determining network needed for an rf amplifier should have maximum impedance at the desired
frequency.

     Before you are shown the actual components that make up the frequency-determining network for an
rf amplifier, look at figure 2-13, which is a simple parallel circuit. The resistors in this circuit are variable
and are connected together (ganged) in such a way that as the resistance of R1 increases, the resistance of
R2 decreases, and vice versa.




                                    Figure 2-13.—Parallel variable resistors (ganged).

     If each resistor has a range from 0 to 200 ohms, the following relationship will exist between the
individual resistances and the resistance of the network (RT). (All values are in ohms, RT rounded off to
two decimal places. These are selected values; there are an infinite number of possible combinations.)


                                                       2-19
                                 R1                   R2                   RT
                                   0                  200                 0.00
                                  10                  190                 9.50
                                  25                  175                21.88
                                  50                  150                37.50
                                  75                  125                46.88
                                 100                  100                50.00
                                 125                   75                46.88
                                 150                   50                37.50
                                 175                   25                21.88
                                 190                   10                 9.50
                                 200                    0                 0.00

     As you can see, this circuit has maximum resistance (RT) when the individual resistors are of equal
value. If the variable resistors represented impedances and if components could be found that varied their
impedance in the same way as the ganged resistors in figure 2-13, you would have the frequency-
determining network needed for an rf amplifier.

    There are components that will vary their impedance (reactance) like the ganged resistors. As you
know, the reactance of an inductor and a capacitor vary as frequency changes. As frequency increases,
inductive reactance increases, and capacitive reactance decreases.

     At some frequency, inductive and capacitive reactance will be equal. That frequency will depend
upon the value of the inductor and capacitor. If the inductor and capacitor are connected as a parallel LC
circuit, you will have the ideal frequency-determining network for an rf amplifier.

     The parallel LC circuit used as a frequency-determining network is called a TUNED CIRCUIT. This
circuit is "tuned" to give the proper response at the desired frequency by selecting the proper values of
inductance and capacitance. A circuit using this principle is shown in figure 2-14 which shows an rf
amplifier with parallel LC circuits used as frequency-determining networks. This rf amplifier will only be
effective in amplifying the frequency determined by the parallel LC circuits.




                                         Figure 2-14.—Simple rf amplifier.

     In many electronic devices, such as radio or television receivers or radar systems, a particular
frequency must be selected from a band of frequencies. This could be done by using a separate rf
amplifier for each frequency and then turning on the appropriate rf amplifier. It would be more efficient if
a single rf amplifier could be "tuned" to the particular frequency as that frequency is needed. This is what


                                                    2-20
happens when you select a channel on your television set or tune to a station on your radio. To
accomplish this "tuning," you need only change the value of inductance or capacitance in the parallel LC
circuits (tuned circuits).

     In most cases, the capacitance is changed by the use of variable capacitors. The capacitors in the
input and output portions of all the rf amplifier stages are ganged together in order that they can all be
changed at one time with a single device, such as the tuning dial on a radio. (This technique will be shown
on a schematic a little later in this chapter.)

Q-20. If the input-signal-developing impedance of an amplifier is increased, what is the effect on the
      gain?

Q-21. If the output impedance of an amplifier circuit is decreased, what is the effect on the gain?

Q-22. What is the purpose of a frequency-determining network in an rf amplifier?

Q-23. Can a parallel LC circuit be used as the frequency-determining network for an rf amplifier?

Q-24. How can the frequency be changed in the frequency-determining network?

RF AMPLIFIER COUPLING

     Figure 2-14 and the other circuits you have been shown use capacitors to couple the signal in to and
out of the circuit (C1 and C4 in figure 2-14). As you remember from chapter 1, there are also other
methods of coupling signals from one stage to another. Transformer coupling is the most common
method used to couple rf amplifiers. Transformer coupling has many advantages over RC coupling for rf
amplifiers; for example, transformer coupling uses fewer components than capacitive coupling. It can also
provide a means of increasing the gain of the stage by using a step-up transformer for voltage gain. If a
current gain is required, a step-down transformer can be used.

    You should also remember that the primary and secondary windings of a transformer are inductors.
With these factors in mind, an rf amplifier could be constructed like the one shown in figure 2-15.




                                  Figure 2-15.—Transformer-coupled rf amplifier.

    In this circuit, the secondary of T1 and capacitor C1 form a tuned circuit which is the input-signal-
developing impedance. The primary of T2 and capacitor C2 are a tuned circuit which acts as the output
impedance of Q1. (Both T1 and T2 must be rf transformers in order to operate at rf frequencies.)

     The input signal applied to the primary of T1 could come from the previous stage or from some input
device, such as a receiving antenna. In either case, the input device would have a capacitor connected


                                                   2-21
across a coil to form a tuned circuit. In the same way, the secondary of T2 represents the output of this
circuit. A capacitor connected across the secondary of T2 would form a parallel LC network. This
network could act as the input-signal-developing impedance for the next stage, or the network could
represent some type of output device, such as a transmitting antenna.

     The tuned circuits formed by the transformer and capacitors may not have the bandwidth required for
the amplifier. In other words, the bandwidth of the tuned circuit may be too "narrow" for the requirements
of the amplifier. (For example, the rf amplifiers used in television receivers usually require a bandwidth
of 6 MHz.)

     One way of "broadening" the bandpass of a tuned circuit is to use a swamping resistor. This is
similar to the use of the swamping resistor that was shown with the series peaking coil in a video
amplifier. A swamping resistor connected in parallel with the tuned circuit will cause a much broader
bandpass. (This technique and the theory behind it are discussed in more detail in NEETS, Module 9.)

      Another technique used to broaden the bandpass involves the amount of coupling in the
transformers. For transformers, the term "coupling" refers to the amount of energy transferred from the
primary to the secondary of the transformer. This depends upon the number of flux lines from the primary
that intersect, or cut, the secondary. When more flux lines cut the secondary, more energy is transferred.

     Coupling is mainly a function of the space between the primary and secondary windings. A
transformer can be loosely coupled (having little transfer of energy), optimumly coupled (just the right
amount of energy transferred), or overcoupled (to the point that the flux lines of primary and secondary
windings interfere with each other).

     Figure 2-16, (view A) (view B) (view C), shows the effect of coupling on frequency response when
parallel LC circuits are made from the primary and secondary windings of transformers.




                              A. LOOSE COUPLING                  FREQUENCY




                             B. OPTIMUM COUPLING                 FREQUENCY




    Figure 2-16 .—Effect of coupling on frequency response: A. LOOSE COUPLING B. OPTIMUM COUPLING




                                                    2-22
                              C. OVER-COUPLING                   FREQUENCY
                                                                           NTS080216




                      Figure 2-16C.—Effect of coupling on frequency response. OVER-COUPLING

      In view (A) the transformer is loosely coupled; the frequency response curve shows a narrow
bandwidth. In view (B) the transformer has optimum coupling; the bandwidth is wider and the curve is
relatively flat. In view (C) the transformer is overcoupled; the frequency response curve shows a broad
bandpass, but the curve "dips" in the middle showing that these frequencies are not developed as well as
others in the bandwidth.

    Optimum coupling will usually provide the necessary bandpass for the frequency-determining
network (and therefore the rf amplifier). For some uses, such as rf amplifiers in a television receiver, the
bandpass available from optimum coupling is not wide enough. In these cases, a swamping resistor (as
mentioned earlier) will be used with the optimum coupling to broaden the bandpass.

COMPENSATION OF RF AMPLIFIERS

     Now you have been shown the way in which an rf amplifier is configured to amplify a band of
frequencies and the way in which an rf amplifier can be "tuned" for a particular band of frequencies. You
have also seen some ways in which the bandpass of an rf amplifier can be adjusted. However, the
frequencies at which rf amplifiers operate are so high that certain problems exist.

    One of these problems is the losses that can occur in a transformer at these high frequencies. Another
problem is with interelectrode capacitance in the transistor. The process of overcoming these problems is
known as COMPENSATION.

Transformers in RF Amplifiers

     As you recall from NEETS, Module 1, the losses in a transformer are classified as copper loss,
eddy-current loss, and hysteresis loss. Copper loss is not affected by frequency, as it depends upon the
resistance of the winding and the current through the winding. Similarly, eddy-current loss is mostly a
function of induced voltage rather than the frequency of that voltage. Hysteresis loss, however, increases
as frequency increases.

      Hysteresis loss is caused by the realignment of the magnetic domains in the core of the transformer
each time the polarity of the magnetic field changes. As the frequency of the a.c. increases, the number of
shifts in the magnetic field also increases (two shifts for each cycle of a.c.); therefore, the "molecular
friction" increases and the hysteresis loss is greater. This increase in hysteresis loss causes the efficiency
of the transformer (and therefore the amplifier) to decrease. The energy that goes into hysteresis loss is
taken away from energy that could go into the signal.

     RF TRANSFORMERS, specially designed for use with rf, are used to correct the problem of
excessive hysteresis loss in the transformer of an rf amplifier. The windings of rf transformers are wound
onto a tube of nonmagnetic material and the core is either powdered iron or air. These types of cores also
reduce eddy-current loss.



                                                    2-23
Neutralization of RF Amplifiers

     The problem of interelectrode capacitance in the transistor of an rf amplifier is solved by
NEUTRALIZATION. Neutralization is the process of counteracting or "neutralizing" the effects of
interelectrode capacitance.

     Figure 2-17 shows the effect of the base-to-collector interelectrode capacitance in an rf amplifier.
The "phantom" capacitor (CBC) represents the interelectrode capacitance between the base and the
collector of Q1. This is the interelectrode capacitance that has the most effect in an rf amplifier. As you
can see, CBC causes a degenerative (negative) feedback which decreases the gain of the amplifier. (There
are some special cases in which CBC can cause regenerative (positive) feedback. In this case, the
technique described below will provide negative feedback which will accomplish the neutralization of the
amplifier.)



                                                     C BC

                                                                           T2

                                                      Q1        C3
                                     T1
                                                   C1
                                                                             V EC

                                                           R1        C2


                                                                                 NTS080217




                              Figure 2-17.—Interelectrode capacitance in an rf amplifier.

     As you may recall, unwanted degenerative feedback can be counteracted (neutralized) by using
positive feedback. This is exactly what is done to neutralize an rf amplifier.

     Positive feedback is accomplished by the use of a feedback capacitor. This capacitor must feed back
a signal that is in phase with the signal on the base of Q1. One method of doing this is shown in figure
2-18.




                                                      2-24
                                       Figure 2-18.—Neutralized rf amplifier.

      In figure 2-18, a feedback capacitor (C4) has been added to neutralize the amplifier. This solves the
problem of unwanted degenerative feedback. Except for capacitor C4, this circuit is identical to the circuit
shown in figure 2-17. (When CBC causes regenerative feedback, C4 will still neutralize the amplifier. This
is true because C4 always provides a feedback signal which is 180 degrees out of phase with the feedback
signal caused by CBC.)

Q-25. What is the most common form of coupling for an rf amplifier?

Q-26. What are two advantages of this type of coupling?

Q-27. If current gain is required from an rf amplifier, what type of component should be used as an
      output coupling element?

Q-28. What problem is caused in an rf amplifier by a loosely coupled transformer?

Q-29. How is this problem corrected?

Q-30. What problem is caused by overcoupling in a transformer?

Q-31. What method provides the widest bandpass?

Q-32. What two methods are used to compensate for the problems that cause low gain in an rf amplifier?

Q-33. What type of feedback is usually caused by the base-to-collector interelectrode capacitance?

Q-34. How is this compensated for?

TYPICAL RF AMPLIFIER CIRCUITS

      As a technician, you will see many different rf amplifiers in many different pieces of equipment. The
particular circuit configuration used for an rf amplifier will depend upon how that amplifier is used. In the
final part of this chapter, you will be shown some typical rf amplifier circuits.




                                                    2-25
     Figure 2-19 is the schematic diagram of a typical rf amplifier that is used in an AM radio receiver. In
figure 2-19, the input circuit is the antenna of the radio (L1-a coil) which forms part of an LC circuit
which is tuned to the desired station by variable capacitor C1. L1 is wound on the same core as L2, which
couples the input signal through C2 to the transistor (Q1). R1 is used to provide proper bias to Q1 from
the base power supply (VBB). R2 provides proper bias to the emitter of Q1, and C3 is used to bypass R2.
The primary of T1 and capacitor C4 form a parallel LC circuit which acts as the load for Q1. This LC
circuit is tuned by C4, which is ganged to C1 allowing the antenna and the LC circuit to be tuned
together. The primary of T1 is center-tapped to provide proper impedance matching with Q1.




                                    Figure 2-19.—Typical AM radio rf amplifier.

    You may notice that no neutralization is shown in this circuit. This circuit is designed for the AM
broadcast band (535 kHz - 1605 kHz).

     At these relatively low rf frequencies the degenerative feedback caused by base-to-collector
interelectrode capacitance is minor and, therefore, the amplifier does not need neutralization.

     Figure 2-20 is a typical rf amplifier used in a vhf television receiver. The input-signal-developing
circuit for this amplifier is made up of L1, C1, and C2. The inductor tunes the input-signal-developing
circuit for the proper TV channel. (L1 can be switched out of the circuit and another inductor switched in
to the circuit by the channel selector.) R1 provides proper bias to Q1 from the base supply voltage (V BB).
Q1 is the transistor. Notice that the case of Q1 (the dotted circle around the transistor symbol) is shown to
be grounded. The case must be grounded because of the high frequencies (54 MHz - 217 MHz) used by
the circuit. R2 provides proper bias from the emitter of Q1, and C3 is used to bypass R2. C5 and L2 are a
parallel LC circuit which acts as the load for Q1. The LC circuit is tuned by L2 which is switched in to
and out of the LC circuit by the channel selector. L3 and C6 are a parallel LC circuit which develops the
signal for the next stage. The parallel LC circuit is tuned by L3 which is switched in to and out of the LC
circuit by the channel selector along with L1 and L2. (L1, L2, and L3 are actually part of a bank of
inductors. L1, L2, and L3 are in the circuit when the channel selector is on channel 2. For other channels,
another group of three inductors would be used in the circuit.) R3 develops a signal which is fed through
C4 to provide neutralization. This counteracts the effects of the interelectrode capacitance from the base
to the collector of Q1. C7 is used to isolate the rf signal from the collector power supply (VCC).


                                                    2-26
                                  Figure 2-20.—Typical vhf television rf amplifier.



     The following questions refer to figure 2-21.




                                        Figure 2-21.—Typical rf amplifier.

Q-35. What components form the input-signal-developing impedance for the amplifier?

Q-36. What is the purpose of R1?



                                                     2-27
Q-37. What is the purpose of R2?

Q-38. If C4 were removed from the circuit, what would happen to the output of the amplifier?

Q-39. What components form the load for Q1?

Q-40. How many tuned parallel LC circuits are shown in this schematic?

Q-41. What do the dotted lines connecting C1, C2, C5, and C6 indicate?

Q-42. What is the purpose of C3?




                                                          SUMMARY

   This chapter has presented information on video and rf amplifiers. The information that follows
summarizes the important points of this chapter.

   A FREQUENCY-RESPONSE CURVE will enable you to determine the BANDWIDTH and the
UPPER and LOWER FREQUENCY LIMITS of an amplifier.




                           E
                          OR
                           I

                          O
                          U        f1                               f2
                          T
                          P                  BANDWIDTH
                          U                   19985 Hz
                          T




                               0   10   50   100     1K      10K         100K   1M       10M

                                                   FREQUENCY (Hz)                    NTS0802I-01




     The BANDWIDTH of an amplifier is determined by the formula:

                                                     BW = f 2- f 1

                                   Where:

                                        BW is the bandwidth
                                        f is the upper-frequency limit
                                          2
                                                       and
                                        f 1 is the lower-frequency limit


                                                               2-28
    The UPPER-FREQUENCY RESPONSE of an amplifier is limited by the inductance and
capacitance of the circuit.


                                                                     X L2         X C3
                     X C1    X L1


       HIGH
                                             Q1
    FREQUENCY
                                                                     L2
                                                                                  C3
                               L1                              R3
                    C1

                                              R1
                                                            +VCC

                                                                            C5           X C5
                                           +VBB
                    C4              X C4
                                                  R2   C2           X C2




                                                                                  NTS0802I-02




   The INTERELECTRODE CAPACITANCE of a transistor causes DEGENERATIVE
FEEDBACK at high frequencies.




                               HIGH
                            FREQUENCY                  R2
                              INPUT




                                                       R1


                                                                    NTS0802I-03




   VIDEO AMPLIFIERS must have a frequency response of 10 hertz to 6 megahertz (10 Hz − 6
MHz). To provide this frequency response, both high- and low-frequency compensation must be used.

     PEAKING COILS are used in video amplifiers to overcome the high-frequency limitations caused
by the capacitance of the circuit.




                                                       2-29
    SERIES PEAKING is accomplished by a peaking coil in series with the output-signal path.


                                     +VCC



                                            R3



                                     L1
                                                            L2        C2


                                Q1
                                                                                   C IN
                                                       CT


                              R1


                                    R2            C2



                                                                           NTS0802I-06



     SHUNT PEAKING is accomplished by a peaking coil in parallel (shunt) with the output-signal
path.



                                     +VCC



                                          R3



                                     L1
                                                                 C2


                                Q1

                                                      CT


                               R1


                                    R2           C1



                                                                 NTS0802I-05




                                                  2-30
    COMBINATION PEAKING is accomplished by using both series and shunt peaking.

                                 +VCC



                                           R3



                                 L1
                                                            L2    C2


                            Q1
                                                                                 C IN
                                                       CT


                          R1


                               R2                 C2



                                                                        NTS0802I-06


     LOW-FREQUENCY COMPENSATION is accomplished in a video amplifier by the use of a
parallel RC circuit in series with the load resistor.

                                           +VCC




                                       R4                C2



                                       R3
                                                         C2                Q2


                                      Q1

                                                                 R5


                                 R1


                                       R2                C2


                                                                       NTS0802I-07




                                                  2-31
     A RADIO-FREQUENCY (RF) AMPLIFIER uses FREQUENCY-DETERMINING NETWORKS
to provide the required response at a given frequency.




    The FREQUENCY-DETERMINING NETWORK in an rf amplifier provides maximum
impedance at the desired frequency. It is a parallel LC circuit which is called a TUNED CIRCUIT.




     TRANSFORMER COUPLING is the most common form of coupling in rf amplifiers. This
coupling is accomplished by the use of rf transformers as part of the frequency-determining network for
the amplifier.




                                                  2-32
     ADEQUATE BANDPASS is accomplished by optimum coupling in the rf transformer or by the use
of a SWAMPING RESISTOR.

     NEUTRALIZATION in an rf amplifier provides feedback (usually positive) to overcome the
effects caused by the base-to-collector interelectrode capacitance.




                         ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS Q1. THROUGH Q42.

 A-1. The difference between the upper and lower frequency limits of an amplifier.

 A-2. The half-power points of a frequency-response curve. The upper and lower limits of the band f
      frequencies for which the amplifier is most effective.

 A-3. (A) f2 = 80 kHz, f1 = 30 kHz, BW = 50 kHz (B) f2 = 4 kHz, f1 = 2 kHz, BW = 2 kHz

 A-4. The capacitance and inductance of the circuit and the interelectrode capacitance of the transistor.

 A-5. Negative (degenerative) feedback.

 A-6. It decreases.

 A-7. It increases.

 A-8. The capacitance of the circuit.

 A-9. Peaking coils.

A-10. The relationship of the components to the output-signal path.

A-11. Combination peaking.

A-12. The coupling capacitor (C3).


                                                  2-33
A-13. A shunt peaking coil for Q2.

A-14. A decoupling capacitor for the effects of R2.

A-15. A part of the low-frequency compensation network for Q1.

A-16. A series peaking coil for Q1.

A-17. A swamping resistor for L2.

A-18. L1, L2, and R5.

A-19. R9 and C5.

A-20. The gain increases.

A-21. The gain decreases.

A-22. To provide maximum impedance at the desired frequency.

A-23. Yes.

A-24. By changing the value.

A-25. Transformer coupling.

A-26. It uses fewer components than capacitive coupling and can provide an increase in gain.

A-27. A step-down transformer.

A-28. A too-narrow bandpass.

A-29. By using an optimumly-coupled transformer.

A-30. Low gain at the center frequency.

A-31. A swamping resistor in parallel with the tuned circuit.

A-32. RF transformers are used and the transistor is neutralized.

A-33. Degenerative or negative.

A-34. By neutralization such as the use of a capacitor to provide regenerative (positive) feedback.

A-35. C2 and the secondary of T1.

A-36. R1 provides the proper bias to the base of Q1 from VBB .

A-37. R2 provides the proper bias to the emitter of Q1.

A-38. The output would decrease. (C4 decouples R2 preventing degenerative feedback from R2.)

A-39. C5 and the primary of T2.

A-40. Four.



                                                  2-34
A-41. The dotted lines indicate that these capacitors are "ganged" and are tuned together with a single
      control.

A-42. C3 provides neutralization for Q1.




                                                  2-35
                                                CHAPTER 3

                                SPECIAL AMPLIFIERS

                                       LEARNING OBJECTIVES

    Upon completion of this chapter, you will be able to:

     1. Describe the basic operation of a differential amplifier.

     2. Describe the operation of a differential amplifier under the following conditions:

         a. Single Input, Single Output

         b. Single input, differential output

         c. Differential input, differential output

     3. List the characteristics of an operational amplifier.

     4. Identify the symbol for an operational amplifier.

     5. Label the blocks on a block diagram of an operational amplifier.

     6. Describe the operation of an operational amplifier with inverting and noninverting
        configurations.

     7. Describe the bandwidth of a typical operational amplifier and methods to modify the bandwidth.

     8. Identify the following applications of operational amplifiers:

         a. Adder

         b. Subtractor

     9. State the common usage for a magnetic amplifier.

    10. Describe the basic operation of a magnetic amplifier.

    11. Describe various methods of changing inductance.

    12. Identify the purpose of components in a simple magnetic amplifier.



                                            INTRODUCTION

     If you were to make a quick review of the subjects discussed in this module up to this point, you
would see that you have been given a considerable amount of information about amplifiers. You have
been shown what amplification is and how the different classes of amplifiers affect amplification. You
also have been shown that many factors must be considered when working with amplifiers, such as



                                                      3-1
impedance, feedback, frequency response, and coupling. With all this information behind you, you might
ask yourself "what more can there be to know about amplifiers?"

     There is a great deal more to learn about amplifiers. Even after you finish this chapter you will have
only "scratched the surface" of the study of amplifiers. But, you will have prepared yourself for the
remainder of the NEETS. This, in turn, should prepare you for further study and, perhaps, a career in
electronics.

    As in chapter 2, the circuits shown in this chapter are intended to present particular concepts to you.
Therefore, the circuits may be incomplete or not practical for use in an actual piece of electronic
equipment. You should keep in mind the fact that this text is intended to teach certain facts about
amplifiers, and in order to simplify the illustrations used, complete operational circuits are not always
shown.

     In this chapter three types of special amplifiers are discussed. These are: DIFFERENTIAL
AMPLIFIERS, OPERATIONAL AMPLIFIERS, and MAGNETIC AMPLIFIERS. These are called
special amplifiers because they are used only in certain types of equipment.

    The names of each of these special amplifiers describe the operation of the amplifier, NOT what is
amplified. For example, a magnetic amplifier does not amplify magnetism but uses magnetic effects to
produce amplification of an electronic signal.

     A differential amplifier is an amplifier that can have two input signals and/or two output signals.
This amplifier can amplify the difference between two input signals. A differential amplifier will also
"cancel out" common signals at the two inputs.

    One of the more interesting aspects of an operational amplifier is that it can be used to perform
mathematical operations electronically. Properly connected, an operational amplifier can add, subtract,
multiply, divide, and even perform the calculus operations of integration and differentiation. These
amplifiers were originally used in a type of computer known as the "analog computer" but are now used
in many electronic applications.

    The magnetic amplifier uses a device called a "saturable core reactor" to control an a.c.output signal.
The primary use of magnetic amplifiers is in power control systems.

     These brief descriptions of the three special amplifiers are intended to provide you with a general
idea of what these amplifiers are and how they can be used. The remaining sections of this chapter will
provide you with more detailed information on these special amplifiers.



                                    DIFFERENTIAL AMPLIFIERS

      A differential amplifier has two possible inputs and two possible outputs. This arrangement means
that the differential amplifier can be used in a variety of ways. Before examining the three basic
configurations that are possible with a differential amplifier, you need to be familiar with the basic
circuitry of a differential amplifier.

BASIC DIFFERENTIAL AMPLIFIER CIRCUIT

     Before you are shown the operation of a differential amplifier, you will be shown how a simpler
circuit works. This simpler circuit, known as the DIFFERENCE AMPLIFIER, has one thing in common




                                                    3-2
with the differential amplifier: It operates on the difference between two inputs. However, the difference
amplifier has only one output while the differential amplifier can have two outputs.

     By now, you should be familiar with some amplifier circuits, which should give you an idea of what
a difference amplifier is like. In NEETS, Module 7, you were shown the basic configurations for transistor
amplifiers. Figure 3-1 shows two of these configurations: the common emitter and the common base.

      In view (A) of figure 3-1 a common-emitter amplifier is shown. The output signal is an amplified
version of the input signal and is 180 degrees out of phase with the input signal. View (B) is a common-
base amplifier. In this circuit the output signal is an amplified version of the input signal and is in phase
with the input signal. In both of these circuits, the output signal is controlled by the base-to-emitter bias.
As this bias changes (because of the input signal) the current through the transistor changes. This causes
the output signal developed across the collector load (R2) to change. None of this information is new, it is
just a review of what you have already been shown regarding transistor amplifiers.




                             Figure 3-1A.—Common-emitter and common-base amplifiers.




                             Figure 3-1B.—Common-emitter and common-base amplifiers.


                                                     3-3
     NOTE: Bias arrangements for the following explanations will be termed base-to-emitter. In other
publications you will see the term emitter-to-base used to describe the same bias arrangement.

THE TWO-INPUT, SINGLE-OUTPUT, DIFFERENCE AMPLIFIER

     If you combine the common-base and common-emitter configurations into a single transistor
amplifier, you will have a circuit like the one shown in figure 3-2. This circuit is the two-input,
single-output, difference amplifier.

                                                        +V CC



                                                               R3
                                                                      C3

                                                                              OUTPUT
                                     C1                         C
                                                   B
                                                                qQ1
                          INPUT 1
                                                                E
                                                R1


                                     C2

                          INPUT 2
                                                               R2


                                                          -V
                                                               EE
                                                                           NTS080302
                               Figure 3-2.—Two-input, single-output, difference amplifier.

     In figure 3-2, the transistor has two inputs (the emitter and the base) and one output (the collector).
 t
Remember, the current through the transistor (and therefore the output signal) is controlled by the
base-to-emitter bias. In the circuit shown in figure 3-2, the combination of the two input signals controls
 he output signal. In fact, the DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE INPUT SIGNALS determines the
base-to-emitter bias.

      For the purpose of examining the operation of the circuit shown in figure 3-2, assume that the circuit
has a gain of -10. This means that for each 1-volt change in the base-to-emitter bias, there would be a
10-volt change in the output signal. Assume, also, that the input signals will peak at 1-volt levels (+1 volt
 I
for the positive peak and -1 volt for the negative peak). The secret to understanding this circuit (or any
transistor amplifier circuit) is to realize that the collector current is controlled by the base-to-emitter bias.
 n other words, in this circuit the output signal (the voltage developed across R3) is determined by the
difference between the voltage on the base and the voltage on the emitter.

    Figure 3-3 shows this two-input, single-output amplifier with input signals that are equal in
amplitude and 180 degrees out of phase. Input number one has a positive alternation when input number
two has a negative alternation and vice versa.



                                                        3-4
                                                            +VCC

                                                 R1         R3
                                                                 C3

                                                 Q1                   OUTPUT
                            INPUT #1       C1




                                            C2
                            INPUT #2



                                                            R2

                                                            -VCC

                                       T0 T1     T2 T3 T4 T5            T6 T7 T8
                                    +1V

                            INPUT      0
                              #1
                                    -1V



                                    +1V
                            INPUT      0
                              #2
                                    -1V



                                    +2V
                                    +1V

                           OUTPUT      0

                                    -1V
                                    -2V
                                                                               NTS080303




                                     Figure 3-3.—Input signals 180º out of phase.

      The circuit and the input and output signals are shown at the top of the figure. The lower portion of
the figure is a comparison of the input signals and the output signal. Notice the vertical lines marked "T0"
through "T8." These represent "time zero" through "time eight." In other words, these lines provide a way
to examine the two input signals and the output signal at various instants of time.




                                                      3-5
    In figure 3-3 at time zero (T0) both input signals are at 0 volts. The output signal is also at 0 volts.
Between time zero (T0) and time one (T1), input signal number one goes positive and input signal
number two goes negative. Each of these voltage changes causes an increase in the base-to-emitter bias
which causes current through Q1 to increase. Increased current through Q1 results in a greater voltage
drop across the collector load (R3) which causes the output signal to go negative.

     By time one (T1), input signal number one has reached +1 volt and input signal number two has
reached −1 volt. This is an overall increase in base-to-emitter bias of 2 volts. Since the gain of the circuit
is −10, the output signal has decreased by 20 volts. As you can see, the output signal has been determined
by the difference between the two input signals. In fact, the base-to-emitter bias can be found by
subtracting the value of input signal number two from the value of input signal number one.

                                   Mathematically:

                                      Bias = (input signal #1) - (input signal #2)
                                      Bias = (+1V) - (1V)
                                      Bias = +1V + 1V
                                      Bias = +2V


     Between time one (T1) and time two (T2), input signal number one goes from +1 volt to 0 volts and
input signal number two goes from −1 volt to 0 volts. At time two (T2) both input signals are at 0 volts
and the base-to-emitter bias has returned to 0 volts. The output signal is also 0 volts.

                                   Mathematically:

                                      Bias = (input signal #1) - (input signal #2)
                                      Bias = (0V) - (0V)
                                      Bias = 0V

   Between time two (T2) and time three (T3), input signal number one goes negative and input signal
number two goes positive. At time three (T3), the value of the base-to-emitter bias is −2 volts.

                                  Mathematically:

                                     Bias = (input signal #1) - (input signal #2)
                                     Bias = (-1V) - (+1V)
                                     Bias = (-1V) + (-1V)
                                     Bias = -2V

     This causes the output signal to be +20 volts at time three (T3).

     Between time three (T3) and time four (T4), input signal #1 goes from −1 volt to 0 volts and input
signal #2 goes from +1 volt to 0 volts. At time four (T4) both input signals are 0 volts, the bias is 0 volts,
and the output is 0 volts.

     During time four (T4) through time eight (T8), the circuit repeats the sequence of events that took
place from time zero (T0) through time four (T4).




                                                      3-6
     You can see that when the input signals are equal in amplitude and 180 degrees out of phase, the
output signal is twice as large (40 volts peak to peak) as it would be from either input signal alone (if the
other input signal were held at 0 volts).

    Figure 3-4 shows the two-input, single-output, difference amplifier with two input signals that are
equal in amplitude and in phase.


                                                                    +V CC
                                                                    R3
                                                                      C3 OUTPUT


                                 INPUT #1            C1

                                                                    Q1
                                                           R1




                                 INPUT #2           C2




                                                                   R2
                                                                   -VCC
                                            T0 T1 T2 T3         T4 T5    T6 T7 T8
                                     +1V

                              INPUT     0
                                #1
                                      -1V



                                     +1V
                              INPUT     0
                                #2
                                      -1V



                                   +20V
                                   +10V

                            OUTPUT      0
                                    -10V
                                    -20V
                                                                             NTS080304


                                            Figure 3-4.—Input signals in phase.




                                                          3-7
     Notice, that the output signal remains at 0 volts for the entire time (T0 - T8). Since the two input
signals are equal in amplitude and in phase, the difference between them (the base-to-emitter bias) is
always 0 volts. This causes a 0-volt output signal.

    If you compute the bias at any time period (T0 - T8), you will see that the output of the circuit
remains at a constant zero.

     For example:

                                       Bias = (input signal #1) - (input signal #2)
                                       T1 Bias = (+1V) - (+1V) = 0
                                       and so forth

     From the above example, you can see that when the input signals are equal in amplitude and in
phase, there is no output from the difference amplifier because there is no difference between the two
inputs. You also know that when the input signals are equal in amplitude but 180 degrees out of phase,
the output looks just like the input except for amplitude and a 180-degree phase reversal with respect to
input signal number one. What happens if the input signals are equal in amplitude but different in phase
by something other than 180 degrees? This would mean that sometimes one signal would be going
negative while the other would be going positive; sometimes both signals would be going positive; and
sometimes both signals would be going negative. Would the output signal still look like the input signals?
The answer is "no," because figure 3-5 shows a difference amplifier with two input signals that are equal
in amplitude but 90 degrees out of phase. From the figure you can see that at time zero (T0) input number
one is at 0 volts and input number two is at -1 volt. The base-to-emitter bias is found to be +1 volt.




                                                     3-8
                                                                +VCC
                                                                R3
                                                                  C3    OUTPUT


                                   INPUT #1       C1


                                                               Q1
                                                         R1




                                    INPUT #2        C2




                                                                R2
                                                                -VCC

                                            T0 T1 T2     T3   T4 T5 T6 T7 T8
                                    +1V

                              INPUT     0
                                #1
                                      -1V



                                    +1V

                              INPUT     0
                                #2
                                      -1V



                                   +20V

                                   +10V

                            OUTPUT      0

                                   -10V
                                   -20V
                                                                         NTS080305




                                      Figure 3-5.—Input signals 90º out of phase.

     This +1-volt bias signal causes the output signal to be −10 volts at time zero (T0). Between time zero
(T0) and time one (T1), both input signals go positive. The difference between the input signals stays
constant. The effect of this is to keep the bias at +1 volt for the entire time between T0 and T1. This, in
turn, keeps the output signal at -10 volts.

     Between time one (T1) and time two (T2), input signal number one goes in a negative direction but
input signal number two continues to go positive. Now the difference between the input signals decreases


                                                       3-9
rapidly from +1 volt. Halfway between T1 and T2 (the dotted vertical line), input signal number one and
input signal number two are equal in amplitude. The difference between the input signals is 0 volts and
this causes the output signal to be 0 volts. From this point to T2 the difference between the input signals is
a negative value. At T2:
                                           Bias = (input signal #1) - (input signal #2)
                                           Bias = (0V) - (+1V)
                                           Bias = +1V


     From time two (T2) to time three (T3), input signal number one goes negative and input signal
number two goes to zero. The difference between them stays constant at -1 volt. Therefore, the output
signal stays at a +10-volt level for the entire time period from T2 to T3. At T3 the bias condition will be:

                                           Bias = (input signal #1) - (input signal #2)
                                           Bias = (0V) - (-1V)
                                           Bias = +1V


     Between T3 and T4 input signal number one goes to zero while input signal number two goes
negative. This, again, causes a rapid change in the difference between the input signals. Halfway between
T3 and T4 (the dotted vertical line) the two input signals are equal in amplitude; therefore, the difference
between the input signals is 0 volts, and the output signal becomes 0 volts. From that point to T4, the
difference between the input signals becomes a positive voltage. At T4:

                                           Bias = (input signal #1) - (input signal #2)
                                           Bias = (0V) - (-1V)
                                           Bias = +1V

     (The sequence of events from T4 to T8 are the same as those of T0 to T4.)

     As you have seen, this amplifier amplifies the difference between two input signals. But this is NOT
a differential amplifier. A differential amplifier has two inputs and two outputs. The circuit you have just
been shown has only one output. Well then, how does a differential amplifier schematic look?

TYPICAL DIFFERENTIAL AMPLIFIER CIRCUIT

     Figure 3-6 is the schematic diagram of a typical differential amplifier. Notice that there are two
inputs and two outputs. This circuit requires two transistors to provide the two inputs and two outputs. If
you look at one input and the transistor with which it is associated, you will see that each transistor is a
common-emitter amplifier for that input (input one and Q1; input two and Q2). R1 develops the signal at
input one for Q1, and R5 develops the signal at input two for Q2. R3 is the emitter resistor for both Q1
and Q2. Notice that R3 is NOT bypassed. This means that when a signal at input one affects the current
through Q1, that signal is developed by R3. (The current through Q1 must flow through R3; as this
current changes, the voltage developed across R3 changes.) When a signal is developed by R3, it is
applied to the emitter of Q2. In the same way, signals at input two affect the current of Q2, are developed
by R3, and are felt on the emitter of Q1. R2 develops the signal for output one, and R4 develops the
signal for output two.




                                                    3-10
                                        Figure 3-6.—Differential amplifier.

     Even though this circuit is designed to have two inputs and two outputs, it is not necessary to use
both inputs and both outputs. (Remember, a differential amplifier was defined as having two possible
inputs and two possible outputs.) A differential amplifier can be connected as a single-input, single-output
device; a single-input, differential-output device; or a differential-input, differential-output device.

  Q-1. How many inputs and outputs are possible with a differential amplifier?

  Q-2. What two transistor amplifier configurations are combined in the single-transistor, two-input,
       single-output difference amplifier?

  Q-3. If the two input signals of a difference amplifier are in phase and equal in amplitude, what will
       the output signal be?

  Q-4. If the two input signals to a difference amplifier are equal in amplitude and 180 degrees out of
       phase, what will the output signal be?

  Q-5. If only one input signal is used with a difference amplifier, what will the output signal be?

  Q-6. If the two input signals to a difference amplifier are equal in amplitude but neither in phase nor
       180 degrees out of phase, what will the output signal be?

SINGLE-INPUT, SINGLE-OUTPUT, DIFFERENTIAL AMPLIFIER

     Figure 3-7 shows a differential amplifier with one input (the base of Q1) and one output (the
collector of Q2). The second input (the base of Q2) is grounded and the second output (the collector of
Q1) is not used.




                                                    3-11
                              Figure 3-7.—Single-input, single-output differential amplifier.

     When the input signal developed by R1 goes positive, the current through Q1 increases. This
increased current causes a positive-going signal at the top of R3. This signal is felt on the emitter of Q2.
Since the base of Q2 is grounded, the current through Q2 decreases with a positive-going signal on the
emitter. This decreased current causes less voltage drop across R4. Therefore, the voltage at the bottom of
R4 increases and a positive-going signal is felt at the output.

     When the input signal developed by R1 goes negative, the current through Q1 decreases. This
decreased current causes a negative-going signal at the top of R3. This signal is felt on the emitter of Q2.
When the emitter of Q2 goes negative, the current through Q2 increases. This increased current causes
more of a voltage drop across R4. Therefore, the voltage at the bottom of R4 decreases and a negative-
going signal is felt at the output.

     This single-input, single-output, differential amplifier is very similar to a single-transistor amplifier
as far as input and output signals are concerned. This use of a differential amplifier does provide
amplification of a.c. or d.c. signals but does not take full advantage of the characteristics of a differential
amplifier.

SINGLE-INPUT, DIFFERENTIAL-OUTPUT, DIFFERENTIAL AMPLIFIER

     In chapter one of this module you were shown several phase splitters. You should remember that a
phase splitter provides two outputs from a single input. These two outputs are 180 degrees out of phase
with each other. The single-input, differential-output, differential amplifier will do the same thing.

     Figure 3-8 shows a differential amplifier with one input (the base of Q1) and two outputs (the
collectors of Q1 and Q2). One output is in phase with the input signal, and the other output is 180 degrees
out of phase with the input signal. The outputs are differential outputs.




                                                        3-12
                                   COMBINED (DIFFERENTIAL) OUTPUT




                                                           R5
                                                         +VCC


                              OUTPUT 1                                       OUTPUT 2

                                                R2                    R4

                          INPUT
                                                        Q1 Q2
                                     R1



                                                              R3

                                                                     NTS080308
                                                         -VEE


                           Figure 3-8.—Single-input, differential-output differential amplifier.

     This circuit’s operation is the same as for the single-input, single-output differential amplifier just
described. However, another output is obtained from the bottom of R2. As the input signal goes positive,
thus causing increased current through Q1, R2 has a greater voltage drop. The output signal at the bottom
of R2 therefore is negative going. A negative-going input signal will decrease current and reverse the
polarities of both output signals.

     Now you see how a differential amplifier can produce two amplified, differential output signals from
a single-input signal. One further point of interest about this configuration is that if a combined output
signal is taken between outputs number one and two, this single output will be twice the amplitude of the
individual outputs. In other words, you can double the gain of the differential amplifier (single output) by
taking the output signal between the two output terminals. This single-output signal will be in phase with
the input signal. This is shown by the phantom signal above R5 (the phantom resistor connected between
outputs number one and two would be used to develop this signal).

DIFFERENTIAL-INPUT, DIFFERENTIAL-OUTPUT, DIFFERENTIAL AMPLIFIER

     When a differential amplifier is connected with a differential input and a differential output, the full
potential of the circuit is used. Figure 3-9 shows a differential amplifier with this type of configuration
(differential-input, differential-output).




                                                       3-13
                                         COMBINED OUTPUT




                                                     R6
                                                   +VCC




                              OUTPUT 1                               OUTPUT 2
                                           R2                 R4

                                                  Q1    Q2


                               R1                                          R5
                    INPUT 1                                                     INPUT 2



                                                        R3

                                                              NTS080309
                                                   -VEE


                        Figure 3-9.—Differential-input, differential-output differential amplifier.

     Normally, this configuration uses two input signals that are 180 degrees out of phase. This causes the
difference (differential) signal to be twice as large as either input alone. (This is just like the two-input,
single-output difference amplifier with input signals that are 180 degrees out of phase.)

     Output number one is a signal that is in phase with input number two, and output number two is a
signal that is in phase with input number one. The amplitude of each output signal is the input signal
multiplied by the gain of the amplifier. With 180-degree-out-of-phase input signals, each output signal is
greater in amplitude than either input signal by a factor of the gain of the amplifier.

     When an output signal is taken between the two output terminals of the amplifier (as shown by the
phantom connections, resistor, and signal), the combined output signal is twice as great in amplitude as
either signal at output number one or output number two. (This is because output number one and output
number two are 180 degrees out of phase with each other.) When the input signals are 180 degrees out of
phase, the amplitude of the combined output signal is equal to the amplitude of one input signal
multiplied by two times the gain of the amplifier.

     When the input signals are not 180 degrees out of phase, the combined output signal taken across
output one and output two is similar to the output that you were shown for the two-input, single-output,
difference amplifier. The differential amplifier can have two outputs (180 degrees out of phase with each
other), or the outputs can be combined as shown in figure 3-9.

    In answering Q7 through Q9 use the following information: All input signals are sine waves with a
peak-to-peak amplitude of 10 millivolts. The gain of the differential amplifier is 10.

  Q-7. If the differential amplifier is configured with a single input and a single output, what will the
       peak-to-peak amplitude of the output signal be?



                                                       3-14
  Q-8. If the differential amplifier is configured with a single input and differential outputs, what will
       the output signals be?

  Q-9. If the single-input, differential-output, differential amplifier has an output signal taken between
       the two output terminals, what will the peak-to-peak amplitude of this combined output be?

     In answering Q10 through Q14 use the following information: A differential amplifier is configured
with a differential input and a differential output. All input signals are sine waves with a peak-to-peak
amplitude of 10 millivolts. The gain of the differential amplifier is 10.

Q-10. If the input signals are in phase, what will be the peak-to-peak amplitude of the output signals?

Q-11. If the input signals are 180 degrees out of phase with each other, what will be the peak-to-peak
      amplitude of the output signals?

Q-12. If the input signals are 180 degrees out of phase with each other, what will the phase
      relationship be between (a) the output signals and (b) the input and output signals?

Q-13. If the input signals are 180 degrees out of phase with each other and a combined output is taken
      between the two output terminals, what will the amplitude of the combined output signal be?

Q-14. If the input signals are 90 degrees out of phase with each other and a combined output is taken
      between the two output terminals, (a) what will the peak-to-peak amplitude of the combined
      output signal be, and (b) will the combined output signal be a sine wave?



                                     OPERATIONAL AMPLIFIERS

     An OPERATIONAL AMPLIFIER (OP AMP) is an amplifier which is designed to be used with
other circuit components to perform either computing functions (addition, subtraction) or some type of
transfer operation, such as filtering. Operational amplifiers are usually high-gain amplifiers with the
amount of gain determined by feedback.

    Operational amplifiers have been in use for some time. They were originally developed for analog
(non-digital) computers and used to perform mathematical functions. Operational amplifiers were not
used in other devices very much because they were expensive and more complicated than other circuits.

      Today many devices use operational amplifiers. Operational amplifiers are used as d.c. amplifiers,
a.c. amplifiers, comparators, oscillators (which are covered in NEETS, Module 9), filter circuits, and many
other applications. The reason for this widespread use of the operational amplifier is that it is a very
versatile and efficient device. As an integrated circuit (chip) the operational amplifier has become an
inexpensive and readily available "building block" for many devices. In fact, an operational amplifier in
integrated circuit form is no more expensive than a good transistor.

CHARACTERISTICS OF AN OPERATIONAL AMPLIFIER

     The schematic symbols for an operational amplifier are shown in figure 3-10. View (A) shows the
power supply requirements while view (B) shows only the input and output terminals. An operational
amplifier is a special type of high-gain, d.c. amplifier. To be classified as an operational amplifier, the
circuit must have certain characteristics. The three most important characteristics of an operational
amplifier are:




                                                    3-15
     1. Very high gain

     2. Very high input impedance

     3. Very low output impedance
                                                   +VCC




                             INPUTS                                                OUTPUT

                                                 +

                                                     -VEE           NTS080310


                                                       A
                            Figure 3-10A.—Schematic symbols of an operational amplifier.




                          INPUTS                                                   OUTPUT

                                                +
                                                      B
                                                                       NTS080311




                            Figure 3-10B.—Schematic symbols of an operational amplifier.

     Since no single amplifier stage can provide all these characteristics well enough to be considered an
operational amplifier, various amplifier stages are connected together. The total circuit made up of these
individual stages is called an operational amplifier. This circuit (the operational amplifier) can be made up
of individual components (transistors, resistors, capacitors, etc.), but the most common form of the
operational amplifier is an integrated circuit. The integrated circuit (chip) will contain the various stages
of the operational amplifier and can be treated and used as if it were a single stage.

BLOCK DIAGRAM OF AN OPERATIONAL AMPLIFIER

     Figure 3-11 is a block diagram of an operational amplifier. Notice that there are three stages within
the operational amplifier.



                                                     3-16
                                                      +VCC




                 INVERTING
                   INPUT


                                       DIFFERENTIAL    VOLTAGE       OUTPUT
                                         AMPLIFIER    AMPLIFIER     AMPLIFIER
                                                                                         OUTPUT




                                      +
              NON-INVERTING
                  INPUT
                                                      -VEE                 NTS080311




                               Figure 3-11.—Block diagram of an operational amplifier.

     The input stage is a differential amplifier. The differential amplifier used as an input stage provides
differential inputs and a frequency response down to d.c. Special techniques are used to provide the high
input impedance necessary for the operational amplifier.

    The second stage is a high-gain voltage amplifier. This stage may be made from several transistors to
provide high gain. A typical operational amplifier could have a voltage gain of 200,000. Most of this gain
comes from the voltage amplifier stage.

    The final stage of the OP AMP is an output amplifier. The output amplifier provides low output
impedance. The actual circuit used could be an emitter follower. The output stage should allow the
operational amplifier to deliver several milliamperes to a load.

    Notice that the operational amplifier has a positive power supply (+VCC) and a negative power
supply (−V EE). This arrangement enables the operational amplifier to produce either a positive or a
negative output.

      The two input terminals are labeled "inverting input" (−) and "noninverting input" (+). The
operational amplifier can be used with three different input conditions (modes). With differential inputs
(first mode), both input terminals are used and two input signals which are 180 degrees out of phase with
each other are used. This produces an output signal that is in phase with the signal on the noninverting
input. If the noninverting input is grounded and a signal is applied to the inverting input (second mode),
the output signal will be 180 degrees out of phase with the input signal (and one-half the amplitude of the
first mode output). If the inverting input is grounded and a signal is applied to the noninverting input
(third mode), the output signal will be in phase with the input signal (and one-half the amplitude of the
first mode output).

Q-15. What are the three requirements for an operational amplifier?



                                                      3-17
Q-16. What is the most commonly used form of the operational amplifier?

Q-17. Draw the schematic symbol for an operational amplifier.

Q-18. Label the parts of the operational amplifier shown in figure 3-12.




                                     a          b           c




                                                                NTS080312

                                         Figure 3-12.—Operational amplifier.

CLOSED-LOOP OPERATION OF AN OPERATIONAL AMPLIFIER

     Operational amplifiers can have either a closed-loop operation or an open-loop operation. The
operation (closed-loop or open-loop) is determined by whether or not feedback is used. Without feedback
the operational amplifier has an open-loop operation. This open-loop operation is practical only when the
operational amplifier is used as a comparator (a circuit which compares two input signals or compares an
input signal to some fixed level of voltage). As an amplifier, the open-loop operation is not practical
because the very high gain of the operational amplifier creates poor stability. (Noise and other unwanted
signals are amplified so much in open-loop operation that the operational amplifier is usually not used in
this way.) Therefore, most operational amplifiers are used with feedback (closed-loop operation).

     Operational amplifiers are used with degenerative (or negative) feedback which reduces the gain of
the operational amplifier but greatly increases the stability of the circuit. In the closed-loop configuration,
the output signal is applied back to one of the input terminals. This feedback is always degenerative
(negative). In other words, the feedback signal always opposes the effects of the original input signal. One
result of degenerative feedback is that the inverting and noninverting inputs to the operational amplifier
will be kept at the same potential.

     Closed-loop circuits can be of the inverting configuration or noninverting configuration. Since the
inverting configuration is used more often than the noninverting configuration, the inverting configuration
will be shown first.

Inverting Configuration

    Figure 3-13 shows an operational amplifier in a closed-loop, inverting configuration. Resistor R2 is
used to feed part of the output signal back to the input of the operational amplifier.




                                                     3-18
                                                             R2


                                           R1




                                       INPUT        +
                                                                  OUTPUT




                                                                  NTS080313




                                        Figure 3-13.—Inverting configuration.

     At this point it is important to keep in mind the difference between the entire circuit (or operational
circuit) and the operational amplifier. The operational amplifier is represented by the triangle-like symbol
while the operational circuit includes the resistors and any other components as well as the operational
amplifier. In other words, the input to the circuit is shown in figure 3-13, but the signal at the inverting
input of the operational amplifier is determined by the feedback signal as well as by the circuit input
signal.

     As you can see in figure 3-13, the output signal is 180 degrees out of phase with the input signal. The
feedback signal is a portion of the output signal and, therefore, also 180 degrees out of phase with the
input signal. Whenever the input signal goes positive, the output signal and the feedback signal go
negative. The result of this is that the inverting input to the operational amplifier is always very close to 0
volts with this configuration. In fact, with the noninverting input grounded, the voltage at the inverting
input to the operational amplifier is so small compared to other voltages in the circuit that it is considered
to be VIRTUAL GROUND. (Remember, in a closed-loop operation the inverting and noninverting inputs
are at the same potential.)

     Virtual ground is a point in a circuit which is at ground potential (0 volts) but is NOT connected to
ground. Figure 3-14, (view A) (view B) and (view C), shows an example of several circuits with points at
virtual ground.




                                       Figure 3-14A.—Virtual ground circuits.


                                                     3-19
                                        Figure 3-14B.—Virtual ground circuits.


                                                     POINT
                                         R1           (A)              R2

                                         5Ω                            1Ω
                       +5V                                                             -1V
                       V1                                                               V2




                                                                             NTS080314C
                                                        (C)
                                        Figure 3-14C.—Virtual ground circuits.

     In view (A), V1 (the left-hand battery) supplies +10 volts to the circuit while V2 (the right-hand
battery) supplies -10 volts to the circuit. The total difference in potential in the circuit is 20 volts.

     The total resistance of the circuit can be calculated:


                                             RT = R 1 + R 2
                                             RT = 1Ω + 1Ω
                                             RT = 2Ω

      Now that the total resistance is known, the circuit current can be calculated:




                                                     3-20
                                                        ET
                                                 IT =
                                                        RT
                                                        20V
                                                 IT =
                                                        2Ω

                                                 I T = 10A


     The voltage drop across R1 can be computed:
                                                 ER1= R 1x I T

                                                 ER1= 1Ω x 10A

                                                 ER1= 10V

     The voltage at point A would be equal to the voltage of V1 minus the voltage drop of R1.
                                        Voltage at point A = V1 - ER1
                                        Voltage at point A = +10V - 10V
                                        Voltage at point A = 0V
    To check this result, compute the voltage drop across R2 and subtract this from the voltage at point
A. The result should be the voltage of V2.
                                                    E R2 = R2 x I T
                                                    E R2 = 1Ω x 10A
                                                    E R2 = 10V
                                                    V2 = (voltage at point A) - (ER2)
                                                    V2 = (0V) - (10V)
                                                    V2 = -10V

     It is not necessary that the voltage supplies be equal to create a point of virtual ground. In view (B)
V1 supplies +1 volt to the circuit while V2 supplies -10 volts. The total difference in potential is 11 volts.
The total resistance of this circuit (R1 + R2) is 11 ohms. The total current (I T) is 1 ampere. The voltage
drop across R1 (ER1 = R1 × IT) is 1 volt. The voltage drop across R2 (ER2 = R2 × I T) is 10 volts. The
voltage at point A can be computed:

                                      Voltage at point A = V1 - E R1
                                      Voltage at point A = +10V - 10V
                                      Voltage at point A = 0V
     So point A is at virtual ground in this circuit also. To check the results, compute the voltage at V2.
                                       V2 = (voltage at point A) - ER1
                                       V2 = (0V) - (+10V)
                                       V2 = -10V



                                                     3-21
    You can compute the values for view (C) and prove that point A in that circuit is also at virtual
ground.

     The whole point is that the inverting input to the operational amplifier shown in figure 3-13 is at
virtual ground since it is at 0 volts (for all practical purposes). Because the inverting input is at 0 volts,
there will be no current (for all practical purposes) flowing into the operational amplifier from the
connection point of R1 and R2.

     Given these conditions, the characteristics of this circuit are determined almost entirely by the values
of R1 and R2. Figure 3-15 should help show how the values of R1 and R2 determine the circuit
characteristics.




                                  Figure 3-15.—Current flow in the operational circuit.

     NOTE: It should be stressed at this point that for purpose of explanation the operational amplifier is
a theoretically perfect amplifier. In actual practice we are dealing with less than perfect. In the practical
operational amplifier there will be a slight input current with a resultant power loss. This small signal can
be measured at the theoretical point of virtual ground. This does not indicate faulty operation.

     The input signal causes current to flow through R1. (Only the positive half cycle of the input signal
is shown and will be discussed.) Since the voltage at the inverting input of the operational amplifier is at 0
volts, the input current (Iin) is computed by:

                                                              Ein
                                                   I in =
                                                              R1
     The output signal (which is opposite in phase to the input signal) causes a feedback current (Ifdbk) to
flow through R2. The left-hand side of R2 is at 0 volts (point A) and the right-hand side is at Eout.
Therefore, the feedback current is computed by:
                                                                -Eout
                                                   Ifdbk =
                                                                  R2

     (The minus sign indicates that Eout is 180 degrees out of phase with Ein and should not be confused
with output polarity.)



                                                       3-22
     Since no current flows into or out of the inverting input of the operational amplifier, any current
reaching point A from R1 must flow out of point A through R2. Therefore, the input current (Iin) and the
feedback current (Ifdbk) must be equal. Now we can develop a mathematical relationship between the input
and output sigABCDABCDnals and R1 and R2.

     Mathematically:
                                                Iin = Ifdbk

                                            By substitution:
                                                Ein -Eout
                                                   =
                                                R1   R2


     If you multiply both sides of the equation by R1:

                                           Ein = - (Eout) (R1)
                                                       R2
     If you divide both sides of the equation by Eout:


                                                Ein     R1
                                                     =-
                                                Eout    R2
     By inverting both sides of the equation:

                                                Ein     R2
                                                     =-
                                                Eout    R1

     You should recall that the voltage gain of a stage is defined as the output voltage divided by the input
voltage:
                                                    E
                                                   ( out )
                                                     Ein

     Therefore, the voltage gain of the inverting configuration of the operational amplifier is expressed by
the equation:

                                                          R1
                                                    -
                                                          R2

     (As stated earlier, the minus sign indicates that the output signal is 180 degrees out of phase with the
input signal.)

Noninverting Configuration

     Figure 3-16 shows a noninverting configuration using an operational amplifier. The input signal (Ein)
is applied directly to the noninverting (+) input of the operational amplifier. Feedback is provided by


                                                        3-23
coupling part of the output signal (Eout) back to the inverting (-) input of the operational amplifier. R1 and
R2 act as voltage divider that allows only a part of the output signal to be applied as feedback (E fdbk).

                                                              R2

                                    E fdbk

                                        R1
                                                  A
                                                POINT
                                                          +              EOUT
                              EIN


                                                                             NTS080316




                                       Figure 3-16.—Noninverting configuration.

     Notice that the input signal, output signal, and feedback signal are all in phase. (Only the positive
alternation of the signal is shown.) It may appear as if the feedback is regenerative (positive) because the
feedback and input signals are in phase. The feedback is, in reality, degenerative (negative) because the
input signals is applied to the noninverting input and the feedback signal is applied to the inverting input,
(Remember, that the operational amplifier will react to the difference between the two inputs.)

    Just as in the inverting configuration, the feedback signal is equal to the input signal (for all practical
purposes). This time, however, the feedback signal is in phase with the input signal.

     Therefore:
                                                E in = E fdbk


     Given this condition, you can calculate the gain of the stage in terms of the resistors (R1 and R2).

     The gain of the stage is defined as:

                                                     Gain = Eout
                                                            Ein
                                              Since: Ein = Efdbk
                                                               Eout
                                             Then: Gain =
                                                               Efdbk

       The feedback signal (Efdbk) can be shown in terms of the output signal (Eout) and the voltage divider
(R1 and R2). The voltage divider has the output signal on one end and ground (0 volts) on the other end.
The feedback signal is that part of the output signal developed by R1 (at point A). Another way to look at
it is that the feedback signal is the amount of output signal left (at point A) after part of the output signal



                                                     3-24
has been dropped by R2. In either case, the feedback signal (Efdbk) is the ratio of R1 to the entire voltage
divider (R1 + R2) multiplied by the output signal (Eout).

     Mathematically, the relationship of the output signal, feedback signal, and voltage divider is:

                                       Efdbk =        R1    ( Eout )
                                                    R1 + R2

     If you divide both sides of the equation by Eout:

                                            Efdbk           R1
                                                      =
                                            Eout          R1 + R2


     By inverting both sides of the equation:

                                            Efdbk         R1 + R2
                                                      =
                                            Eout            R1

     Separating the right-hand side:

                                          Efdbk           R1   R
                                                     =       + 2
                                          Eout            R1   R1

     Remember:
                                                           Eout
                                             Gain =
                                                           Efdbk

     Therefore, by substitution:
                                                           R2
                                             Gain =           +1
                                                           R1

     You can now see that the gain of the noninverting configuration is determined by the resistors. The
formula is different from the one used for the inverting configuration, but the gain is still determined by
the values of R1 and R2.

BANDWIDTH LIMITATIONS

     As with most amplifiers, the gain of an operational amplifier varies with frequency. The
specification sheets for operational amplifiers will usually state the open-loop (no feedback) gain for d.c.
(or 0 hertz). At higher frequencies, the gain is much lower. In fact, for an operational amplifier, the gain
decreases quite rapidly as frequency increases.

     Figure 3-17 shows the open-loop (no feedback) frequency-response curve for a typical operational
amplifier. As you should remember, bandwidth is measured to the half-power points of a frequency-
response curve. The frequency-response curve shows that the bandwidth is only 10 hertz with this


                                                      3-25
configuration. The UNITY GAIN POINT, where the signal out will have the same amplitude as the signal
in (the point at which the gain of the amplifier is 1), is 1 megahertz for the amplifier. As you can see, the
frequency response of this amplifier drops off quite rapidly.



                                               HALF-POWER
                                                  POINT
                      100,000
                       70,700

                       10,000

                     G
                     A 1,000
                     I
                     N
                           100


                            10
                                                                        UTILITY-GAIN
                                                                           POINT
                              1
                              1Hz     10Hz     100Hz       1kHz    10kHz 100kHz        1MHz
                                                      FREQUENCY
                                                                                    NTS080317



                                 Figure 3-17.—Open-loop frequency-response curve.

     Figure 3-17 is the open-loop frequency-response curve. You have been told that most operational
amplifiers are used in a closed-loop configuration. When you look at the frequency-response curve for a
closed-loop configuration, one of the most interesting and important aspects of the operational amplifier
becomes apparent: The use of degenerative feedback increases the bandwidth of an operational amplifier
circuit.

     This phenomenon is another example of the difference between the operational amplifier itself and
the operational-amplifier circuit (which includes the components in addition to the operational amplifier).
You should also be able to see that the external resistors not only affect the gain of the circuit, but the
bandwidth as well.

      You might wonder exactly how the gain and bandwidth of a closed-loop, operational-amplifier
circuit are related. Figure 3-18 should help to show you the relationship. The frequency-response curve
shown in figure 3-18 is for a circuit in which degenerative feedback has been used to decrease the circuit
gain to 100 (from 100,000 for the operational amplifier). Notice that the half-power point of this curve is
just slightly above 10 kilohertz.




                                                    3-26
                    100,000
                                              OPEN-LOOP
                                                GAIN


                     10,000

                   G
                   A 1,000
                   I
                                            CLOSED-LOOP
                   N                           GAIN                    HALF-POWER
                                                                          POINT
                        100
                        70.7


                         10
                                                                    UTILITY-GAIN
                                                                       POINT
                           1
                           1Hz     10Hz      100Hz    1kHz     10kHz 100kHz 1MHz
                                                  FREQUENCY
                                                                              NTS080318


                         Figure 3-18.—Closed-loop frequency-response curve for gain of 100.




     Now look at figure 3-19. In this case, more feedback has been used to decrease the gain of the circuit
to 10. Now the bandwidth of the circuit is extended to about 100 kilohertz.




                                                     3-27
                           100,000
                                                OPEN-LOOP
                                                  GAIN


                            10,000

                          G
                          A 1,000
                          I
                          N
                               100


                                10
                                                                    UTILITY-GAIN
                                                                       POINT
                                 1
                                 1Hz    10Hz   100Hz    1kHz    10kHz 100kHz       1MHz
                                                     FREQUENCY                NTS080319




                           Figure 3-19.—Closed-loop frequency-response curve for gain of 10.




     The relationship between circuit gain and bandwidth in an operational-amplifier circuit can be
expressed by the GAIN-BANDWIDTH PRODUCT (GAIN × BANDWIDTH = UNITY GAIN POINT).
In other words, for operational-amplifier circuits, the gain times the bandwidth for one configuration of an
operational amplifier will equal the gain times the bandwidth for any other configuration of the same
operational amplifier. In other words, when the gain of an operational-amplifier circuit is changed (by
changing the value of feedback or input resistors), the bandwidth also changes. But the gain times the
bandwidth of the first configuration will equal the gain times the bandwidth of the second configuration.
The following example should help you to understand this concept.

     The frequency-response curves shown in figures 3-17, 3-18, and 3-19 have a gain-bandwidth product
of 1,000,000. In figure 3-17, the gain is 100,000 and the bandwidth is 10 hertz. The gain-bandwidth
product is 100,000 times 10 (Hz), or 1,000,000. In figure 3-18, the gain has been reduced to 100 and the
bandwidth increases to 10 kilohertz. The gain-bandwidth product is 100 times 10,000 (Hz) which is also
equal to 1,000,000. In figure 3-19 the gain has been reduced to 10 and the bandwidth is 100 kilohertz. The
gain-bandwidth product is 10 times 100,000 (Hz), which is 1,000,000. If the gain were reduced to 1, the
bandwidth would be 1 megahertz (which is shown on the frequency-response curve as the unity-gain
point) and the gain-bandwidth product would still be 1,000,000.

Q-19. What does the term "closed-loop" mean in the closed-loop configuration of an operational
      amplifier?

    In answering Q20, Q21, and Q23, select the correct response from the choices given in the
parentheses.




                                                   3-28
Q-20. In a closed-loop configuration the output signal is determined by (the input signal, the feedback
      signal, both).

Q-21. In the inverting configuration, the input signal is applied to the (a) (inverting, noninverting)
      input and the feedback signal is applied to the (b) (inverting, noninverting) input.

Q-22. In the inverting configuration, what is the voltage (for all practical purposes) at the inverting
      input to the operational amplifier if the input signal is a 1-volt, peak-to-peak sine wave?

Q-23. In the inverting configuration when the noninverting input is grounded, the inverting input is at
      (signal, virtual) ground.

Q-24. In a circuit such as that shown in figure 3-15, if R1 has a value of 100 ohms and R2 has a value
      of 1 kilohm and the input signal is at a value of + 5 millivolts, what is the value of the output
      signal?

Q-25. If the unity-gain point of the operational amplifier used in question 24 is 500 kilohertz, what is
      the bandwidth of the circuit?

Q-26. In a circuit such as that shown in figure 3-16, if R1 has a value of 50 ohms and R2 has a value of
      250 ohms and the input signal has a value of +10 millivolts, what is the value of the output
      signal?

Q-27. If the open-loop gain of the operational amplifier used in question 26 is 200,000 and the open-
      loop bandwidth is 30 hertz, what is the closed loop bandwidth of the circuit?

APPLICATIONS OF OPERATIONAL AMPLIFIERS

     Operational amplifiers are used in so many different ways that it is not possible to describe all of the
applications. Entire books have been written on the subject of operational amplifiers. Some books are
devoted entirely to the applications of operational amplifiers and are not concerned with the theory of
operation or other circuits at all. This module, as introductory material on operational amplifiers, will
show you only two common applications of the operational amplifier: the summing amplifier and the
difference amplifier. For ease of explanation the circuits shown for these applications will be explained
with d.c. inputs and outputs, but the circuit will work as well with a.c. signals.

Summing Amplifier (Adder)

     Figure 3-20 is the schematic of a two-input adder which uses an operational amplifier. The output
level is determined by adding the input signals together (although the output signal will be of opposite
polarity compared to the sum of the input signals).




                                                    3-29
                                          Figure 3-20.—Two-input adder.

     If the signal on input number one (E1) is +3 volts and the signal on input number two (E2) is +4
volts, the output signal (Eout) should be −7 volts [(+3 V) + (+4 V) = +7 V and change the polarity to get
−7 V].

     With +3 volts at E1 and 0 volts at point A (which is at virtual ground), the current through R1 must
be 3 milliamperes.

    Mathematically:
                                                           E1
                                                I R1 =
                                                           R1

                                                I R1 = +3V
                                                       1k Ω

                                                I R1 = +3mA



    (The + sign indicates a current flow from right to left.)

    By the same sort of calculation, with +4 volts at E2 and 0 volts at point A the current through R2
must be 4 milliamps.

     This means that a total of 7 milliamps is flowing from point A through R1 and R2. If 7 milliamps is
flowing from point A, then 7 milliamps must be flowing into point A. The 7 milliamps flowing into point
A flows through R3 causing 7 volts to be developed across R3. With point A at 0 volts and 7 volts
developed across R3, the voltage potential at Eout must be a −7 volts. Figure 3-21 shows these voltages
and currents.




                                                    3-30
                                                        IR3 = 7mA
                     I R1 = 3mA                              R3
                          R1
                                                            1k Ω
              E1
              +3V         1k Ω

                 I R2 = 4mA
                                         POINT
                         R2                A
                                          0V                                  -7V E
              E2
                         1k Ω
                                                       +                           OUT
              +4V

                                                                                         NTS080321


                                Figure 3-21.—Current and voltage in a two-input adder.

     An adder circuit is not restricted to two inputs. By adding resistors in parallel to the input terminals,
any number of inputs can be used. The adder circuit will always produce an output that is equal to the
sum of the input signals but opposite in polarity. Figure 3-22 shows a five-input adder circuit with
voltages and currents indicated.




                                                     3-31
                                  I R1
                          E1
                                  R1 1k Ω


                                  I R2
                                                     E1      I R1 2mA
                                                            +2V
                          E2
                                  R2 1k Ω           E2 +1V I R2 1mA
                                                    E3 +6V I R3 6mA
                                  I R3              E4 0V I R4
                          E3                        E5 +4V I R5 4mA
                                  R3 1k Ω
                                                   EOUT -13V I R6 13mA

                                  I R4
                                                                I R6
                          E4
                                  R4 1k Ω
                                                             R6 1k Ω

                                  I R5
                          E5
                                  R5 1k Ω
                                                                             E
                                                            +                    OUT



                                                                             NTS080322


                                            Figure 3-22.—Five-input adder.

    The previous circuits have been adders, but there are other types of summing amplifiers. A summing
amplifier can be designed to amplify the results of adding the input signals. This type of circuit actually
multiplies the sum of the inputs by the gain of the circuit.

    Mathematically (for a three-input circuit):

                                               Eout = gain (E1 + E2 + E3)

    If the circuit gain is -10:
                                               Eout = -10 (E1 + E2 + E3)

     The gain of the circuit is determined by the ratio between the feedback resistor and the input
resistors. To change figure 3-20 to a summing amplifier with a gain of -10, you would replace the
feedback resistor (R3) with a 10-kilohm resistor. This new circuit is shown in figure 3-23.




                                                     3-32
                                                              R3
                                  R1                       10k Ω
                        E1
                                 1k Ω

                                             POINT
                                  R2           A
                        E2                                                   EOUT
                                 1k Ω                   +
                                                                                 NTS080323

                                         Figure 3-23.—Summing amplifier.

     If this ciABCDrcuit is designed correctly and the input voltages (E1 and E2) are +2 volts and +3 volts,
respectively, the output voltage (Eout) should be:


                                             Eout = gain (E1 + E2)
                                             Eout = -10 [(+2V) + (+3V)]
                                             Eout = -10 (+5)
                                             Eout = -50V


     To see if this output (−50 V) is what the circuit will produce with the inputs given above, start by
calculating the currents through the input resistors, R1 and R2 (remember that point A is at virtual
ground):
                                                              E1
                                                     I R1 =
                                                              R1

                                                     I R1 = 2V
                                                           1k Ω

                                                     I R1 = 2mA
                                                              E2
                                                     I R2 =
                                                              R2
                                                               3V
                                                     I R2 =
                                                              1k Ω

                                                     I R2 = 3mA


     Next, calculate the current through the feedback resistor (R3):



                                                    3-33
                                               I R3 = - ( I R1 + I R2 )

                                               I R3 = - (2mA + 3 mA)
                                               I R3 = - 5mA

     (The minus sign indicates current flow from left to right.)

     Finally, calculate the voltage dropped across R3 (which must equal the output voltage):


                                                EOUT = ( I R3 x R3 )
                                                EOUT = (-5 mA x 10 k Ω )
                                                EOUT = -50V



     As you can see, this circuit performs the function of adding the inputs together and multiplying the
result by the gain of the circuit.

     One final type of summing amplifier is the SCALING AMPLIFIER. This circuit multiplies each
input by a factor (the factor is determined by circuit design) and then adds these values together. The
factor that is used to multiply each input is determined by the ratio of the feedback resistor to the input
resistor. For example, you could design a circuit that would produce the following output from three
inputs (E1, E2, E3):

                                         -[(2 x E1) + (4 x E2) + (3 x E3)]


   Using input resistors R1 for input number one (E1), R2 for input number two (E2), R3 for input
number three (E3), and R4 for the feedback resistor, you could calculate the values for the resistors:


                                                        R4
                                                   2=
                                                        R1
                                                        R4
                                                   4=
                                                        R2
                                                        R4
                                                   3=
                                                        R3


     Any resistors that will provide the ratios shown above could be used. If the feedback resistor (R4) is
a 12-kilohm resistor, the values of the other resistors would be:




                                                     3-34
                                                       12 k Ω
                                                  2=
                                                         R1
                                             2 (R1) = 12 k Ω
                                                 R1 = 6 k Ω
                                                       12 k Ω
                                                  4=
                                                         R2

                                             4(R2) = 12 k Ω
                                                 R2 = 3 k Ω
                                                       12 k Ω
                                                  3=
                                                         R3
                                             3(R3) = 12 k Ω

                                                 R3 = 4 k Ω


     Figure 3-24 is the schematic diagram of a scaling amplifier with the values calculated above.


                                                              R4
                                     R1
                            E1                              12k Ω
                                    6k Ω

                                     R2
                            E2
                                    3k Ω       POINT
                                                 A                           EOUT
                            E3
                                     R3                   +
                                    4k Ω
                                                                              NTS080324




                                           Figure 3-24.—Scaling amplifier.

     To see if the circuit will produce the desired output, calculate the currents and voltages as done for
the previous circuits.

     With:
                                                  E1 = +12V
                                                  E2 = +3V
                                                  E3 = +8V

the output should be:




                                                     3-35
                      Eout = -[(2 x E1) + (4 x E2) + (3 x E3)]
                      Eout = -[(2 x 12V) + (4 x +3V) + (3 x +8V)]

                      Eout = -[(+ 24V) + (+ 12V) + (+ 24V)]

                      Eout = -60V

                                                       E1
Calculate the current for each input:         I R1 =
                                                       R1

                                              I R1 = +12V
                                                      6k Ω

                                              I R1 = +2mA

                                                       E2
                                              I R2 =
                                                       R2

                                              I R2 = +3V
                                                     3k Ω

                                              I R2 = +1mA

                                                       E3
                                              I R3 =
                                                       R3

                                              I R3 = +8V
                                                     4k Ω

                                              I R3 = +2mA

                                              I R4 = -(IR1 +I R2 +I R3 )

                                              I R4 = -(2mA + 1mA + 2mA)

                                              I R4 = -5mA



Calculate the output voltage:           Eout = E R4
                                        Eout = I R4 x R4

                                        Eout = (-5mA x 12k Ω )

                                        Eout = -60V

                                           3-36
    You have now seen how an operational amplifier can be used in a circuit as an adder, a summing
amplifier, and a scaling amplifier.

Difference Amplifier (Subtractor)

     A difference amplifier will produce an output based on the difference between the input signals. The
subtractor circuit shown in figure 3-25 will produce the following output:

                                               EOUT = 5 (E2 - E1)




                                          Figure 3-25.—Subtractor circuit.

     Normally, difference amplifier circuits have the ratio of the inverting input resistor to the feedback
resistor equal to the ratio of the noninverting input resistors. In other words, for figure 3-25:

                                                   R1 R2
                                                     =
                                                   R3 R4

and, by inverting both sides:

                                                   R3 R4
                                                     =
                                                   R1 R2

     For ease of explanation, in the circuit shown in figure 3-25 all the resistors have a value of 1 kilohm,
but any value could be used as long as the above ratio is true. For a subtractor circuit, the values of R1
and R3 must also be equal, and therefore, the values of R2 and R4 must be equal. It is NOT necessary that
the value of R1 equal the value of R2.

     Using figure 3-25, assume that the input signals are:

                                                        E1 = +3V
                                                        E2 = +12V
     The output signal should be:


                                                    3-37
                                                    EOUT = E2 - E1

                                                    EOUT = (+12V) - (+3V)

                                                    EOUT = +9V

     To check this output, first compute the value of R2 plus R4:
                                                    R 2 + R 4 = 1k Ω + 1k Ω

                                                    R 2 + R 4 = 2k Ω

    With this value, compute the current through R2 (IR2):

                                                     I R2 =       E2
                                                                 R2 + R4

                                                     I R2 =       +12V
                                                                   2k Ω

                                                     IR2 = +6mA
(indicating current flow from left to right)

     Next, compute the voltage drop across R2 (ER2):
                                                   E R2 = R 2 x I R2

                                                   E R2 = 1k Ω x (+6mA)

                                                   E R2 = +6V
     Then compute the voltage at point B:

                                        Then compute the voltage at point B:

                                        Voltage at point B = E2 - E R2
                                        Voltage at point B = (+12V) - (+6V)
                                        Voltage at point B = +6V

     Since point B and point A will be at the same potential in an operational amplifier:

                                       Voltage at point A = +6V

     Now compute the voltage developed by R1 (ER1):
                                       E R1 = (voltage at point A) - (E1)

                                       E R1= (+6V) - (+3V)

                                       E R1= +3V
    Compute the current through R1 (IR1):

                                                      3-38
                                               I R1    E R1
                                                      =
                                                       R1
                                                      +3V
                                               I R1 = 1k Ω

                                               I R1 = +3mA

                                             Since: IR1 = I R3
                                             Then: I R3 = +3mA


     Compute the voltage developed by R3 (ER3):

                                          E R3 = (R 3) x (I R3)
                                          E R3 = ( 1k Ω) x (+3mA )
                                          E R3 = +3V

     Add this to the voltage at point A to compute the output voltage (Eout):
                                          EOUT = ( E R3) + (voltage at point A)

                                          EOUT = (+3V) x (+6V)

                                          EOUT = +9V
     As you can see, the circuit shown in figure 3-25 functions as a subtractor. But just as an adder is only
one kind of summing amplifier, a subtractor is only one kind of difference amplifier. A difference
amplifier can amplify the difference between two signals. For example, with two inputs (E1 and E2) and a
gain of five, a difference amplifier will produce an output signal which is:

                                           EOUT = 5 (E2 - E1)
      The difference amplifier that will produce that output is shown in figure 3-26. Notice that this circuit
is the same as the subtractor shown in figure 3-25 except for the values of R3 and R4. The gain of this
difference amplifier is:




                                         Figure 3-26.—Difference amplifier.


                                                      3-39
                                                       R3
                                                Gain =
                                                       R1
                                                       5 kΩ
                                                Gain =
                                                       1 kΩ
                                                Gain = 5
    Then, for a difference amplifer:

                                                             R3   R4
                                             Gain =             =
                                                             R1   R2

     With the same inputs that were used for the subtractor, (E1 = + 3 V; E2 = + 12 V) the output of the
difference amplifier should be five times the output of the subtractor (Eout = + 45 V).

    Following the same steps used for the subtractor:

    First compute the value of R2 plus R4:

                                            R2 + R4 = 1 k Ω + 5 kΩ
                                            R2 + R4 = 4 k Ω
    With this value, compute the current through R2 (IR2):
                                             I R2 =      E2
                                                        R2 + R4

                                            I R2 =       +12V
                                                          6k Ω
                                            I
                                                R2 = +2mA
    Next, compute the voltage drop across R2 (ER2):
                                                E R2 = (R2) x ( IR2)

                                                E R2 = (1k    ) x (+2mA)

                                                E R2 = +2V
    Then, compute the voltage at point B:

                                       Voltage at point B = E2 - E R2
                                       Voltage at point B = (+12V) - (+2V)
                                       Voltage at point B = +10V

    Since point A and point B will be at the same potential in an operational amplifier:
                                         Voltage at point A = +10V




                                                      3-40
   Now compute the voltage developed by R1 (ER1):


                                        E R1 = (voltage at point A) - (E1)

                                        E R1= (+10V ) - (+3V)

                                        E R1= +7V


   Compute the current through R1 (IR1):

                                                         I R1 =   E R1
                                                                  R1

                                                         I R1 =   +7V
                                                                   kΩ
                                                         I R1 = +7mA

                                               Since: I R1 = I R3
                                               Then: I R3 = +7mA


   Compute the voltage developed by R3 (ER3):

                                            E R3 = R 3 x I R3
                                            E R3 = ( 5k Ω ) x (+7mA )
                                            E R3 = +35V


   Add this voltage to the voltage at point A to compute the output voltage (Eout):

                                      EOUT = ( E R3) + (voltage at point A)

                                      EOUT = (+35V) + (+10V)

                                      EOUT = +45V

   This was the output desired, so the circuit works as a difference amplifier.

Q-28. What is the difference between a summing amplifier and an adder circuit?

Q-29. Can a summing amplifier have more than two inputs?

Q-30. What is a scaling amplifier?

   Refer to figure 3-27 in answering Q31 through Q33.



                                                  3-41
                                   Figure 3-27.—Circuit for Q31 through Q33.

Q-31. What type of circuit is figure 3-27?

Q-32. If: E1 = +2V, and: E2 = +6V, then Eout = ?

Q-33. What is the difference in potential between the inverting (-) and noninverting (+) inputs to the
      operational amplifier when: E1 = +6V, and E2 = +2V

Q-34. What is the difference between a subtractor and a difference amplifier?

Q-35. Can a difference amplifier have more than two inputs?

    Refer to figure 3-28 in answering Q36 through Q38.




                                   Figure 3-28.—Circuit for Q36 through Q38.

Q-36. What type of circuit is figure 3-28?

Q-37. If: E1 = +5V, and: E2 = +11V, then Eout = ?

Q-38. What is the difference in potential between the inverting (í DQGnoninverting (+) inputs to the
      operational amplifier when: E1 = +2V, and E2 = +4V


                                                  3-42
                                        MAGNETIC AMPLIFIERS

    You have now been shown various ways that electron tubes (NEETS, Module 6) and transistors
(NEETS, Module 7) can be used to amplify signals. You have also been shown the way in which this is
done. There is another type of amplifier in use—the MAGNETIC AMPLIFIER, sometimes called the
MAG AMP.

     The magnetic amplifier has certain advantages over other types of amplifiers. These include (1) high
efficiency (up to 90 percent); (2) reliability (long life, freedom from maintenance, reduction of spare parts
inventory); (3) ruggedness (shock and vibration resistance, high overload capability, freedom from effects
of moisture); and (4) no warm-up time. The magnetic amplifier has no moving parts and can be
hermetically sealed within a case similar to the conventional dry-type transformer.

     However, the magnetic amplifier has a few disadvantages. For example, it cannot handle low-level
signals; it is not useful at high frequencies; it has a time delay associated with the magnetic effects; and
the output waveform is not an exact reproduction of the input waveform (poor fidelity).

     The magnetic amplifier is important, however, to many phases of naval engineering because it
provides a rugged, trouble-free device that has many applications aboard ship and in aircraft. These
applications include throttle controls on the main engines of ships; speed, frequency, voltage, current, and
temperature controls on auxiliary equipment; and fire control, servomechanisms, and stabilizers for guns,
radar, and sonar equipment.

     As stated earlier, the magnetic amplifier does not amplify magnetism, but uses electromagnetism to
amplify a signal. It is a power amplifier with a very limited frequency response. Technically, it falls into
the classification of an audio amplifier; but, since the frequency response is normally limited to 100 hertz
and below, the magnetic amplifier is more correctly called a low-frequency amplifier.

     The basic principle of a magnetic amplifier is very simple. (Remember, all amplifiers are current-
control devices.) A magnetic amplifier uses a changing inductance to control the power delivered to a
load.

BASIC OPERATION OF A MAGNETIC AMPLIFIER

     Figure 3-29 shows a simple circuit with a variable inductor in series with a resistor (representing a
load). The voltage source is 100 volts at 60 hertz.




                                                                               L
                                                                               10-25 mH

                             E
                           100V
                           60HZ
                                                                             R
                                                                              LOAD
                                                                             5Ω
                            NTS080329



                                  Figure 3-29.—Variable inductor in series with a load.



                                                       3-43
    What happens when the inductance decreases? The end result is that the power in the load (true
power) increases. Why? Look at the following formulas and see how each is affected by a decrease in
inductance.

                       X L= 2πf L                (inductive reactance
                                                 in the circuit)
                       Z = X L2 + R 2            (impedance in the circuit)

                            E
                       I=                 (current in the circuit)
                            Z
                       True power = I 2 R (true power or power
                                          in the load)
    (True power is covered in NEETS, Module 2—Introduction to Alternating Current and
Transformers.)

     As inductance (L) decreases, XL decreases. As XL decreases, Z decreases. As Z decreases, I
increases. Finally, as I increases, true power increases.

    This general conclusion can be confirmed by using some actual values of inductance in the formulas
along with other values from figure 3-29.

    If the value of inductance is 23 millihenries, the formulas yield the following values:


                                       X L= 2πf L
                                       X L= (2) (3.14) (60Hz) (23mH)
                                       X L= 8.67 Ω (rounded off)

                                       Z = X L2 + R 2

                                                            2
                                       Z = (8.67Ω)2 + (5Ω)

                                       Z = 100.1689 Ω
                                       Z = 10 Ω (rounded off)
                                           E
                                       I=
                                           Z
                                           100v
                                       I=
                                           10 Ω
                                       I = 10A
                                     True power = I 2 R
                                                        2
                                     True power = (10A) + (5 Ω)
                                     True power = 500 watts




                                                    3-44
     Now, if the value of inductance is decreased to 11.7 millihenries, the formulas yield the following
values:
                                     X L= 2πf L
                                     X L= (2) (3.14) (60Hz) (117mH)
                                     X L= 4.41 Ω (rounded off)

                                      Z = X L2 + R 2

                                                               2
                                      Z = (4.41Ω)2 + (5Ω)

                                      Z = 144.4481 Ω
                                      Z = 6.67 Ω (rounded off)
                                          E
                                      I=
                                          Z
                                          100v
                                      I=
                                          6.67Ω
                                      I = 15A (rounded off)
                                   True power = I 2 R
                                                      2
                                   True power = (15A) + (5 Ω)
                                   True power = 1125 watts
     So a decrease in inductance of 11.3 millihenries (23 mH—11.7 mH) causes an increase in power to
the load (true power) of 625 watts (1125 W—500 W). If it took 1 watt of power to change the inductance
by 11.3 millihenries (by some electrical or mechanical means), figure 3-29 would represent a power
amplifier with a gain of 625.

Q-39. What is the frequency classification of a magnetic amplifier?

Q-40. What is the basic principle of a magnetic amplifier?

Q-41. If inductance increases in a series LR circuit, what happens to true power?

METHODS OF CHANGING INDUCTANCE

     Since changing the inductance of a coil enables the control of power to a load, what methods are
available to change the inductance? Before answering that question, you should recall a few things about
magnetism and inductors from NEETS, Module 1—Introduction to Matter, Energy, and Direct Current,
chapter 1—Matter, Energy, and Electricity; and Module 2 —Introduction to Alternating Current and
Transformers, chapter 2—Inductance.

      Permeability was defined as the measure of the ability of a material to act as a path for additional
magnetic lines of force. Soft iron was presented as having high permeability compared with air. In fact,
the permeability of unmagnetized iron is 5000 while air has a permeability of 1. A nonmagnetized piece
of iron has high permeability because the tiny molecular magnets (Weber's Theory) or the directions of
electron spin (Domain Theory) are able to be aligned by a magnetic field. As they align, they act as a path
for the magnetic lines of force.

                                                   3-45
     Earlier NEETS modules state that the inductance of a coil increases directly as the permeability of
the core material increases. If a coil is wound around an iron core, the permeability of the core is 5000.
Now, if the iron is pulled part way out of the coil of wire, the core is part iron and part air. The
permeability of the core decreases. As the permeability of the core decreases, the inductance of the coil
decreases. This increases the power delivered to the load (true power). This relationship is shown in
figure 3-30.

      The system shown in figure 3-30 is not too practical. Even if a motor were used in place of the hand
that is shown, the resulting amplifier would be large, expensive, and not easily controlled. If the
permeability of a core could be changed by electrical means rather than mechanical, a more practical
system would result.




                              Figure 3-30.—Varying coil inductance with a movable coil.

     High permeability depends on there being many molecular magnets (or electron spin directions) that
can be aligned to provide a path for magnetic lines of force. If almost all of these available paths are
already being used, the material is magnetized and there are no more paths for additional lines of force.
The "flux density" (number of lines of force passing through a given area) is as high as it can be. This
means that the permeability of the material has decreased. When this condition is reached, the core is said
to be SATURATED because it is saturated (filled) with all the magnetic lines of force it can pass. At this
point, the core has almost the same value of permeability as air (1) instead of the much higher value of
permeability (5000) that it had when it was unmagnetized.

     Of course, the permeability does not suddenly change from 5000 to 1. The permeability changes as
the magnetizing force changes until saturation is reached. At saturation, permeability remains very low no
matter how much the magnetizing force increases. If you were to draw a graph of the flux density
compared to the magnetizing force, you would have something similar to the graph shown in figure 3-31.
Figure 3-31 also includes a curve representing the value of permeability as the magnetizing force
increases. Point "s" in figure 3-31 is the point of saturation. The flux density does not increase above
point "s," and the permeability is at a steady, low value.




                                                     3-46
                                 Figure 3-31.—Magnetization and permeability curves.

     You have now seen how a change in the magnetizing force causes a change in permeability. The
next question is, how do you change the magnetizing force? Magnetizing force is a function of
AMPERE-TURNS. (An ampere-turn is the magnetomotive force developed by 1 ampere of current
flowing in a coil of one turn.) If you increase the ampere-turns of a coil, the magnetizing force increases.
Since it is not practical to increase the number of turns, the easiest way to accomplish this is to increase
the current through the coil.

     If you increase the current through a coil, you increase the ampere-turns. By increasing the ampere-
turns you increase the magnetizing force. At some point, this causes a decrease in the permeability of the
core. With the permeability of the core decreased, the inductance of the coil decreases. As said before, a
decrease in the inductance causes an increase in power through the load. A device that uses this
arrangement is called a SATURABLE-CORE REACTOR or SATURABLE REACTOR.

SATURABLE-CORE REACTOR

     A saturable-core reactor is a magnetic-core reactor (coil) whose reactance is controlled by changing
the permeability of the core. The permeability of the core is changed by varying a unidirectional flux (flux
in one direction) through the core.

     Figure 3-32 shows a saturable-core reactor that is used to control the intensity of a lamp. Notice that
two coils are wound around a single core. The coil on the left is connected to a rheostat and a battery.
This coil is called the control coil because it is part of the control circuit. The coil on the right is
connected to a lamp (the load) and an a.c. source. This coil is called the load coil because it is part of the
load circuit.

     As the wiper (the movable connection) of the rheostat is moved toward the right, there is less
resistance in the control circuit. With less resistance, the control-circuit current increases. This causes the
amount of magnetism in the core to increase and the inductance of the coil in the load circuit to decrease
(because the core is common to both coils). With less inductance in the load circuit, load current increases
and the lamp gets brighter.




                                                     3-47
 RHEOSTAT                                                                                  LOAD
                                                                                          CIRCUIT
                                              LAMINATED
                                                CORE
           CONTROL
            CIRCUIT                                                                            LAMP



         NTS080332                                                                       A.C. SOURCE

                                 Figure 3-32.—A simple saturable-core reactor circuit.

     The schematic diagram of this circuit is shown in figure 3-33. L1 is the schematic symbol for a
saturable-core reactor. The control winding is shown with five loops, and the load winding is shown with
three loops. The double bar between the inductors stands for an iron core, and the symbol that cuts across
the two windings is a saturable-core symbol indicating that the two windings share a saturable core.




                          Figure 3-33.—Schematic diagram of a simple saturable-core reactor.

     Now that you have seen the basic operation of a saturable-core reactor, there is one other idea to
discuss before moving on to the circuitry of a magnetic amplifier. There is a point upon the magnetization
curve where the saturable-core reactor should be operated. The ideal operating point is the place in which
a small increase in control current will cause a large increase in output power and a small decrease in
control current will cause a large decrease in output power. This point is on the flattest portion of the
permeability curve (after its peak).

     Figure 3-34 shows the magnetization and permeability curves for a saturable-core reactor with the
ideal operating point (point "O") indicated. Notice point "O" on the magnetization curve. The portion of
the magnetization curve where point "O" is located is called the KNEE OF THE CURVE. The knee of the
curve is the point of maximum curvature. It is called the "knee" because it looks like the knee of a leg that
is bent. Saturable-core reactors and magnetic amplifiers should be operated on the knee of the
magnetization curve.


                                                      3-48
                                                MAGNETIZATION CURVE




                    FLUX DENSITY
                                                                  POINT 0




                                                                                   PERMEABILITY
                                                                                      CURVE


                                      MAGNETIZING FORCE                                    NTS080334


                                   Figure 3-34.—Magnetization and permeability curves with operating point.

     When the saturable-core reactor is set at the knee of the magnetization curve, any small increase in
control current will cause a large increase in load current. Any small decrease in control current will cause
a large decrease in load current. That is why point "O" is the ideal operating point-because small changes
in control current will cause large changes in load current. In other words, the saturable-core reactor can
amplify the control current. However, a saturable-core reactor is NOT a magnetic amplifier. You will find
out a little later how a magnetic amplifier differs from a saturable-core reactor. First you should know a
few more things about the saturable-core reactor.

     If a d.c. voltage is applied to the control winding of a saturable-core reactor and an a.c. voltage is
applied to the load windings, the a.c. flux will aid the d.c. flux on one half cycle and oppose the d.c. flux
on the other half cycle. This is shown in figure 3-35. Load flux is indicated by the dashed-line arrows, and
control flux is indicated by the solid-line arrows. View (A) shows the load and control flux adding during
one half cycle of the a.c. View (B) of the figure shows the load and control flux opposing during the other
half cycle of the a.c.




                                                                                                          _
              CONTROL
               CIRCUIT                                                                       A.C. SOURCE
                                                                                       LOAD
                                                                                      CIRCUIT     +
                NTS080335A                                                              LOAD


                                               A. FLUX AIDING
                                     Figure 3-35A.—Flux paths in a saturable-core reactor. FLUX AIDING



                                                                 3-49
                CONTROL                                             LOAD        +
                 CIRCUIT                                                   A. C.SOURCE
                                                                   CIRCUIT     _

                 NTS08035B                                          LOAD



                               B. FLUX OPPOSING

                        Figure 3-35B.—Flux paths in a saturable-core reactor. FLUX OPPOSING

     This situation causes the operating point of the saturable-core reactor to shift with the applied a.c.
However, the situation would be better if the load flux was not an influence on the control flux. Figure
3-36 shows a circuit in which this is accomplished.

     During the first half cycle, the load circuit flux (dashed-line arrows) cancels in the center leg of the
core. This is shown in figure 3-36, view (A). As a result, there is no effect upon the flux from the control
circuit. During the second half cycle, the polarity of the a.c. (and therefore the polarity of the flux)
reverses as shown in view (B). The result is the same as it was during the first half cycle. There is no
effect upon the control circuit flux.




                                                        CONTROL
                                                         CIRCUIT                    LOAD




                                     LOAD CIRCUIT
                                                 A. C. SOURCE
                                                    _        +         NTS080336A


                                          A. FIRST HALF CYCLE

                       Figure 3-36A.—Three-legged, saturable-core reactor. FIRST HALF CYCLE




                                                     3-50
                                                        CONTROL
                                                         CIRCUIT                 LOAD




                                        LOAD CIRCUIT

                                                  A. C. SOURCE
                                                            _
                                                    +               NTS080336B


                                         B. SECOND HALF CYCLE


                     Figure 3-36B.—Three-legged, saturable-core reactor. SECOND HALF CYCLE

    Another approach to solving the problem of load flux affecting control flux is shown in figure 3-37.
Figure 3-37 shows a toroidal saturable-core reactor. The shape of these cores is a toroid (donut shape).
The windings are wound around the cores so that the load flux aids the control flux in one core and
opposes the control flux in the other core.

     During the first half cycle, the flux aids in the left core and opposes in the right core, as shown in
figure 3-37, view (A). During the second half cycle, the flux opposes in the left core and aids in the right
core, as shown in view (B). Regardless of the amount of load flux or polarity of the load voltage, there is
no net effect of load flux on control flux.




                         Figure 3-37A.—Toroidal saturable-core reactor. FIRST HALF CYCLE


                                                    3-51
                        Figure 3-37B.—Toroidal saturable-core reactor. SECOND HALF CYCLE

     Figures 3-36 and 3-37 both represent practical, workable saturable-core reactors. Circuits similar to
these are actually used to control lighting in auditoriums or electric industrial furnaces. These circuits are
sometimes referred to as magnetic amplifiers, but that is NOT technically correct. A magnetic amplifier
differs from a saturable-core reactor in one important aspect: A magnetic amplifier has a rectifier in
addition to a saturable-core reactor.

Q-42. If the permeability of the core of a coil increases, what happens to (a) inductance and (b) true
      power in the circuit?

Q-43. What happens to the permeability of an iron core as the current increases from the operating
      point to a large value?

Q-44. If two coils are wound on a single iron core, what will a change in current in one coil cause in
      the other coil?

Q-45. What symbol in figure 3-33 indicates a saturable core connecting two windings?

SIMPLIFIED MAGNETIC AMPLIFIER CIRCUITRY

      If the saturable-core reactor works, why do we need to add a rectifier to produce a magnetic
amplifier? To answer this question, recall that in NEETS, Module 2—Introduction to Alternating Current
and Transformers, you were told about hysteresis loss. Hysteresis loss occurs because the a.c. applied to a
coil causes the tiny molecular magnets (or electron-spin directions) to realign as the polarity of the a.c.
changes. This realignment uses up power. The power that is used for realignment is a loss as far as the
rest of the circuit is concerned. Because of this hysteresis loss in the saturable-core reactor, the power
gain is relatively low. A rectifier added to the load circuit will eliminate the hysteresis loss and increase
the gain. This is because the rectifier allows current to flow in only one direction through the load coils.

    A simple half-wave magnetic amplifier is shown in figure 3-38. This is a half-wave magnetic
amplifier because it uses a half-wave rectifier. During the first half cycle of the load voltage, the diode
conducts and the load windings develop load flux as shown in view (A) by the dashed-line arrows. The


                                                     3-52
load flux from the two load coils cancels and has no effect on the control flux. During the second half
cycle, the diode does not conduct and the load coils develop no flux, as shown in view (B). The load flux
never has to reverse direction as it did in the saturable-core reactor, so the hysteresis loss is eliminated.




                                                     CONTROL
                                                      CIRCUIT                     LOAD




                                   LOAD CIRCUIT
                                              A. C. SOURCE
                                                 _           +       NTS080336A


                                        A. FIRST HALF CYCLE
                       Figure 3-38A.—Simple half-wave magnetic amplifier. FIRST HALF CYCLE


                                                                                  CRI




                                                     CONTROL
                                                      CIRCUIT                            LOAD

                                 LOAD CIRCUIT
                                               A.C. SOURCE
                                                       _
                                                  +                       NTS080338B

                                    B. SECOND HALF CYCLE
                      Figure 3-38B.—Simple half-wave magnetic amplifier. SECOND HALF CYCLE

      The circuit shown in figure 3-38 is only able to use half of the load voltage (and therefore half the
possible load power) since the diode blocks current during half the load-voltage cycle. A full-wave
rectifier used in place of CR1 would allow current flow during the entire cycle of load voltage while still
preventing hysteresis loss.

    Figure 3-39 shows a simple full-wave magnetic amplifier. The bridge circuit of CR1, CR2, CR3,
CR4 allows current to flow in the load circuit during the entire load voltage cycle, but the load current is
always in the same direction. This current flow in one direction prevents hysteresis loss.


                                                      3-53
     View (A) shows that during the first half cycle of load voltage, current flows through CR1, the load
coils, and CR3. View (B) shows that during the second half cycle, load current flows through CR2, the
load coils, and CR4.




                                                    CONTROL
                                                     CIRCUIT
                                                                                    LOAD

                                       LOAD CIRCUIT


                                                           CR3          NTS08039A
                                              CR2




                                              CR1           CR4
                                                             _
                                                                 +
                                                           A.C. INPUT
                                            A. FIRST HALF CYCLE

                      Figure 3-39A.—Simple full-wave magnetic amplifier. FIRST HALF CYCLE




                                                    CONTROL
                                                     CIRCUIT
                                                                                     LOAD

                                     LOAD CIRCUIT


                                                           CR3          NTS080339B
                                             CR2




                                            CR1             CR4
                                                             + _
                                                           A.C. INPUT
                                          B. SECOND HALF CYCLE
                     Figure 3-39B.—Simple full-wave magnetic amplifier. SECOND HALF CYCLE

   Up to this point, the control circuit of the magnetic amplifier has been shown with d.c. applied to it.
Magnetic-amplifier control circuits should accept a.c. input signals as well as d.c. input signals. As shown


                                                    3-54
earlier in figure 3-34, a saturable-core reactor has an ideal operating point. Some d.c. must always be
applied to bring the saturable core to that operating point. This d.c. is called BIAS. the most effective way
to apply bias to the saturable core and also allow a.c. input signals to control the magnetic amplifier is to
use a bias winding. A full-wave magnetic amplifier with a bias winding is shown in figure 3-40.

                                                   CONTROL
                                                    INPUT

                                                            CONTROL
                                                            WINDING


                                                             BIAS
                                                            WINDING



                                                       BIAS
                                                     CIRCUIT

                                    LOAD CIRCUIT


                                                                           NTS080340




                                                            A.C. INPUT

                             Figure 3-40.—Full-wave magnetic amplifier with bias winding.

     In the circuit shown in figure 3-40, the bias circuit is adjusted to set the saturable-core reactor at the
ideal operating point. Input signals, represented by the a.c. source symbol, are applied to the control input.
The true power of the load circuit is controlled by the control input signal (a.c.)

     The block diagram symbol for a magnetic amplifier is shown in figure 3-41. The triangle is the
general symbol for an amplifier. The saturable-core reactor symbol in the center of the triangle identifies
the amplifier as a magnetic amplifier. Notice the input and output signals shown. The input signal is a
small-amplitude, low-power a.c. signal. The output signal is a pulsating d.c. with an amplitude that varies.
This variation is controlled by the input signal and represents a power gain of 1000.




                                                     3-55
                              Figure 3-41.—Magnetic amplifier input and output signals.

    Some magnetic amplifiers are designed so a.c. goes through the load rather than pulsating d.c. This is
done by placing the load in a different circuit position with respect to the rectifier. The principle of the
magnetic amplifier remains the same: Control current still controls load current.

     Magnetic amplifiers provide a way of accurately controlling large amounts of power. They are used
in servosystems (which are covered later in this training series), temperature or pressure indicators, and
power supplies.

     This chapter has presented only the basic operating theory of saturable-core reactors and magnetic
amplifiers. For your convenience, simple schematic diagrams have been used to illustrate this material.
When magnetic amplifiers and saturable-core reactors are used in actual equipment, the schematics may
be more complex than those you have seen here. Also, you may find coils used in addition to those
presented in this chapter. The technical manual for the equipment in question should contain the
information you need to supplement what you have read in this chapter.

Q-46. At what portion of the magnetization curve should a magnetic amplifier be operated?

Q-47. How is the effect of load flux on control flux eliminated in a saturable-core reactor?

Q-48. What is the purpose of the rectifier in a magnetic amplifier?

Q-49. What is used to bias a magnetic amplifier so that the control winding remains free to accept
      control (input) signals?

Q-50. List two common usages of magnetic amplifiers.



                                                SUMMARY

    This chapter has presented information on differential amplifiers, operational amplifiers, and
magnetic amplifiers. The information that follows summarizes the important points of this chapter.

     A DIFFERENCE AMPLIFIER is any amplifier with an output signal dependent upon the
difference between the input signals. A two-input, single-output difference amplifier can be made by
combining the common-emitter and common-base configurations in a single transistor.




                                                     3-56
   A difference amplifier can have input signals that are IN PHASE with each other, view (A), 180
DEGREES OUT OF PHASE with each other, view (B), or OUT OF PHASE BY SOMETHING OTHER
THAN 180 DEGREES with each other, view (C).




                                                       +V CC
                                                       R3
                                                            C3   OUTPUT


                           INPUT #1        C1

                                                       Q1
                                                R1




                           INPUT #2        C2




                                                       R2
                                                       -VCC
                         NTS0803I-02



                                A. DIFFERENTIAL AMPLIFIER IN PHASE




                                                3-57
                                                        +VCC

                                                R1      R3
                                                             C3

                                                Q1                OUTPUT
                           INPUT #1       C1




                                          C2
                           INPUT #2



                                                        R2

                            NTS0803I-03                 -VCC

                        B. DIFFERENTIAL AMPLIFIER 180 OUT OF PHASE




                                                        +VCC
                                                        R3
                                                          C3      OUTPUT


                           INPUT #1       C1


                                                        Q1
                                                R1




                            INPUT #2       C2




                                                        R2
                                                        -VCC
                                                                           NTS0803I-04

                  C. DIFFERENTIAL AMPLIFIER OUT OF PHASE OTHER THAN 180




    A DIFFERENTIAL AMPLIFIER has two possible inputs and two possible outputs. The combined
output signal is dependent upon the difference between the input signals.


                                                 3-58
                                       +VCC



                                   OUTPUTS
                            R2                       R4
                                   1          2


                  INPUT 1                                   INPUT 2
                                   Q1     Q2
                 R1                                              R5




                                   R3


                                       -VEE       NTS0803I-05




A differential amplifier can be configured with a SINGLE INPUT and a SINGLE OUTPUT

                                          +VCC



                                                                         OUTPUT
                                 R2                         R4
             INPUT

                                          qQ1 Q2
                      R1



                                                  R3

                                              -VEE         NTS0803I-06



a SINGLE INPUT and a DIFFERENTIAL OUTPUT




                                          3-59
                                COMBINED (DIFFERENTIAL) OUTPUT




                                                     R5
                                                   +VCC


                           OUTPUT 1                                        OUTPUT 2

                                            R2                   R4

                        INPUT
                                                   Q1 Q2
                                R1



                                                          R3

                                                                 NTS0803I-07
                                                   -VEE


    or a DIFFERENTIAL INPUT and a DIFFERENTIAL OUTPUT.

                                                 COMBINED OUTPUT




                                                            R6
                                                          +VCC




                                      OUTPUT 1                                 OUTPUT 2
                                                  R2                  R4

                                                         Q1    Q2


                                       R1                                          R5
                            INPUT 1                                                     INPUT 2



                                                               R3

                                                                     NTS0803I-08
                                                          -VEE


    An OPERATIONAL AMPLIFIER is an amplifier which has very high gain, very high input
impedance, and very low output impedance. An OP AMP is made from three stages: (1) a differential
amplifier, (2) a high-gain voltage amplifier, and (3) an output amplifier.



                                                       3-60
                                                        +VCC




                   INVERTING
                     INPUT


                                        DIFFERENTIAL      VOLTAGE     OUTPUT
                                          AMPLIFIER      AMPLIFIER   AMPLIFIER
                                                                                         OUTPUT




                                       +
                NON-INVERTING
                    INPUT
                                                         -VEE              NTS0803I-09




    Operational amplifiers are usually used in a CLOSED-LOOP OPERATION. This means that
degenerative feedback is used to lower the gain and increase the stability of the operational amplifier.

     An operational amplifier circuit can be connected with an INVERTING CONFIGURATION




     or a NONINVERTING CONFIGURATION.




                                                       3-61
     The GAIN-BANDWIDTH PRODUCT for an operational amplifier is computed by multiplying the
gain by the bandwidth (in hertz). For any given operational amplifier, the gain-bandwidth product will
remain the same regardless of the amount of feedback used.




     A SUMMING AMPLIFIER is an application of an operational amplifier in which the output signal
is determined by the sum of the input signals multiplied by the gain of the amplifier:


                                  EOUT = gain (E1 + E2...)




                                                 3-62
     A SCALING AMPLIFIER is a special type of summing amplifier with the output signal
determined by multiplying each input signal by a different factor (determined by the ratio of the input-
signal resistor and feedback resistor) and then adding these products:




                                          R fdbk x          R fdbk x
                            E OUT = [ (            E1 ) + (          E2 )
                                          R in1             R in2
                                       R fdbk x
                                   +            E3 ...) ]
                                       R in3




     A DIFFERENCE AMPLIFIER is an application of an operational amplifier in which the output
signal is determined by the difference between the input signals multiplied by the gain of the amplifier:

                                       EOUT = gain (E2 - E1)


                                                   3-63
     A SATURABLE-CORE REACTOR works upon the principle that increasing the current through a
coil decreases the permeability of the core; the decreased permeability decreases the inductance of the
coil which causes an increase in current (power) through the load.




         RHEOSTAT                                                                LOAD
                                                                                CIRCUIT
                                             LAMINATED
                 CONTROL                       CORE
                  CIRCUIT                                                               LAMP



           NTS0803I-19                                                        A.C. SOURCE


     The IDEAL OPERATING POINT of a saturable-core reactor is on the KNEE OF THE
MAGNETIZATION CURVE. At this point, small changes in control current will cause large changes in
load current (power).




                                                 3-64
                                           MAGNETIZATION CURVE




                       FLUX DENSITY
                                                        POINT 0




                                                                  PERMEABILITY
                                                                     CURVE


                                      MAGNETIZING FORCE                NTS0803I-20




     THREE-LEGGED and TOROIDAL saturable-core reactors solve the problem of load flux aiding
and opposing control flux during alternate half cycles of the a.c. load current.




                                                       CONTROL
                                                        CIRCUIT                   LOAD




                                        LOAD CIRCUIT
                                                 A. C. SOURCE
                                                   _        +       NTS0803I-21




     MAGNETIC AMPLIFIERS use the principle of electromagnetism to amplify signals. They are
power amplifiers with a frequency response normally limited to 100 hertz or below. Magnetic amplifiers
use a saturable-core reactor. A magnetic amplifier uses a RECTIFIER to solve the problem of
HYSTERESIS LOSS in a saturable-core reactor.



                                                        3-65
     A BIAS WINDING allows a d.c. bias voltage to be applied to the saturable-core reactor while a.c.
control signals are applied to a separate control winding. In this way a magnetic amplifier can be set to the
proper operating point.



                                                 CONTROL
                                                  INPUT

                                                        CONTROL
                                                        WINDING


                                                         BIAS
                                                        WINDING



                                                     BIAS
                                                   CIRCUIT

                                      LOAD CIRCUIT


                                                                         NTS0803I-23




                                                            A.C. INPUT




                                                     3-66
                          ANSWERS TO QUESTIONS Q1. THROUGH Q50.

 A-1. Two inputs, two outputs.

 A-2. Common emitter (CE) and common base (CB).

 A-3. No output (the signals will "cancel out").

 A-4. Equal in shape and frequency to each input signal and larger in amplitude by two times than
      either input signal.

 A-5. Equal in shape and frequency to the input signal; larger in amplitude than the input signal; half as
      large in amplitude as when two input signals were used that were 180 degrees out of phase.

 A-6. A different shape than the input signals but larger in amplitude.

 A-7. 100 millivolts.

 A-8. Each output will be a sine wave with a peak-to-peak amplitude of 100 millivolts. The output
      signals will be 180 degrees out of phase with each other.

 A-9. 200 millivolts.

A-10. 0 volts (the input signals will "cancel out").

A-11. Each output signal will be 100 millivolts.

A-12.

        a. 180 degrees out of phase with each other.

        b. Output signal number one will be in phase with input signal number two; output signal
           number two will be in phase with input signal number one.

A-13. 200 millivolts.

A-14.

        a. 100 millivolts.

        b. No.

A-15. Very high gain, very high input impedance, very low output impedance.

A-16. An integrated circuit (chip).




                                                       3-67
A-17.                                            +VCC




                                       OR




           NTS0803A-17                             -VEE

A-18.

        a. Differential amplifier.

        b. Voltage amplifier.

        c. Output amplifier.

A-19. The use of degenerative (negative) feed-back.

A-20. Both the input signal and the feedback signal.

A-21.

        a. Inverting.

        b. Inverting.

A-22. 0 volts.

A-23. Virtual.

A-24. -50 millivolts.

A-25. 50 kilohertz (Gain = 10; Gain-Bandwidth Product = 500,000;


                  500,000 (Hz)
        BW =                   = 50kHz
                      10        NTS0803A-25




A-26. 60 millivolts.




                                                 3-68
A-27. 1 megahertz.

        Open-loop Gain-Bandwidth Product = Closed-loop Gain-Bandwidth Prod.

        Open-loop Gain-Bandwidth Product = 200,000 × 30 (Hz)

        Open-loop Gain Bandwidth Product = 600,000

        Closed-loop Gain Bandwidth Product = 6 × Bandwidth

        6,000,000 = 6 × Bandwidth

        1,000,000 (Hz) = Bandwidth

A-28. The adder simply adds the input signals together while the summing amplifier multiplies the sum
      of the input signals by the gain of circuit.

A-29. Yes, a summing amplifier can have as many inputs as desired.

A-30. A summing amplifier that applies a factor to each input signal beforeadding the results.

A-31. A scaling amplifier.

A-32.   Eout = -72V
        Solution:

        Eout = -(+2V x 30k Ω ) + ( +6V x 30k Ω )
                        5k Ω              3k Ω
        Eout = - (+2V x 6) + ( +6V x 10 )     NTS0803A-32




A-33. 0 volts. (The two inputs to the operational amplifier are both at 0 volts.)

A-34. The difference amplifier multiplies the difference between the two inputs by the gain of the circuit
      while the subtractor merely subtracts one input signal from the other.

A-35. No.

A-36. A difference amplifier.




                                                     3-69
A-37.

        Eout = +60V
        Solution:

        Eout = [(+11V ) - ( +5V )] x R 3
                                         R1
        Eout = (+6V ) + 20k  Ω
                          2k Ω
        Eout = (+6V ) x 10     NTS0803A-37




A-38. 0 volts. (The two inputs to the operational amplifier are both at the same potential.)

A-39. An audio (or low) frequency power amplifier.

A-40. A change in inductance in a series LR circuit causes a change in true power.

A-41. It decreases.

A-42. (a) Inductance increases; (b) true power decreases.

A-43. Permeability decreases.

A-44. A change in inductance.

A-45.




A-46. The knee of the curve.

A-47. Use two load windings whose flux effects cancel in the core of the reactor or use two load
      windings on two toroidal cores so that load flux always aids control flux in one core and opposes
      control flux in the other core.

A-48. The rectifier eliminates hysteresis loss.

A-49. A bias winding and associated circuitry.

A-50. Servosystems, temperature recorders, or power supplies.




                                                   3-70
                                             APPENDIX I

                                           GLOSSARY

AMPERE-TURN—The magnetomotive force developed by one ampere of current flowing through a
  coil of one turn.

AMPLIFICATION—The process of enlarging a signal in amplitude (as of voltage or current).

AMPLIFIER—A device that enables an input signal to control an output signal. The output signal will
  have some (or all) of the characteristics of the input signal but will generally be larger than the input
  signal in terms of voltage, current, or power.

AMPLITUDE—The size of a signal. Generally used to describe voltage, current, or power.

AUDIO AMPLIFIER—An amplifier designed to amplify frequencies between 15 hertz (15 Hz) and 20
   kilohertz (20 kHz).

BANDWIDTH—The difference between the highest usable frequency of a device (upper frequency
   limit) and the lowest usable frequency of the device (lower frequency limit)—measured at the half-
   power points.

BYPASS CAPACITOR—A capacitor used to transfer unwanted signals out of a circuit; e.g., coupling
   an unwanted signal to ground. Also called a DECOUPLING CAPACITOR.

COMBINATION PEAKING—A technique in which a combination of peaking coils in series and
  parallel (shunt) with the output signal path is used to improve high-frequency response.

COMPENSATION—The process of overcoming the problems associated with frequencies in an
  amplifier.

COUPLING—The process of transferring energy from one point in a circuit to another point or from one
   circuit to another.

COUPLING CAPACITOR—A capacitor used to couple signals.

DECOUPLING CAPACITOR—A capacitor used to transfer unwanted signals out of a circuit; e.g.,
   coupling an unwanted signal to ground. Also called a BYPASS CAPACITOR.

DEGENERATIVE FEEDBACK—Feedback in which the feedback signal is out of phase with the input
   signal, also called NEGATIVE FEEDBACK.

DIFFERENTIAL AMPLIFIER—An amplifier with an output which is determined by the difference
   between two input signals and which can provide up to two output signals.

DISTORTION—Any unwanted change between an input signal and an output signal.

DRIVER—An electronic circuit that supplies the input to another circuit.

FEEDBACK—The process of sending part of an output signal of an amplifier back to the input of the
   amplifier.


                                                   AI-1
FIDELITY—The quality of reproducing an output signal exactly like the input signal except for
   amplitude (and somtimes phase); i.e., output and input signals exactly alike in terms of frequency
   and shape.

FREQUENCY-DETERMINING NETWORK—A circuit that provides the desired response
   (maximum or minimum impedance) at a specific frequency.

FREQUENCY-RESPONSE CURVE—A curve showing the output of an amplifier (or any other
   device) in terms of voltage or current plotted against frequency with a fixed-amplitude input signal.

GAIN-BANDWIDTH PRODUCT—The number that results when the gain of a circuit is multiplied by
   the bandwidth of that circuit. For an operational amplifier, the gain-bandwidth product for one
   configuration will always equal the gain-bandwidth product for any other configuration of the same
   amplifier.

HALF-POWER POINTS—The points on a frequency-response curve at which the output power is one-
   half of the maximum power out.

HIGH-FREQUENCY COMPENSATION—See peaking coil.

KNEE OF THE CURVE—The point of maximum curvature. (Shaped like the knee of a leg that is bent.)

MAGNETIC AMPLIFIER (MAG AMP)—An amplifier that uses electromagnetic effects to provide
  amplification of a signal. The magnetic amplifier uses a changing inductance to control the power
  delivered to a load.

NEGATIVE FEEDBACK—Feedback in which the feedback signal is out of phase with the input signal.
   Also called DEGENERATIVE FEEDBACK.

NEUTRALIZATION—The process of counteracting or "neutralizing" the effects of interelectrode
   capacitance.

OPERATIONAL AMPLIFIER (OP AMP)—An amplifier designed to perform computing or transfer
  operations and which has the following characteristics: (1) very high gain, (2) very high input
  impedance, and (3) very low out put impedance.

PEAKING COIL—An inductor used in an amplifier to provide high-frequency compensation which
   extends the high-frequency response of the amplifier.

PERMEABILITY—The measure of the ability of a material to act as a path for additional magnetic lines
   of force.

PHASE SPLITTER—A device that provides two output signals from a single input signal. The two
   output signals will differ from each other in phase.

POSITIVE FEEDBACK—Feedback in which the feedback signal is in phase with the input signal. Also
   called REGENERATIVE FEEDBACK.

POWER AMPLIFIER—An amplifier in which the output-signal power is greater than the input-signal
   power.

PUSH-PULL AMPLIFIER—An amplifler which uses two transistors (or electron tubes) whose output
   signals are combined to provide a larger gain (usually a power gain) than a single transistor (or
   electron tube) can provide.


                                                  AI-2
REGENERATIVE FEEDBACK—Feedback in which the feedback signal is in phase with the input
   signal. Also called POSITIVE FEEDBACK

RF (RADIO FREQUENCY) AMPLIFIER—An amplifier designed to amplify signals with frequencies
    between 10 kilohertz (10 kHz) and 100,000 megahertz (100,000 MHz).

RF (RADIO FREQUENCY) TRANSFORMER—A transformer specially designed for use with rf
    (radio frequencies). An rf transformer is wound onto a tube of non- magnetic material and has a core
    of either powdered iron or air.

SATURATION (MAGNETIC CORE)—The condition in which a magnetic material has reached a
   maximum flux density and the permeability has decreased to a value of (approximately) 1.

SATURABLE-CORE REACTOR—A coil whose reactance is controlled by changing the permeability
   of the core.

SERIES PEAKING—A technique used to improve high-frequency response in which a peaking coil is
   placed in series with the output signal path.

SHUNT PEAKING—A technique used to improve high-frequency response in which a peaking coil is
   placed in parallel (shunt) with the output signal path.

SIGNAL—A general term used to describe any a.c. or d.c. of interest in a circuit; e.g., input signal.

STAGE—One of a series of circuits within a single device; e.g., first stage of amplification.

SWAMPING RESISTOR—A resistor used to increase or "broaden" the bandwidth of a circuit.

TUNED CIRCUIT—An LC circuit used as frequency-determining network.

VIDEO AMPLIFIER—An amplifier designed to amplify the entire band of frequencies from 10 hertz
   (10 Hz) to six megahertz (6 MHz). Also called a WIDE-BAND AMPLIFIER.

VIRTUAL GROUND—A point in a circuit which is at ground potential (0 V) but is not connected to
   ground.

VOLTAGE AMPLIFIER—An amplifier in which the output-signal voltage is greater than the input-
   signal voltage.

WIDE-BAND AMPLIFIER—An amplifier designed to pass an extremely wide band of frequencies,
   i.e., video amplifier.




                                                   AI-3
                                                          INDEX-1

                     A                             typical video-amplifier circuit, 2-16                          F
                                               Applications of operational amplifiers,
Amplifier frequency response, 2-2 to 2-11       3-29 to 3-40                                  Factors affecting frequency response of
    bandwidth of an amplifier, 2-3 to 2-5      Audio amplifiers, 1-24 to 1-26                   an amplifier, 2-9 to 2-11
    factors affecting frequency response           phase splitters, 1-27, 1-28                Feedback, amplifier, 1-17 to 1-24
        of an amplifier, 2-9 to 2-11               push-pull amplifiers, 1-28, 1-29                negative, 1-23, 1-24
    reading amplifier frequency-response           single-stage, 1-25, 1-26                        positive, 1-20 to 1-23
    curve, 2-5 to 2-7                                                                         Frequency-determining network, rf
Amplifier input/output impedance and                                B                           amplifier, 2-19
 gain, 2-18, 2-19                                                                             Frequency-response curve, reading
Amplifiers, 1-1 to 1-29                        Bandwidth limitations, operational               amplifier, 2-5 to 2-7
    audio, 1-24 to 1-29                         amplifiers, 3-25 to 3-28                      Frequency response of amplifiers, 1-5
    classification of, 1-25 to 1-26            Bandwidth of an amplifier, 2-3 to 2-5
    frequency response of amplifiers, 1-5      Block diagram, operational amplifiers,                             G
    phase splitters, 1-24 to 1-26               3-16 to 3-18
    push-pull amplifiers, 1-27 to 1-28                                                        Glossary, AI-l to AI-3
    single-stage, 1-28, 1-29
                                                                    C
    voltage amplifiers and power
    amplifiers, 1-3, 1-4                                                                                          H
                                               Changing inductance, methods of,
    introduction, 1-1, 1-2
                                                magnetic amplifiers, 3-44 to 3-46             High-frequency compensation for video,
    summary, 1-29 to 1-38
                                               Classes of operation, amplifier, 1-6 to 1-9     2-12 to 2-16
    transistor, 1-5 to 1-24
                                                   class A, 1-6, 1-7                              amplifiers, 2-12 to 2-15
    classes of operation, 1-6 to 1-9
                                                   class AB, 1-7                                  combination peaking, 2-14, 2-15
    coupling, 1-9 to 1-13
                                                   class B, 1-7, 1-8                              series peaking, 2-12, 2-13
    feedback, 1-17 to 1-24
                                                   class C, 1-8, 1-9                              shunt peaking, 2-13, 2-14
    impedance considerations for, 1-14
        to 1-17                                Classification of amplifiers, 1-3, 1-4
    Amplifiers, special, 3-1 to 3-57               frequency response, 1-5
                                                   voltage amplifiers and power                                   I
    differential amplifiers, 3-2 to 3-14
    basic differential amplifier circuit,              amplifiers, 1-3, 1-4
                                               Closed-loop operation, operational             Impedance considerations for amplifiers,
        3-2
                                                amplifiers, 3-18 to 3-23                        1-14 to 1-17
    differential-input, differential-output,
                                               Combination peaking, 2-14, 2-15                Impedance coupling, 1-12, 1-13
    differential amplifier, 3-13
    single-input, differential-output,         Compensation of rf amplifiers, 2-23 to
    differential amplifier, 3-12                2-25                                                              L
    single-input, single-output,                   neutralization, 2-24, 2-25
        differential amplifier, 3-11               transformers, 2-23                         Learning objectives, video and rf
    two-input, single-output, difference       Coupling, amplifiers, 1-9 to 1-13               amplifiers, 2-1
    amplifier, 3-3 to 3-10                         direct, 1-10, 1-11
                                                                                              Low-frequency compensation for video
    typical differential amplifier circuit,        impedance, 1-12, 1-13
                                                                                                  amplifiers, 2-15, 2-16
    3-10                                           RC, 1-11, 1-12
    introduction, 3-1                              transformer, 1-13
                                               Coupling, rf amplifier, 2-21 to 2-23                              M
    magnetic amplifiers, 3-42 to 3-57
    basic operation, 3-42 to 3-44
                                                                    D                         Magnetic amplifiers, 3-42 to 3-57
    methods of changing inductance,
        3-44 to 3-46                                                                             basic operation, 3-42 to 3-44
    saturable-core reactor, 3-46 to 3-52                                                         methods of changing inductance,
                                               Differential amplifiers, 3-2 to 3-14
    simplified magnetic amplifier                                                                    3-44 to 3-46
                                                   basic differential amplifier circuit,
    circuitry, 3-52 to 3-57                                                                      saturable-core reactor, 3-46 to 3-52
                                                       3-2
    operational amplifiers, 3-15 to 3-41                                                         simplified magnetic amplifier
                                                   differential-input, differential-output,
    applications, 3-29 to 3-40                                                                       circuitry, 3-52 to 3-57
                                                   differential amplifier, 3-13
    bandwidth limitations, 3-25 to 3-28            single-input, differential-output,
    block diagram, 3-16 to 3-18                    differential amplifier, 3-12                                   O
    characteristics, 3-15                           single-input, single-output,
    closed-loop operation, 3-18 to 3-23                differential amplifier, 3-11           Operational amplifiers, 3-15 to 3-41
    summary, 3-57 to 3-69                          two-input, single-output, difference           applications, 3-29 to 3-40
Amplifiers, video, 2-12 to 2-16                    amplifier, 3-3 to 3-10                         difference amplifier (subtractor),
    high-frequency compensation, 2-12              typical differential amplifier circuit,            3-36 to 3-40
    low-frequency compensation, 2-15,                  3-10                                       summing amplifier (adder), 3-29 to
        2-16                                   Direct coupling, 1-10, 1-11                        3-35



                                                            INDEX-1
    bandwidth limitations, 3-25 to 3-28         rf amplifier coupling, 2-21 to 2-23    amplifier frequency response, 2-5 to
    block diagram, 3-16, 3-17                   typical circuits, 2-25 to 2-27             2-7
    characteristics, 3-15                   RC coupling, 1-11, 1-12                    bandwidth of an amplifier, 2-3 to 2-5
    closed-loop operation, 3-18 to 3-28     Reading amplifier frequency-response       factors affecting frequency response
    inverting configuration, 3-18 to 3-23    curve, 2-9                                    of an amplifier, 2-9 to 2-11
    noninverting configuration, 3-23 to                                                reading amplifier frequency-
    3-28                                                        S                          responsecurve, 2-5 to 2-7
                                                                                       introduction, 2-1
                    P                                                                  learning objectives, 2-1
                                            Saturable-core reactor, magnetic
                                                                                       radio-frequency amplifiers, 2-17 to
                                             amplifiers, 3-46 to 3-52
                                                                                           2-27
Peaking, high-frequency compensation            Series peaking, 2-12, 2-13
                                                                                       amplifier input/output impedance
 for video amplifiers, 2-12 to 2-15             Shunt peaking, 2-13, 2-14
                                                                                           and gain, 2-18, 2-19
    combination, 2-14                           Single-stage audio amplifiers, 1-25,
                                                                                       compensation, 2-23 to 2-25
    series, 2-13                                    1-26
                                                                                       frequency-determining network,
    shunt, 2-12
                                                                                           2-19
Phase splitters, 1-27, 1-28                                     T                      rf amplifier coupling, 2-21 to 2-23
Power amplifiers and voltage amplifiers,                                               typical circuits, 2-25 to 2-27
 1-3, 1-4                                   Transformer coupling, 1-13                 summary, 2-28 to 2-33
Push-pull amplifiers, 1-28, 1-29            Transistor amplifiers, 1-5 to 1-24         video amplifiers, 2-12 to 2-15
                                                classes of operation, 1-6 to 1-9       high-frequency compensation, 2-12,
                   R                            coupling, 1-9 to 1-13                      2-13
                                                feedback, 1-17 to 1-24                 low-frequency, 2-15 to 2-16
                                                impedance considerations for           typical video-amplifier circuit, 2-16
Radio-frequency amplifiers, 2-17 to 2-27
                                                    amplifiers, 1-14 to 1-17           Voltage amplifiers and power
    amplifier input/output impedance
                                                                                           amplifiers, 1-3, 1-4
       and gain, 2-18, 2-19
    compensation, 2-23 to 2-25                                  V
    frequency-determining network,
       2-19                                 Video and rf amplifiers, 2-1 to 2-27




                                                        INDEX-2
                                          ASSIGNMENT 1
 Textbook assignment: Chapter 1, “Amplifiers,” pages 1-1 through 1-40. Chapter 2, “Video and RF
                              Amplifiers,” pages 2-1 through 2-34.
  _________________________________________________________________________________

1-1. The control of an output signal by an             1-4. Most amplifiers can be classified in
     input signal resulting in the output signal            which of the following ways?
     having some (or all) of the characteristics
     of the input signal is known by which of               1.   Function and size
     the following terms?                                   2.   Power requirements and size
                                                            3.   Function and frequency response
     1.   Multiplication                                    4.   Frequency response and power
     2.   Magnification                                          requirements
     3.   Amplification
     4.   Addition                                     1-5. The speaker system of a record player
                                                            should be driven by which of the
1-2. Which of the following statements                      following types of amplifier?
     describes the relationship of input and
     output signals in a amplifier?                         1.   An audio power amplifier
                                                            2.   A video voltage amplifier
     1. The input signal is actually changed                3.   A direct-current voltage amplifier
        into the output signal                              4.   An alternating-current rf amplifier
     2. Both the input and output signal are
        unchanged; neither is affected by the          1-6. The signal from a radio antenna should
        other                                               be amplified by which of the following
     3. The input signal is controlled by the               types of amplifier?
        output signal and the output signal
        remains unchanged                                   1.   An rf voltage amplifier
     4. The input signal remains unchanged                  2.   A video power amplifier
        and the output signal is controlled by              3.   A direct-current audio amplifier
        the input signal                                    4.   An alternating-current power
                                                                 amplifier
1-3. Why are amplifiers used in electronic
     devices?                                          1-7. The class of operation of an amplifier is
                                                            determined by which of the following
     1. To provide signals of usable                        factors?
        amplitude
     2. To "pick up" broadcast signals                      1. The gain of the stage
     3. To select the proper broadcast signal               2. The efficiency of the amplifier
     4. To change the broadcast signal to an                3. The amount of time (in relation to the
        audio signal                                           input signal) that current flows in the
                                                               output circuit
                                                            4. The amount of current (in relation to
                                                               the input-signal current) that flows in
                                                               the output circuit




                                                   1
 1-8. Which of the following is NOT a class of          1-14. What is the most common form of
      operation for an amplifier?                             coupling?

      1.   A                                                  1.   RC
      2.   C                                                  2.   Resistor
      3.   AB                                                 3.   Impedance
      4.   AC                                                 4.   Transformer

 1-9. If the output of a circuit should be a            1-15. Which of the following types of coupling
      representation of less than one-half of the             is usually used to couple the output from
      input signal, what class of operation                   a power amplifier?
      should be used?
                                                              1.   RC
      1.   A                                                  2.   Resistor
      2.   C                                                  3.   Impedance
      3.   AB                                                 4.   Transformer
      4.   AC
                                                        1-16. Which of the following types of
1-10. What class of operation is the most                     amplifiers have both high and low
      efficient?                                              frequency response limitations?

      1.   A                                                  1.   RC
      2.   C                                                  2.   Resistor
      3.   AB                                                 3.   Impedance
      4.   AC                                                 4.   Transformer

1-11. What class of operation has the highest           1-17. Which of the following types of coupling
      fidelity?                                               is most effective at high frequencies?

      1.   A                                                  1.   RC
      2.   C                                                  2.   Resistor
      3.   AB                                                 3.   Impedance
      4.   AC                                                 4.   Direct

1-12. What is the purpose of an amplifier-
      coupling network?                                 THIS SPACE LEFT BLANK
                                                        INTENTIONALLY.
      1.   To "block" d.c.
      2.   To provide gain between stages
      3.   To separate one stage from another
      4.   To transfer energy from one stage to
           another

1-13. Which of the following is NOT a method
      of coupling amplifier stages?

      1.   RC
      2.   Resistor
      3.   Impedance
      4.   Transformer



                                                    2
1-18. For maximum power transfer between              1-22. What type of coupling is most useful for
      circuits, what impedance relationship                 impedance matching?
      should there be between the two circuits?
                                                            1.   RC
      1. The output impedance of circuit                    2.   Resistor
         number one should be higher                        3.   Impedance
      2. The input impedance of circuit                     4.   Transformer
         number one should be higher than the
         output impedance of circuit .number          1-23. What is feedback?
         two
      3. The output impedance of circuit                    1. The control of a circuit output signal
         number one should be lower than the                   by the input signal
         input impedance of circuit number                  2. The control of a circuit input signal
         two                                                   by the output signal
      4. The output impedance of circuit                    3. The coupling of a portion of the
         number one should be equal to the                     output signal to the input of the
         input impedance of circuit number                     circuit
         two                                                4. The coupling of a portion of the input
                                                               signal to the output of the circuit
1-19. For maximum current at the input to a
      circuit, what should the relationship of        1-24. Which of the following terms describe
      the input impedance be to the output                  the two types of feedback?
      impedance of the previous stage?
                                                            1.   Positive and negative
      1.   Higher than                                      2.   Degenerative and regenerative
      2.   Lower than                                       3.   Both 1 and 2 above
      3.   Equal to                                         4.   Bypassed and unbypassed
      4.   The impedance relationship is
           immaterial                                 1-25. What type of feedback provide an
                                                            increased amplitude output signal?
1-20. What is the (a) input impedance and
      (b) output impedance of a common-base                 1.   Positive
      transistor configuration?                             2.   Negative
                                                            3.   Bypassed
      1.   (a) Low    (b) low                               4.   Unbypassed
      2.   (a) Low    (b) high
      3.   (a) High   (b) low                         1-26. Distortion caused by amplifier saturation
      4.   (a) High   (b) high                              can be reduced by using which of the
                                                            following types of feedback?
1-21. What transistor configuration should be
      used to match a high output impedance to              1.   Positive
      a low input impedance?                                2.   Negative
                                                            3.   Regenerative
      1.   Common collector                                 4.   Unbypassed
      2.   Common emitter
      3.   Common gate
      4.   Common base




                                                  3
1-27. What type feedback is provided if the            1-32. What is the advantage of a push-pull
      feedback signal is out of phase with the               amplifier as compared to a single
      input signal?                                          transistor amplifier?

      1.   Unbypassed                                        1.   Lower cost
      2.   Bypassed                                          2.   Fewer parts
      3.   Negative                                          3.   Higher gain
      4.   Positive                                          4.   Less power usage

1-28. What type of feedback is provided by a           1-33. To provide good fidelity output signals,
      capacitor connected across the emitter-                which of the following classes of
      resistor in a common-emitter transistor                operation CANNOT be used by a push-
      amplifier?                                             pull amplifier?

      1.   Bypassed                                          1.   A
      2.   Positive                                          2.   B
      3.   Negative                                          3.   C
      4.   Unbypassed                                        4.   AB

1-29. What are the (a) inputs and (b) outputs of       1-34. What is the bandwidth of an amplifier?
      a phase splitter?
                                                             1. The actual frequencies the amplifier
      1. (a) Two signals in phase                               is effective in amplifying
         (b) One signal                                      2. The difference between the high and
      2. (a) Two signals out of phase                           low frequencies seen at the input of
         (b) One signal                                         the amplifier
      3. (a) One signal                                      3. The width, in inches, between the
         (b) Two signals in phase                               half-power points on a frequency-
      4. (a) One signal                                         response curve
         (b) Two signals out of phase                        4. The difference between the lowest
                                                                and highest frequency shown on a
1-30. A single-stage, two transistor amplifier                  frequency-response curve
      that uses a phase splitter input is
      classified as what type of amplifier?
                                                       THIS SPACE LEFT BLANK
      1.   Inverse                                     INTENTIONALLY.
      2.   Push-pull
      3.   Phase splitter
      4.   Regenerative

1-31. Which of the following is a common use
      for a push-pull amplifier?

      1. The first stage of a video amplifier
      2. The amplifier stage connected
         directly to an antenna
      3. The second stage in a four stage rf
         amplifier
      4. The final stage in an audio amplifier




                                                   4
OUTPUT
(VOLTS)
   100                                                                1-39. What happens to capacitive reactance as
    90
    80
                                                                            frequency decreases?
    70
    60                                                                      1.   It increases
    50
    40
                                                                            2.   It decreases
    30                                                                      3.   It remains the same
    20                                                                      4.   It cannot be determined
    10
     0                                              FREQUENCY
          500 1.5k 2.5k 3.5k 4.5k 5.5k 6.5k 7.5k
             1k   2k   3k  4k    5k  6k   7k     8k   (HERTZ)         1-40. What happens to inductive reactance as
                                                   Mod 8 Fig 1A
                                                                            frequency increases?

                 Figure 1A.—Frequency-response curve.                       1.   It increases
                                                                            2.   It decreases
  IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 1-35 AND                                           3.   It remains the same
  1-36 REFER TO FIGURE 1A.                                                  4.   It cannot be determined

   1-35. What are the (a) upper and (b) lower                         1-41. What is the major factor that limits the
         frequency limits shown?                                            high frequency response of an amplifier?

            1.    (a) 8 kHz        (b) 0 Hz                                 1.   Inductance
            2.    (a) 7.5 kHz      (b) 0 Hz                                 2.   Resistance
            3.    (a) 6.0 kHz      (b) 2 kHz                                3.   Capacitance
            4.    (a) 5.5 kHz      (b) 2.5 kHz                              4.   Transformer reactance

   1-36. What is the bandwidth shown?                                 1-42. What components can be used to
                                                                            increase the high-frequency response of
            1.    1 inch                                                    an amplifier?
            2.    8 kHz
            3.    3 kHz                                                     1.   Diodes
            4.    2 kHz to 8 kHz                                            2.   Inductors
                                                                            3.   Resistors
   1-37. Which of the following limit(s) the                                4.   Capacitors
         frequency response of a transistor
         amplifier?                                                   1-43. What determines whether a peaking
                                                                            component is considered "series" or
            1.    The inductance                                            "shunt"?
            2.    The transistor
            3.    The capacitance                                           1. The relationship of the component to
            4.    All of the above                                             the power supply
                                                                            2. The relationship of the component to
   1-38. What type of feedback is caused by                                    the input signal path
         interelectrode capacitance?                                        3. The relationship of the component to
                                                                               the amplifying device
            1.    Bypassed                                                  4. The relationship of the component to
            2.    Negative                                                     the output signal path
            3.    Positive
            4.    Regenerative




                                                                  5
1-44. What is the arrangement of both "series"                          1-48. What is the purpose of R4 in relation to
      and "shunt" peaking components called?                                  Q1?

          1.     Coordinated                                                  1.   Coupling resistor
          2.     Combination                                                  2.   Input-signal developing
          3.     Combined                                                     3.   Low-frequency compensation
          4.     Complex                                                      4.   High-frequency compensation

1-45. Which of the following components in a                            1-49. What is the purpose of L4 in relation to
      transistor amplifier circuit tends to limit                             Q2?
      the low-frequency response of the
      amplifier?                                                              1.   Coupling
                                                                              2.   Decoupling
          1.     The transistor                                               3.   Shunt peaking
          2.     The load resistor                                            4.   Series peaking
          3.     The coupling capacitor
          4.     The input-signal-developing resistor                   1-50. What is the purpose of R10 in relation to
                                        +VCC                                  Q2?
          +VCC
                                       R9      C5
                                                                              1.   Swamping
          R4       C2
                                       R8
                                                                              2.   Input-signal developing
          R3
                                                                              3.   Low-frequency compensation
                                        L3
                                                    L4
                                                                              4.   High-frequency compensation
          L1
                             C3    Q2
                        L2

     Q1
                                                    R10
                                                                        1-51. Which of the following components
                        R5                                                    is/are used for high-frequency
                                  R6
                                                                              compensation for Q2?
    R1                                 R7      C4

         R2       C1
                                                                              1.   C4
                                                     Mod 8 Fig 1C             2.   L3
                                                                              3.   R9
                   Figure 1B.—Video Amplifier.
                                                                              4.   All of the above
IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 1-46
THROUGH 1-52, REFER TO FIGURE 1B.                                       1-52. Which of the following components
                                                                              is/are used for low-frequency
1-46. What is the purpose of L1 in relation to                                compensation for Q1?
      Q1?
                                                                              1.   C1
          1.     Decoupling                                                   2.   C2
          2.     Shunt peaking                                                3.   R3
          3.     Series peaking                                               4.   All of the above
          4.     Input-signal developing
                                                                        1-53. What is the effect of the gain of an
1-47. What is the purpose of C4 in relation to                                amplifier if the input-signal developing
      Q2?                                                                     impedance is decreased?

          1.     Decoupling (Bypass)                                          1.   It decreases
          2.     Shunt peaking                                                2.   It increases
          3.     Series peaking                                               3.   It remains the same
          4.     Input-signal developing                                      4.   It cannot be determined



                                                                    6
1-54. What is the effect on the gain of an            1-59. Which of the following advantages are
      amplifier if the output-signal-developing             provided by transformer coupling?
      impedance is increased?
                                                             1. Simpler power supplies can be used
      1.   It decreases                                      2. The circuit is not affected by
      2.   It increases                                         frequency
      3.   It remains the same                               3. Low-frequency response is improved
      4.   It cannot be determined                           4. Fewer parts are used

1-55. What is/are the purpose(s) of a                 1-60. If a current gain is desired, which of the
      frequency-determining network in an rf                following elements/networks should be
      amplifier?                                            used as an output-coupling device?

      1. To create a large bandpass                          1.   An RC network
      2. To compensate for low-frequency                     2.   A resistive network
         losses                                              3.   A step-up transformer
      3. To provide maximum impedance at a                   4.   A step-down transformer
         given frequency
      4. All of the above                             1-61. Which of the following techniques would
                                                            cause a too-narrow bandpass in an rf
1-56. Of the following networks, which could                amplifier?
      be used as a frequency-determining
      network for an rf amplifier?                           1.   An overcoupled transformer
                                                             2.   A loosely coupled transformer
      1.   A parallel-resistor network                       3.   The use of a swamping resistor
      2.   A series-resistor network                         4.   The use of a frequency-determining
      3.   A parallel RC network                                  network
      4.   A parallel LC network
                                                      1-62. Which of the following techniques would
1-57. Which of the following methods may be                 cause low gain at the center frequency of
      used to tune an LRC frequency-                        an rf amplifier?
      determining network to a different
      frequency?                                             1.   An overcoupled transformer
                                                             2.   A loosely coupled transformer
      1.   Vary the capacitance                              3.   The use of a swamping resistor
      2.   Vary the inductance                               4.   The use of a frequency-determining
      3.   Both 1 and 2 above                                     network
      4.   Vary the resistance
                                                      1-63. What type of transformer coupling
1-58. What is the most common form of                       should be used in an rf amplifier?
      coupling for an rf amplifier?
                                                             1.   Ideal
      1.   RC                                                2.   Loose
      2.   Resistor                                          3.   Optimum
      3.   Impedance                                         4.   Overcoupling
      4.   Transformer




                                                  7
                                                                                                    T2
1-64. Which of the following methods
      provides the widest band-pass in an rf                                                             C6
      amplifier?                                                                             C5
                                                                                       Q1
                                                                    T1
      1. A swamping resistor                                                                      +VCC
      2. A loosely coupled amplifier                   C1                      C2
      3. A large input-signal-developing
         resistor                                                               R1      R2          C4
      4. A small output-signal-developing
         resistor
                                                                                                    C3
                                                       Mod Fig 1C               +VBB
1-65. Which of the following methods will
      compensate for the problem that cause                                 Figure 1C.—RF amplifier.
      low gain in an rf amplifier?
                                                       IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 1-68
      1. Using rf transformers                         THROUGH 1-75, REFER TO FIGURE 1C.
      2. Taking advantage of the
         interelectrode capacitance                    1-68. Which of the following components
      3. Both 1 and 2 above                                  is/are part of the input-signal-developing
      4. Using audio transformers                            impedance for Q1?

1-66. Which of the following types of feedback                 1.        C1
      is usually caused by the base-to-collector               2.        T1
      interelectrode capacitance?                              3.        C3
                                                               4.        All of the above
      1.   Regenerative
      2.   Decoupled                                   1-69. What is the purpose of R1?
      3.   Positive
      4.   Negative                                            1. To provide swamping for the
                                                                  secondary of T1
1-67. In an rf amplifier an unwanted signal is                 2. To act as an output-signal-developing
      coupled through the base-to-collector                       resistor
      interelectrode capacitance. This problem                 3. To provide proper bias to the base of
      can be solved by providing feedback out                     Q1
      of phase with the unwanted signal. What                  4. To develop the signal coupled by C3
      is this technique called?
                                                       1-70. What is the purpose of R2?
      1.   Neutralization
      2.   Compensating                                        1.    To provide swamping for C4
      3.   Decoupling                                          2.    To develop the input signal for Q1
      4.   Swamping                                            3.    To provide bias to the emitter of Q1
                                                               4.    To act as the output-signal-
                                                                     developing resistor

THIS SPACE LEFT BLANK                                  1-71. If C4 were removed from the circuit,
INTENTIONALLY.                                               what would happen to the output?

                                                               1.        It would increase
                                                               2.        It would decrease
                                                               3.        It would remain the same
                                                               4.        It cannot be determined


                                                   8
1-72. Which of the following components             1-74. What do the dotted lines connecting C1,
      is/are part of the load for Q1?                     C2, C5, and C6 indicate?

      1.   C6                                             1. The components are in a different
      2.   T2                                                physical location
      3.   Both 1 and 2 above                             2. That the components are "phantom"
      4.   C3                                                components
                                                          3. The components are variable
1-73. How many tuned parallel LC circuits are                capacitors
      shown in the schematic?                             4. The components are ganged together

      1.   One                                      1-75. What is the purpose of C3?
      2.   Two
      3.   Three                                          1. To couple the input signal of Q1 to
      4.   Four                                              the secondary of T2
                                                          2. To tune the parallel LC circuit of C3,
                                                             C6, and T2
                                                          3. To provide neutralization for Q1
                                                          4. To bypass R1




                                                9
                                                ASSIGNMENT 2
           Textbook assignment: Chapter 3, “Special Amplifiers,” pages 3-1 through 3-70.
    _________________________________________________________________________________

 2-1. What is the maximum number of                        2-3. If the input signals are in phase with each
      possible inputs in a differential                         other, what will the peak-to-peak
      amplifier?                                                amplitude of the output signal be?

      1.      One                                               1. 0 volts
      2.      Two                                               2. 12 volts
      3.      Three                                             3. 24 volts
      4.      Four                                              4. 48 volts

 2-2. What is the maximum number of                        2-4. Which of the following statements
      possible outputs in an differential                       describes the output signal if the input
      amplifier?                                                signals are in phase with each other?

      1.      One                                               1. A sine wave in phase with the input
      2.      Two                                                  signals
      3.      Three                                             2. A sine wave 180 degrees out of phase
      4.      Four                                                 with the input signals
                           +VCC                                 3. A sine wave 90 degrees out of phase
                                                                   with the input signals
                                                                4. Not a sine wave
                               R3
                                        C3
                                                           2-5. If the input signals are 180 degrees out of
                                                                phase with each other, what will the
                                             OUTPUT
                C1             C                                peak-to-peak amplitude of the output
                       B
                                   Q1                           signal be?
    INPUT 1
                              E
                      R1
                                                                1. 0 volts
                C2
                                                                2. 12 volts
                                                                3. 24 volts
   INPUT 2                                                      4. 48 volts
                               R2
                                                           2-6. Which of the following statements
                           -V EE         NTS080A2A              describes the output signal if the input
      Figure 2A.—Difference amplifier.                          signals are 180 degrees out of phase with
                                                                each other?
IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-3
THROUGH 2-10, REFER TO FIGURE 2A                                1. A sine wave 90 degrees out of phase
AND THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION:                                     with each input signal
THE AMPLIFIER HAS A GAIN OF 6 AND                               2. A sine wave in phase with input
THE INPUT SIGNALS ARE SINE WAVES                                   signal number one
WHICH ARE EQUAL IN AMPLITUDE AND                                3. A sine wave in phase with input
VARY BETWEEN +2 VOLTS AND -2                                       signal number two
VOLTS.                                                          4. Not a sine wave




                                                      10
                                                                                +V
                                                                                     CC
 2-7. If input signal number one is 90 degrees
      out of phase with input signal number
      two, what will the peak-to-peak                                   R2   OUTPUT OUTPUT    R4
                                                                               1      2
      amplitude of the output signal be?
                                                          INPUT                      2                        INPUT
                                                            1                                                   2
      1. 0 volts                                                               Q1        Q2
                                                                   R1
      2. 12 volts                                                                                             R5

      3. 24 volts
      4. 48 volts
                                                                                R3

 2-8. Which of the following statements
                                                                                 -V EE
      describes the output signal if input signal                                                  NTS0802B

      number one is 90 degrees out of phase                       Figure 2B.—Differential amplifier.
      with input signal number two?
                                                         IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-11
      1. A sine wave 90 degrees out of phase             THROUGH 2-24, REFER TO FIGURE 2B
         with input number two                           AND THE FOLLOWING INFORMATION:
      2. A sine wave 180 degrees out of phase            ALL INPUT SIGNALS ARE SINE WAVES
         with input number one                           WITH A PEAK-TO-PEAK AMPLITUDE OF 5
      3. A sine wave 180 degrees out of phase            MILLIVOLTS. THE GAIN OF THE
         with input number two                           AMPLIFIER IS 100.
      4. Not a sine wave
                                                         2-11. If input number one and output number
 2-9. If input number two is the only input                    one are the only terminals used, what
      signal applied to the amplifier, what will               will the peak-to-peak amplitude of the
      the peak-to-peak amplitude of the output                 output signal be?
      signal be?
                                                                  1.  1 volt
      1. 0 volts                                                  2.  2 volts
      2. 12 volts                                                 3. 500 millivolts
      3. 24 volts                                                 4.  0 volt
      4. 48 volts
                                                         2-12. Which of the following statements
2-10. Which of the following statements                        describes the output signal if input
      describes the output signal if input                     number one, and output number one are
      number two is the only input signal                      the only terminals used?
      applied to the amplifier?
                                                                  1. A sine wave in phase with the input
      1. A sine wave in phase with the input                         signal
         signal                                                   2. A sine wave 90 degrees out of phase
      2. A sine wave 90 degrees out of phase                         with the input signal
         with the input signal                                    3. A sine wave 180 degrees out of phase
      3. A sine wave 180 degrees out of phase                        with the input signal
         with the input signal                                    4. Not a sine wave
      4. Not a sine wave




                                                    11
2-13. If input number one is the only input and          2-17. If the input signals are in phase with each
      both output terminals are used, what will                other and an output signal is taken
      the peak-to-peak amplitude of each                       between the two output terminals, what
      output signal be? (Assume base of Q2                     will the amplitude of the output signal
      grounded)                                                be?

      1.  1 volt                                               1.  1 volt
      2.  2 volts                                              2.  2 volts
      3. 500 millivolts                                        3. 500 millivolts
      4.  0 volts                                              4.  0 volts

2-14. If input one is the only input used and an         2-18. Which of the following statements
      output signal is taken between output                    describes output signal number one if the
      number one and output number two,                        input signals are in phase with each
      what will the peak-to-peak amplitude of                  other?
      the output signal be? (Assume base of Q2
      grounded)                                                1. A sine wave in phase with input
                                                                  signal number one
      1.  1 volt                                               2. A sine wave in phase with input
      2.  2 volts                                                 signal number two
      3. 500 millivolts                                        3. A sine wave 90 degrees out of phase
      4.  0 volts                                                 with input signal number one
                                                               4. Not a sine wave
2-15. Which of the following statements
      describes the output signal if input one is        2-19. If the input signals are 180 degrees out of
      the only input used and an output signal                 phase with each other, what will the
      is taken between output number one and                   peak-to-peak output of each output signal
      output number two?                                       be?

      1. A sine wave twice the amplitude of                    1.     1 volt
         output number two                                     2.     2 volts
      2. A sine wave 90 degrees out of phase                   3.   500 millivolts
         with the input signal                                 4.     0 volts
      3. A sine wave one-half the amplitude
         of output number one                            2-20. If the input signals are 180 degrees out of
      4. Not a sine wave                                       phase with each other and the output
                                                               signal is taken between the two output
2-16. If the input signals are in phase with each              terminals, what will the peak-to-peak
      other what will the amplitude of each                    amplitude of the output signal be?
      output signal be?
                                                               1.   1 volt
      1.   1 volt                                              2.   2 volts
      2.   2 volts                                             3. 500 millivolts
      3. 500 millivolts                                        4.   0 volts
      4.  0 volts




                                                    12
2-21. Which of the following statements                 2-25. Which of the following is NOT a
      describes output signal number one if the               requirement for an operational amplifier?
      input signals are 180 degrees out of
      phase with each other?                                  1.   Very high gain
                                                              2.   Very high input impedance
      1. A sine wave in phase with input                      3.   Very high output impedance
         signal number one                                    4.   Very low output impedance
      2. A sine wave in phase with input
         signal number two                              2-26. Which of the following types of
      3. A sine wave in phase with output                     components are used in most operational
         signal number two                                    amplifiers?
      4. Not a sine wave
                                                              1.   Transistor circuits
2-22. Which of the following statements                       2.   Electron tube circuits
      describes the output signal if the input                3.   Both 1 and 2 above
      signals are 180 degrees out of phase with               4.   Integrated circuits
      each other and the output signal is taken
      between the output terminals?
                                                        THIS SPACE LEFT BLANK
      1. A sine wave                                    INTENTIONALLY.
      2. Not a sine wave
      3. A sine wave 90 degrees out of phase
         with input signal number one
      4. A sine wave in phase with input
         signals number one and two

2-23. If the input amplitudes are increased to
      15 millivolts and are 180 degrees out of
      phase, what will be the peak-to-peak
      amplitude of the combined output?

      1.   1 volt
      2.   2 volts
      3.   3 volts
      4.   1.5 volts

2-24. What will be the peak-to-peak amplitude
      of the combined output if the inputs are 6
      millivolts peak-to-peak, 180 degrees out
      of phase, and the gain is 20?

      1.   2 volts
      2.   2.4 volts
      3.   0.12 volts
      4.   0.24 volts




                                                   13
                                                       2-31. Which of the following signals
                                                             determines the stability of the output
                                                             signal from an operational-amplifier
                                                             circuit in which degenerative feedback is
            a      b       c                                 used?

                                                             1.   The input signal only
                                                             2.   The feedback signal only
                                                             3.   Both 1 and 2 above
                               NTS0802C                      4.   The detected signal
      Figure 2C.—Operational Amplifier.

IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-27                            THIS SPACE LEFT BLANK
THROUGH 2-29, REFER TO FIGURE 2C.                      INTENTIONALLY.

2-27. What is part A of the figure?

      1.   An input amplifier
      2.   A power amplifier
      3.   A voltage amplifier
      4.   A differential amplifier

2-28. What is part B of the figure?

      1.   A differential amplifier
      2.   A voltage amplifier
      3.   A power amplifier
      4.   A video amplifier

2-29. What is part C of the figure?

      1.   An output amplifier
      2.   A voltage amplifier
      3.   A differential amplifier
      4.   A high-impedance amplifier

2-30. If degenerative feedback is used in an
      operational-amplifier circuit, which of
      the following terms describes the circuit
      configuration?

      1.   Open loop
      2.   Closed loop
      3.   Full circle
      4.   Neutralized




                                                  14
                            R2

                            5kΩ
                                                      2-34. In the inverting configuration of an
          R1                                                operational-amplifier circuit, when the
         1kΩ
                                                            noninverting input of the operational
                                                            amplifier is grounded, what is the term
                                                            that describes the potential at the
                    +                                       inverting input of the operational
      INPUT                       OUTPUT
                                                            amplifier?

                                                            1.   Feedback-signal voltage
                                  NTS0802D
                                                            2.   Input-signal voltage
      Figure 2D.—Inverting Configuration.
                                                            3.   Signal ground
                                                            4.   Virtual ground
IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-32
THROUGH 2-36, REFER TO FIGURE 2D.                     2-35. If the amplitude of the input signal to the
                                                            circuit is +2 millivolts, what will the
2-32. In the inverting configuration of an                  amplitude of the output signal be?
      operational-amplifier circuit where are
      the (a) input signal and (b) feedback                 1.   -10 mV
      signal applied?                                       2.   -2 mV
                                                            3.   +10 mv
      1. (a) Inverting input                                4.   +2 mV
         (b) Inverting input
      2. (a) Inverting input                          2-36. If the unity gain point of the operational
         (b) Noninverting input                             amplifier is 1 mega-hertz, what is the
      3. (a) Noninverting input                             bandwidth of the circuit?
         (b) Inverting input
      4. (a) Noninverting input                             1.   100 kHz
         (b) Noninverting input                             2.   200 kHz
                                                            3.   300 kHz
2-33. In the inverting configuration of an                  4.   400 kHz
      operational-amplifier circuit with
      feedback applied and a 1-volt, peak-to-
      peak, sine wave as an input signal, what        THIS SPACE LEFT BLANK
      is the amplitude of the signal at the           INTENTIONALLY.
      inverting input of the operational
      amplifier?

      1. 1 volt
      2. 2 volts
      3. 10 volts
      4. 0 volts




                                                 15
                                                                                           R2
                          R2
                                                                  R1                      9kΩ
                         6kΩ                             E1
             R1
                                                                 1kΩ
                                                                 R2
            1kΩ                                          E2
                                                                 3kΩ
                     +                                                             +
                                                          NTS0802F
                               NTS0802E

                                                                       Figure 2F.—Scaling Amplifier.
                                                              IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-40 AND
      Figure 2E.—Noninverting Configuration.
                                                              2-41, REFER TO FIGURE 2F.
IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-37 AND
2-38, REFER TO FIGURE 2E.                                     2-40. THIS QUESTION HAS BEEN
                                                                    DELETED.
2-37. If the amplitude of the input signal is +10
      millivolts, what is the amplitude of the                2-41. If the amplitude of the signal at E1 is +3
      output signal?                                                volts and the amplitude of the signal at
                                                                    E2 is +4 volts, what is the amplitude of
      1.   +70 mV                                                   the output signal?
      2.   +60 mV
      3.   -70 mV                                                      1.   +39 volts
      4.   -60 mV                                                      2.   +45 volts
                                                                       3.   −39 volts
2-38. The open-loop gain of the operational                            4.   −45 volts
      amplifier is 100,000 and the open-loop
      bandwidth is 10 hertz. If we make it a                  2-42. If the amplitude of the signal at E1 is +5
      closed-loop with a gain of 10, what is the                    volts and the amplitude of the signal at
      bandwidth of the circuit?                                     E2 is +2 volts, what is the amplitude of
                                                                    the signal at the inverting (−) input of the
      1.   100 kHz                                                  operational amplifier?
      2.   350 kHz
      3.   500 kHz                                                     1.   0 volts
      4.   583 kHz                                                     2. +7 volts
                                                                       3. +21 volts
2-39. Which of the following is a difference                           4. +54 volts
      between a summing amplifier and an
      adder circuit?                                          2-43. Which of the following is a difference
                                                                    between a difference amplifier and a
      1.   The amount of gain                                       subtractor?
      2.   The number of inputs
      3.   The type of operational amplifier                           1.   The amount of gain
      4.   The placement of resistors in the                           2.   The number of inputs
           circuit                                                     3.   The type of operational amplifier
                                                                       4.   The placement of resistors in the
                                                                            circuit




                                                    16
2-44. How many inputs can a (a) difference              2-48. The gain of the operational amplifier
      amplifier and (b) summing amplifier                     shown in figure 2G can be determined by
      have?                                                   using the ratio of resistance. Which of
                                                              the following ratios is correct for
       1. (a) Two only                                        determining this gain.
          (b) Two only
       2. (a) Two only                                          1. R1 = R3        3. R3 = R4
          (b) More than two                                        R2 R4
       3. (a) More than two
                                                                                     R2 R1
          (b) Two only
       4. (a) More than two                                     2. R1 = R2        4. R3 = R4
          (b) More than two                                        R4 R3               R1 R2
                                R2
                                                        2-49. A magnetic amplifier can be classified as
                               25kΩ                           which of the following types of
            R1                                                amplifier?
  E1
        1kΩ
                                                              1.   RF amplifier
            R2                                                2.   Audio amplifier
  E2                     +                                    3.   Video amplifier
        3kΩ
                 R2   15kΩ
                                                              4.   Voltage amplifier
                                      NTS0802G
                                                        2-50. Which of the following statements
       Figure 2G.—Difference Amplifier.                       describes the basic operating principle of
                                                              a magnetic amplifier?
IN ANSWERING QUESTIONS 2-45
THROUGH 2-48, REFER TO FIGURE 2G.                             1. Any power amplifier will create a
                                                                 magnetic field which can be used to
2-45. THIS QUESTION HAS BEEN                                     increase the gain of the power
      DELETED.                                                   amplifier
                                                              2. The inductance of an air-core
2-46. If the amplitude of the signal at E1 is +3                 inductor will change as the power
      volts and the amplitude of the signal at                   used by the load changes
      E2 is +9 volts, what will the amplitude of              3. A changing inductance can be used
      the output signal be?                                      to control the current in a load
                                                              4. Magnetism can be increased
       1.    +6 volts                                            (amplified) by changing the voltage
       2.    +12 volts                                           amplitude
       3.    +30 volts
       4.    +60 volts                                  2-51. What happens to the true power in a
                                                              series LR circuit if the inductance is
2-47. If the amplitude of the signal at E1 is +6              decreased?
      volts and the amplitude of the signal at
      E2 is +2 volts, what will the amplitude of              1.   It increases
      the output signal be?                                   2.   It decreases
                                                              3.   It remains the same
       1. +8 volts                                            4.   It increases initially and then
       2. +20 volts                                                decreases rapidly
       3. −20 volts
       4. −40 volts


                                                   17
2-52. If the permeability of the core of a coil        2-56. A magnetic amplifier should be operated
      decreases, what happens to the (a)                     on what portion of the magnetization
      inductance and (b) true power in the                   curve?
      circuit?
                                                             1.   The positive peak
       1.   (a) Increases       (b) increases                2.   The negative peak
       2.   (a) Increases       (b) decreases                3.   The mid-point
       3.   (a) Decreases       (b) increases                4.   The knee
       4.   (a) Decreases       (b) decreases
                                                       2-57. A toroidal core is used in a saturable-core
2-53. If the current in an iron-core coil is                 reactor to counteract which of the
      increased to a large value (from the                   following effects?
      operating point) what happens to the
      permeability of the core?                              1.   Hysteresis
                                                             2.   Copper loss
       1.   It increases                                     3.   Both 1 and 2 above
       2.   It decreases                                     4.   The effect of load flux on control
       3.   It remains the same                                   flux
       4.   It increases initially and then
            decreases rapidly                          2-58. Why is a rectifier used in a magnetic
                                                             amplifier?
2-54. If two coils are wound on a single iron
      core, a change in current in one coil                  1. To decrease current
      (a) will or will not cause a change in                 2. To eliminate hysteresis loss
      inductance and (b) will or will not cause              3. To increase the power-handling
      a change in current in the other coil.                    capability
                                                             4. To convert the magnetic amplifier
       1.   (a) Will            (b) will                        from an a.c. device to a d.c. device.
       2.   (a) Will            (b) will not
       3.   (a) Will not        (b) will               2-59. What can be used to set a magnetic
       4.   (a) Will not        (b) will not                 amplifier to the proper operating point
                                                             and leave the control winding free to
                                                             accept input signals?

                                                             1.   A filter
                                                             2.   A bias winding
                                                             3.   A d.c. power source
                                                             4.   A feedback network

       Figure 2H.—Saturable-core reactor.              2-60. A magnetic amplifier would not be used
                                                             in which of the following devices?
IN ANSWERING QUESTION 2-55, REFER
TO FIGURE 2H.                                                1.   A servo system
                                                             2.   A d.c. power supply
2-55. What portion of the schematic diagram                  3.   Temperature indicators
      indicates a saturable core?                            4.   A wideband audio power amplifier
                                                                  system
       1.   a
       2.   b
       3.   c
       4.   d

                                                  18
