                     SPECIAL PUBLICATION

                                  September 1998




Navy Electricity and
Electronics Training Series
Module 19—The Technician’s
Handbook
NAVEDTRA 14191




  DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
                        Although the words “he,” “him,” and
                 “his” are used sparingly in this course to
                 enhance communication, they are not
                 intended to be gender driven or to affront or
                 discriminate against anyone.




DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A: Approved for public release; distribution is unlimited.
                                            PREFACE

Special Publications (SPs) are manuals or catalogs that provide information of general benefit and career
development. SPs have no associated assignments or tests.

NEETS Module 19—The Technician’s Handbook presents the technician who works in the electrical and
electronics fields with a ready reference manual for use during everyday work. This SP is available
ONLY in electronic Portable Document Format from the following web site:
http://www.advancement.cnet.navy.mil


Refer questions about this SP to:

E-mail:  n315.products@cnet.navy.mil
Phone:   Comm: (850) 452-1001, ext. 1728
         DSN: 922-1001, ext. 1728/1809
         FAX: (850) 452-1370
         (Do not fax answer sheets.)
Address: COMMANDING OFFICER
         NETPDTC N315
         6490 SAUFLEY FIELD ROAD
         PENSACOLA FL 32509-5237




                                       1998 Edition Prepared by
                                      TMCM Jack L. Formyduval




                                          Published by
                                NAVAL EDUCATION AND TRAINING
                                 PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
                                   AND TECHNOLOGY CENTER




                                                    i
          Sailor’s Creed

“I am a United States Sailor.

I will support and defend the
Constitution of the United States of
America and I will obey the orders
of those appointed over me.

I represent the fighting spirit of the
Navy and those who have gone
before me to defend freedom and
democracy around the world.

I proudly serve my country’s Navy
combat team with honor, courage
and commitment.

I am committed to excellence and
the fair treatment of all.”




                   ii
                      TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER                                   PAGE

   1. The Technician’s Handbook             1-1




                                  iii
  NAVY ELECTRICITY AND ELECTRONICS TRAINING
                    SERIES
The Navy Electricity and Electronics Training Series (NEETS) was developed for use by personnel in
many electrical- and electronic-related Navy ratings. Written by, and with the advice of, senior
technicians in these ratings, this series provides beginners with fundamental electrical and electronic
concepts through self-study. The presentation of this series is not oriented to any specific rating structure,
but is divided into modules containing related information organized into traditional paths of instruction.

The series is designed to give small amounts of information that can be easily digested before advancing
further into the more complex material. For a student just becoming acquainted with electricity or
electronics, it is highly recommended that the modules be studied in their suggested sequence. While
there is a listing of NEETS by module title, the following brief descriptions give a quick overview of how
the individual modules flow together.

Module 1, Introduction to Matter, Energy, and Direct Current, introduces the course with a short history
of electricity and electronics and proceeds into the characteristics of matter, energy, and direct current
(dc). It also describes some of the general safety precautions and first-aid procedures that should be
common knowledge for a person working in the field of electricity. Related safety hints are located
throughout the rest of the series, as well.

Module 2, Introduction to Alternating Current and Transformers, is an introduction to alternating current
(ac) and transformers, including basic ac theory and fundamentals of electromagnetism, inductance,
capacitance, impedance, and transformers.

Module 3, Introduction to Circuit Protection, Control, and Measurement, encompasses circuit breakers,
fuses, and current limiters used in circuit protection, as well as the theory and use of meters as electrical
measuring devices.

Module 4, Introduction to Electrical Conductors, Wiring Techniques, and Schematic Reading, presents
conductor usage, insulation used as wire covering, splicing, termination of wiring, soldering, and reading
electrical wiring diagrams.

Module 5, Introduction to Generators and Motors, is an introduction to generators and motors, and
covers the uses of ac and dc generators and motors in the conversion of electrical and mechanical
energies.

Module 6, Introduction to Electronic Emission, Tubes, and Power Supplies, ties the first five modules
together in an introduction to vacuum tubes and vacuum-tube power supplies.

Module 7, Introduction to Solid-State Devices and Power Supplies, is similar to module 6, but it is in
reference to solid-state devices.

Module 8, Introduction to Amplifiers, covers amplifiers.

Module 9, Introduction to Wave-Generation and Wave-Shaping Circuits, discusses wave generation and
wave-shaping circuits.

Module 10, Introduction to Wave Propagation, Transmission Lines, and Antennas, presents the
characteristics of wave propagation, transmission lines, and antennas.



                                                      iv
Module 11, Microwave Principles, explains microwave oscillators, amplifiers, and waveguides.

Module 12, Modulation Principles, discusses the principles of modulation.

Module 13, Introduction to Number Systems and Logic Circuits, presents the fundamental concepts of
number systems, Boolean algebra, and logic circuits, all of which pertain to digital computers.

Module 14, Introduction to Microelectronics, covers microelectronics technology and miniature and
microminiature circuit repair.

Module 15, Principles of Synchros, Servos, and Gyros, provides the basic principles, operations,
functions, and applications of synchro, servo, and gyro mechanisms.

Module 16, Introduction to Test Equipment, is an introduction to some of the more commonly used test
equipments and their applications.

Module 17, Radio-Frequency Communications Principles, presents the fundamentals of a radio-
frequency communications system.

Module 18, Radar Principles, covers the fundamentals of a radar system.

Module 19, The Technician's Handbook, is a handy reference of commonly used general information,
such as electrical and electronic formulas, color coding, and naval supply system data.

Module 20, Master Glossary, is the glossary of terms for the series.

Module 21, Test Methods and Practices, describes basic test methods and practices.

Module 22, Introduction to Digital Computers, is an introduction to digital computers.

Module 23, Magnetic Recording, is an introduction to the use and maintenance of magnetic recorders and
the concepts of recording on magnetic tape and disks.

Module 24, Introduction to Fiber Optics, is an introduction to fiber optics.

Embedded questions are inserted throughout each module, except for modules 19 and 20, which are
reference books. If you have any difficulty in answering any of the questions, restudy the applicable
section.

Although an attempt has been made to use simple language, various technical words and phrases have
necessarily been included. Specific terms are defined in Module 20, Master Glossary.

Considerable emphasis has been placed on illustrations to provide a maximum amount of information. In
some instances, a knowledge of basic algebra may be required.

Assignments are provided for each module, with the exceptions of Module 19, The Technician's
Handbook; and Module 20, Master Glossary. Course descriptions and ordering information are in
NAVEDTRA 12061, Catalog of Nonresident Training Courses.




                                                     v
Throughout the text of this course and while using technical manuals associated with the equipment you
will be working on, you will find the below notations at the end of some paragraphs. The notations are
used to emphasize that safety hazards exist and care must be taken or observed.



                                              WARNING

       AN OPERATING PROCEDURE, PRACTICE, OR CONDITION, ETC., WHICH MAY
       RESULT IN INJURY OR DEATH IF NOT CAREFULLY OBSERVED OR
       FOLLOWED.


                                              CAUTION

       AN OPERATING PROCEDURE, PRACTICE, OR CONDITION, ETC., WHICH MAY
       RESULT IN DAMAGE TO EQUIPMENT IF NOT CAREFULLY OBSERVED OR
       FOLLOWED.


                                                 NOTE

       An operating procedure, practice, or condition, etc., which is essential to emphasize.




                                                    vi
                                       Student Comments
                      NEETS Module 19
Course Title:         The Technician’s Handbook

NAVEDTRA:             14191                                              Date:

We need some information about you:

Rate/Rank and Name:                              SSN:                   Command/Unit

Street Address:                                  City:                  State/FPO:             Zip

Your comments, suggestions, etc.:




Privacy Act Statement: Under authority of Title 5, USC 301, information regarding your military status is
requested in processing your comments and in preparing a reply. This information will not be divulged without
written authorization to anyone other than those within DOD for official use in determining performance.

NETPDTC 1550/41 (Rev 4-00)



                                                     vii
                                               CHAPTER 1

                     THE TECHNICIAN'S HANDBOOK

    Here, in one compact module, you will be able to find essential information and reference material.
Whether you want to know safety precautions, first aid, or any number of helpful pieces of information,
you will find it indexed.

    We have included electrical and electronic formulas, data tables, and general maintenance hints. In
most cases you will find references to other more detailed sources included.

     We solicit your suggestions, maintenance hints, and constructive criticism. You will receive credit in
future editions of this handbook if your input is used.



                               MISHAP PREVENTION AND AFTERCARE

     Most of us working with electricity take risks. Usually we get our jobs done without any harmful
results. Mishaps or injuries usually result from not understanding a risk or danger.

    The first part of this handbook is designed to help you eliminate or minimize mishaps. It also
provides you with a good review of what to do in case of a mishap.



     SAFETY OBSERVATIONS FOR THE ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS TECHNICIAN

     Working safely is the most important thing you can do. Because of their importance, several
precautions are included as the first subject in this handbook. Of course there are more precautions, but
these are some you should think about. The keyword here is think. Think safety.

    •    Never work alone.

    •    Never receive an intentional shock.

    •    Only work on, operate, or adjust equipment if you are authorized.

    •    Don't work on energized equipment unless absolutely necessary.

    •    Keep loose tools, metal parts, and liquids from above electrical equipment. Never use steel wool
         or emery cloth on electric and electronic circuits.

    •    Never attempt to repair energized circuits except in an emergency.

    •    Never measure voltage in excess of 300 volts while holding the meter wire or probe.

    •    Use only one hand when operating circuit breakers or switches.

    •    Use proper tag-out procedures for regular and preventive maintenance.



                                                    1-1
     •   Be cautious when working in voids or unvented spaces.

     •   Beware the dangers of working aloft. Never attempt to stop a rotating antenna manually.

     •   Keep protective closures, fuse panels, and circuit breaker boxes closed unless you are actually
         working on them.

     •   Never bypass an interlock unless you are authorized to do so by the commanding officer, and
         then properly tag the bypass.

     •   Use extreme caution when handling cathode-ray tubes. They implode violently if broken. The
         anode contact may have a residual electrical charge. Make sure you discharge the anode before
         handling.

     You can find additional and more detailed information on safety in the Electronics Installation and
Maintenance Book (EIMB), General, NAVSEA SE000-00-EIM-100, paragraph 3-4. Another excellent
reference source is the Naval Electronics Systems Command's Electronic Safety Handbook, E0410-AA-
HBK-010/00K ELEXSAFE.

FIRST AID

     First aid is the emergency care you give to sick or injured persons. It consists only of providing
temporary assistance or treatment until medical help is available. In addition to knowing what to do for a
victim, you should also know what not to do.

     This section should be used to reinforce the knowledge you already have about first aid. First aid is
included in detail for the purposes of review, study, and ready reference.

    First aid study classes are usually available through your medical department or the American Red
Cross.

      Your knowledge of first aid measures and their proper application may mean the difference between
life and death, between rapid recovery and long hospitalization, or between temporary disability and
permanent injury.

     The objectives of first aid are to save life and prevent further injury. First aid is not a substitute,
however, for proper medical treatment. Keep in mind the objectives of first aid. Everyone in the Navy
must know when and how to apply first aid measures and must be prepared to give assistance to persons
injured in battle, collision, fire, or accidents.

     In administering first aid, you have three primary tasks:

     •   Maintain breathing

     •   Stop bleeding

     •   Prevent or reduce shock

      The first step, of course, is to determine the extent of the victim's injuries. When you treat a victim,
first consideration usually must be given to the most serious injury. In general, the order of treatment is to
restore breathing, stop bleeding, and treat for shock.

    Work quickly, but do not rush around frantically. Do not waste time looking for ready-made
materials; do the best you can with whatever is at hand. Send for medical help as soon as possible.


                                                     1-2
      Although each case involving injury or sickness presents its own special problems, the following
general rules apply to practically all situations. Become familiar with these basic rules before you go on to
first aid treatment for specific types of injuries.
     1. Keep the victim lying down, head level with the body, until you have found out what kind of
        injury has occurred and how serious it is. If the victim shows one of the following difficulties,
        however, follow the rule given for that specific problem:
         a. Vomiting or bleeding about the mouth and semi-consciousness. If the victim is in danger of
            sucking in blood, vomited matter, or water, place the victim on his/her side or back with the
            head turned to one side and lower than the feet.

         b. Shortness of breath. If the victim has a chest injury or breathing difficulties, place the victim
            in a sitting or semi-sitting position.

         c. Shock. If the victim is in shock, place the person on his or her back with the head slightly
            lower than the feet.
     2. Move the victim no more than is absolutely necessary. To determine the extent of the victim's
        injuries, carefully rip or cut the clothing along the seams. If done improperly, the removal of the
        victim's clothing could cause great harm, especially if fracture injuries are involved. When the
        clothing is removed, ensure that the victim does not become chilled. Shoes may also be cut off to
        avoid causing pain or increasing an injury.
     3. The victim need not see the actual injury(ies). You can supply reassurance and make the victim
        more comfortable by ensuring him or her that the injuries incurred are understood and medical
        attention will be given as soon as possible.
     4. Do not touch open wounds or burns with fingers or other objects, except when sterile compresses
        or bandages are not available and it is absolutely necessary to stop severe bleeding.
     5. Do not try to give an unconscious person any solid or liquid substance by mouth. The person
        may vomit and get some of the material into the lungs when he or she breathes, causing choking
        and possibly death.
     6. If a bone is broken, or you suspect that one is broken, do not move the victim until you have
        immobilized the injured part. This may prove life saving in cases of severe bone fractures or
        spinal cord injuries, because the jagged bone may sever nerves and blood vessels, damage
        tissues, and increase shock. Of course, threat of fire, necessity to abandon ship, or other similar
        situations may require that the victim be moved. But the principle that further damage could be
        done by moving the victim should always be kept in mind and considered against other factors.
     7. When transporting an injured person, always see that the litter is carried feet forward no matter
        what the injuries are. This will enable the rear bearer to observe the victim for any respiratory
        obstruction or stoppage of breathing.
     8. Keep the injured person comfortably warm — warm enough to maintain normal body
        temperature.
     Very serious and mutilating injuries may require heroic first aid measures on your part. However, the
greater the number of injuries, the more judgment and self-control you must exhibit to prevent yourself
and well-intentioned bystanders from trying to do too much.




                                                     1-3
Electric Shock

    Electric shock may cause anything from mild surprise to death. The effects of the shock are usually
unknown. It is often hard to determine how an electrical shock victim has been affected.

     SYMPTOMS OF ELECTRIC SHOCK.—When you find someone who has received a severe
electric shock, the person's skin is usually very white or pale blue. In the case of victims with dark skin, it
may be necessary to rely primarily on the color of the mucous membranes on the inside of the mouth or
under the eye lid or under the nail bed. A person in or going into electric shock has a bluish color to these
membranes instead of a healthy pink. The victim's pulse is very weak or absent. The person is
unconscious, and usually the skin is burned. A stiffness of the body may happen in a few minutes. This is
caused by the muscles reacting to shock. You should not consider this condition as rigor mortis. You
should make sure the victim is no longer touching the live circuit and then start artificial respiration.
People have recovered after body stiffness has set in.

      RESCUE OF VICTIMS.—The rescue of a shock victim depends on your immediate administration
of first aid.

                                                   WARNING

                 Do not attempt to administer first aid or come in physical contact with an
        electric shock victim before the power is shut off or, if the power cannot be shut off
        immediately, before the victim has been removed from the live conductor.

     When attempting to administer first aid to an electric shock victim, proceed as follows:

Shut off the power.

     If the power cannot be deactivated, remove the victim immediately, observing the following
precautions:

          —Protect yourself with dry insulating material. Use a dry board, a belt, dry clothing, or other
           available nonconductive material to free the victim (by pulling, pushing, or rolling) from the
           power-carrying object. DO NOT TOUCH the victim.

     Immediately after you remove the victim from contact with the live circuit, administer artificial
respiration/ventilation or cardiopulmonary resuscitation as necessary.

     ANYONE WHO RECEIVES A SIGNIFICANT SHOCK SHOULD BE TAKEN TO SICK
     BAY OR A MEDICAL FACILITY AND OBSERVED FOR SEVERAL HOURS.

Artificial Ventilation

     A person who has stopped breathing is not necessarily dead, but is in immediate critical danger. Life
depends on oxygen that is breathed into the lungs and then carried by the blood to every body cell. Since
body cells cannot store oxygen, and since the blood can hold only a limited amount (and only for a short
time), death will surely result from continued lack of breathing.

     The heart may continue to beat and the blood may still be circulated to the body cells for some time
after breathing has stopped. Since the blood will, for a short time, contain a small supply of oxygen, the
body cells will not die immediately. Thus, for a few minutes, there is some chance that the person's life
may be saved. A person who has stopped breathing but who is still alive is said to be in a state of
respiratory failure. The first aid treatment for respiratory failure is called artificial ventilation.


                                                      1-4
     The purpose of artificial ventilation is to provide a method of air exchange until natural breathing is
established. Artificial ventilation should be given only when natural breathing has stopped; it must NOT
be given to any person who is still breathing. Do not assume that breathing has stopped merely because a
person is unconscious or because a person has been rescued from the water, from poisonous gas, or from
contact with an electric wire. Remember, DO NOT GIVE ARTIFICIAL VENTILATION TO A
PERSON WHO IS BREATHING NATURALLY. If the victim does not begin spontaneous breathing
after you use the head or jaw tilt techniques (discussed later) to open the airway, artificial ventilation must
be attempted immediately. If ventilation is inadequate, one of the "thrust" methods of clearing the airway
must be performed, followed by another attempt of artificial ventilation.

     MOUTH-TO-MOUTH.—To perform this method of ventilation, clear the victim's mouth of
obstructions (false teeth and foreign matter), place one hand under the victim's neck and the heel of the
other hand on the forehead, and, using the thumb and index finger, pinch the nostrils shut. Tilt the head
back to open the airway. Take a deep breath, cover the victim's mouth with your own, and blow into the
victim's mouth. Then remove your mouth from the victim's to allow the victim to exhale. Observe the
victim's chest for movement. If the victim has not started to breathe normally, start artificial ventilation
with four quick ventilation in succession, allowing the lungs to only partially inflate. If the victim still
does not respond, then you must fully inflate the victim's lungs at the rate of 12 TO 15 VENTILATIONS
PER MINUTE, or ONE BREATH EVERY 5 SECONDS.

     MOUTH-TO-NOSE.—This type ventilation is effective when the victim has extensive facial or
dental injuries or is very young, as it permits an effective air seal.

     To administer this method, place the heel of one hand on the victim's forehead and use the other
hand to lift the jaw. After sealing the victim's lips, take a deep breath, place your lips over the victim's
nose, and blow. Observe the chest for movement and place your ear next to the victim's nose to listen for,
or feel, air exchange. Again, you must continue your efforts at the rate of 12 to 15 ventilation per minute,
or one breath every 5 seconds, until the victim can breathe without assistance.

    NOTE: Sometimes during artificial ventilation, air enters the stomach instead of the lungs. This
condition is called GASTRIC DISTENTION. It can be relieved by moderate pressure exerted with a flat
hand between the navel and rib cage. Before applying pressure, turn the victim's head to the side to
prevent choking on stomach contents that are often brought up during the process.

     BACK PRESSURE ARM LIFT.—This method is an alternate technique used when other methods
are not possible. Place the victim on the stomach, face to one side, neck hypo-extended, with hands under
the head. Quickly clear the mouth of any foreign matter. Kneel at the victim's head and place your hands
on the victim's back so that the heels of the hands lie just below a line between the armpits, with thumbs
touching and fingers extending downward and outward. Rock forward, keeping your arms straight, and
exert pressure almost directly downward on the victim's back, forcing air out of the lungs. Then rock
backward, releasing the pressure and grasping the arms just above the elbows. Continue to rock
backward, pulling the arms upward and inward (toward the head) until resistance and tension in the
victim's shoulders are noted. This expands the chest, causing active intake of air (inspiration). Rock
forward and release the victim's arms. This causes passive exiting of air (expiration). Repeat the cycle of
press, release, lift, and release 10 to 12 times a minute until the victim can breathe naturally.

Cardiac Arrest and Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation

   Cardiac arrest is the complete stoppage of heart function. If the victim is to live, action must be taken
immediately to restore heart function.




                                                     1-5
      In this situation, the immediate administration of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) by a rescuer
using correct procedures greatly increases the chances of a victim's survival. To be effective, CPR must
be started within 4 minutes of the onset of cardiac arrest. CPR consists of external heart compression and
artificial ventilation. This compression is performed on the outside of the chest, and the lungs are
ventilated either by mouth-to-mouth or mouth-to-nose techniques. The victim should be lying on a firm
surface.

                                                  CAUTION

                A rescuer who has not been properly trained should not attempt CPR.
        Everyone who works around electricity should be trained. (To learn CPR, consult a
        hospital corpsman.) Improperly done, CPR can cause serious damage. Therefore, it
        is never practiced on a healthy individual for training purposes; a training aid is
        used instead.

     ONE RESCUER TECHNIQUE.—If a cardiac arrest is not witnessed, the rescuer must not assume
that an arrest has occurred solely because the victim is lying on the floor and appears to be unconscious.
First, try to arouse the victim. You can try shaking the victim's shoulders gently to obtain a response.
Next, quickly check vital signs; if there is no response, apply artificial ventilation. Establish an open
airway and ventilate the victim four times. Check the carotid (neck) pulse as shown in figure 1-1. If no
pulse is felt and there are no visible signs of breathing, start CPR immediately.




                                     Figure 1-1.—Feeling for the carotid pulse

     To start external cardiac compression, place the victim on the back, establish an open airway, and
kneel at right angles to the victim's body. Then locate the victim's sternum (breastbone). You have a
choice of two methods of doing this. One method is to bare the chest and locate the sternum by drawing
an imaginary line from one nipple to the other to identify the proper area of the sternum, which is
darkened in figure 1-2. The other method is to locate the lower tip of the sternum with the index and
middle fingers, placing the heels of your hands above your fingers in the darkened area.




                                                    1-6
                                         Figure 1-2.—Locating the sternum.

     There is a small piece of cartilage at the lower end of the sternum (figure 1-2). A fracture of this area
can damage the liver, causing hemorrhage (heavy bleeding) and death. When you place the heels of your
hands on the victim's chest, make sure they are above the tip of the sternum.

     Place the heel of one hand directly on the sternum and the heel of the other on top of the first. Figure
1-3, view A, shows this technique. Interlock your fingers and keep them off the victim's chest!




                                    Figure 1-3.—Position for cardiac compression.




                                                     1-7
     Lean or rock forward with elbows locked, and apply vertical pressure to depress the sternum (adult)
1 1/2 to 2 inches. View B depicts this. Then release the pressure, keeping hands in place. Administer 60 to
80 compressions per minute.

     You will feel less fatigue if you use the proper technique, and a more effective compression will
result.

     Ineffective compression occurs when the elbows are not locked, the rescuer is not directly over the
sternum, or the hands are improperly placed on the sternum.

      When one rescuer performs CPR, as shown in figure 1-4, the ratio of compressions to ventilations is
15 to 2. After 15 compressions, you must give the victim 2 ventilations. This ratio must continue for four
full cycles. Then check for pulse and breathing. If there are still no signs of recovery, continue CPR until
the victim can breathe unassisted or you are relieved by medical personnel.




                                      Figure 1-4.—One rescuer CPR technique.

     Before reviewing the next technique, let's go over the steps to take in an unwitnessed cardiac arrest
involving one rescuer.

     1. Determine whether the victim is conscious.

     2. Check the vital signs.

     3. Ventilate four times (you may have to remove an airway obstruction at this time!).

     4. Again check the vital signs; if none:

         a. Begin compression-ventilation rate of 15 to 2 for four complete cycles.

         b. Check pulse, breathing, and pupils. If no change

         c. Continue compression-ventilation rate of 15 to 2 until victim is responsive or you are
            relieved by medical personnel.


                                                    1-8
     TWO RESCUER TECHNIQUE.—If two people trained in CPR are on the scene, one must
perform compressions while the other performs artificial ventilation. The ratio for two-person CPR is 5
compressions to 1 ventilation. One rescuer is positioned at the chest area and the other beside the victim's
head. The rescuers should be on opposite sides of the victim.

     To avoid confusion, one rescuer must be designated the leader. The leader must make the
preliminary checks of the victim's vital signs and perform the initial four ventilations. The second rescuer
will perform the compressions.

     When CPR is started, the compressions should be given in a constant, methodical rhythm. The
rescuer giving the compressions counts them out loud. As the fifth compression is released, the other
rescuer ventilates the victim. The compressions should be continued while ventilation is being given.

Hemorrhage

     Blood is circulated throughout the body by means of three different kinds of blood vessels: arteries,
veins, and capillaries. Arteries are large vessels that carry the blood away from the heart; veins are large
vessels that carry the blood back to the heart; and capillaries form a connecting network of smaller vessels
between the arteries and the veins.

     Hemorrhage (escape of blood) occurs whenever there is a break in the wall of one or more blood
vessels. In most small cuts, only capillaries are injured. Deeper wounds result in injury to veins or
arteries. Bleeding which is severe enough to endanger life seldom occurs except when arteries or veins
are cut.

     The average adult body contains about 5 quarts (4.75 liters) of blood. One pint of blood can usually
be lost without harmful effect—in fact, this is the amount usually given by blood donors. However, the
loss of 2 pints (.95 liter) will usually cause shock; shock becomes greater and greater as the amount of
blood loss increases (shock will be discussed later in this chapter). If half the blood in the body is lost,
death almost always results.

     Capillary blood is usually brick red in color. If capillaries are cut, the blood oozes out slowly. Blood
from veins is dark red. If a vein is cut, the blood escapes in a steady, even flow. If an artery near the
surface is cut, the blood will gush out in spurts that are synchronized with the heartbeats; but if the cut
artery is deeply buried, the bleeding will appear to be a steady stream. Arterial blood is usually bright red
in color.

     In actual practice, you might find it difficult to decide whether bleeding is from a vein or an artery;
but the distinction is not usually important. The important thing to know is that bleeding must be
controlled as quickly as possible.

     METHODS OF CONTROLLING BLEEDING.—The only way to stop serious bleeding is by the
application of pressure. In practically all cases, bleeding can be stopped if PRESSURE is applied
DIRECTLY TO THE WOUND. If direct pressure does not stop the bleeding, pressure should be
applied at the appropriate pressure point. In those very rare cases where bleeding is so severe that it
cannot be controlled by either of these methods, pressure can be applied by means of a tight, constricting
band called a tourniquet.

     PROCEDURES.—The actual procedures you should use to stop bleeding are detailed in the
following paragraphs:

     Direct Pressure.—In almost every case, bleeding can be stopped by the application of pressure
directly on the wound. Figure 1-5 is an example of direct pressure. Place a dressing (sterile or clean, if


                                                     1-9
possible) over the wound and firmly fasten it in position with a bandage. If bleeding does not stop, firmly
secure another dressing over the first, or apply direct pressure with your hand to the dressing.




                                            Figure 1-5.—Direct pressure.

    In cases of severe hemorrhage, do not worry too much about the dangers of infection. The basic
problem is to stop the flow of blood. If no material is available, simply apply pressure with your bare
hand. Remember, DIRECT PRESSURE is the first method to use when you are trying to control
hemorrhage.

     Pressure Points.—Bleeding from a cut artery or vein may often be controlled by pressure applied to
the appropriate pressure point. A pressure point is a place where the main artery to the injured part lies
near the skin surface and over a bone. Pressure at such a point is applied with the fingers (digital pressure)
or with the hand; no first aid materials are required. The object of the pressure is to compress the artery
against the bone, thus shutting off the flow of blood from the heart to the wound.

     There are 11 principal points on each side of the body where hand or finger pressure can be used to
stop hemorrhage. These points are shown in figure 1-6.




                                                    1-10
                                 Figure 1-6.—Pressure points for control of bleeding.

     You should memorize these pressure points so that you will know immediately which point to use
for controlling hemorrhage from a particular part of the body. The correct pressure point is the one that is

                                                     1-11
(1) NEAREST THE WOUND and (2) BETWEEN THE WOUND AND THE MAIN PART OF
THE BODY.

     Applying finger pressure is very tiring, and it can seldom be maintained for more than 15 minutes.
Pressure points are recommended for use while direct pressure is being applied to a serious wound. While
pressure is being applied at the appropriate pressure point, an assistant can bandage the wound (or
wounds). If available, a battle dressing should be used. Figure 1-7 shows the battle dressing and its use.
After opening the dressing, be careful not to contaminate it. Place the compress portion over the wound,
then bind it tightly in place with the attached straps. If bleeding continues to be severe even after direct
pressure and pressure points have been used, you may have to apply a tourniquet.




                                            Figure 1-7.—Battle dressing.

     Use of the Tourniquet.—A tourniquet is a constricting band that is used to cut off the supply of
blood to an injured limb. It cannot be used to control bleeding from the head, neck, or trunk, since its use
in these locations would result in greater injury or death. A tourniquet should be used only if the control
of hemorrhage by other means proves to be impossible.

     Basically, a tourniquet consists of a pad, a band, and a device for tightening the band so that the
blood vessels will be compressed. There are several different kinds of ready-made tourniquets. A variety
of materials can be used to improvise tourniquets. Any round, smooth pressure object may be used for the
pad — a compress, a roller bandage, a stone, a rifle shell — and any long, flat material may be used as the
band. However, the band must be flat: belts, stockings, flat strips of rubber, or neckerchiefs can be used;
but rope, wire, string, or very narrow pieces of cloth should not be used because they will cut into the
flesh. A short stick may be used to twist the band, thus tightening the tourniquet.

     A tourniquet must always be applied above the wound — that is, toward the body — and it must be
applied as close to the wound as practicable.

     The best object to be used for the pad is either a bandage, a compress, or some similar pressure
object. The pad goes under the band. It must be placed directly over the artery, or it will actually decrease
the pressure on the artery and thus allow greater flow of blood. If a tourniquet placed over a pressure
object does not stop the bleeding, the pressure object is probably in the wrong place. If this occurs, shift

                                                    1-12
the object around until the tourniquet, when tightened, will control the bleeding. If no suitable pressure
object is available, use the tourniquet without it.

      To apply an emergency tourniquet made from something like a neckerchief, wrap the material once
around the limb and tie an overhand knot; place a short stick on the overhand knot and tie a square knot
over it. Then twist the stick rapidly to tighten the tourniquet. The stick may be tied in place with another
strip of material. Figure 1-8 shows how to apply a tourniquet.




                                         Figure 1-8.—Applying a tourniquet.

     To be effective, a tourniquet must be tight enough to stop the blood flowing to the limb. If the
pressure from the tourniquet is less than the arterial pressure, arterial bleeding will continue. Also,
insufficient tourniquet pressure may actually increase the amount of bleeding from the veins. So be sure
to draw the tourniquet tight enough to stop the bleeding. However, do not make it any tighter than
necessary.

     After you have brought the bleeding under control with the tourniquet, apply a sterile compress or
dressing to the wound and fasten it in position with a bandage.

                                                   CAUTION

                 NEVER apply a tourniquet unless the hemorrhage is so severe that it cannot
         be controlled in any other way. By the time the tourniquet is required, the victim
         will have lost a considerable amount of blood; therefore, once a tourniquet has been
         applied, it should be released only by medical personnel.

     Here are the points to remember when you use a tourniquet:

     •   Do not use a tourniquet unless you cannot control the bleeding by any other means.

     •   Do not use a tourniquet for bleeding from the head, face, neck, or trunk. Use it only on the limbs.

     •   Always apply a tourniquet above the wound and as close to the wound as possible.



                                                    1-13
    •   Be sure you draw the tourniquet tight enough to stop the bleeding, but do not make it any tighter
        than necessary.

    •   Do not loosen a tourniquet after it has been applied except in extreme emergency.

    •   Do not cover a tourniquet with a dressing. If you must cover the injured person in some way,
        make sure that all other people concerned with the case know about the tourniquet. Using
        crayon, magic marker, or blood, mark a large T on the victim's forehead or on a medical tag
        attached to the wrist.

Shock

    If you've ever hit your finger with a hammer and felt — in addition to the pain — weak, dizzy, and
nauseous, then you have experienced a mild form of shock. In such an instance, the symptoms appear
immediately after the injury; but they may not show up for several hours.

    Shock is a condition in which blood circulation is seriously disturbed. Crushed or fractured bones,
burns, prolonged bleeding, and asphyxia all cause shock. It may be slight or it may be severe enough to
cause death. Because all injuries will result in some form of shock, you must learn its symptoms and
know how to treat the victim.

      HOW TO RECOGNIZE SHOCK.—A person who is going into shock may show quite a few signs
or symptoms, some of which are indicated in figure 1-9 and are discussed below. Remember, however,
that signs of shock do not always appear at the time of the injury; indeed, in many serious cases they may
not appear until hours later.




                                         Figure 1-9.—Symptoms of shock.


                                                   1-14
     The symptoms of a person suffering from shock are caused, directly or indirectly, by the disturbance
of the circulation of the blood. The pulse is weak and rapid. Breathing is likely to be shallow, rapid, and
irregular, because the poor circulation of the blood affects the breathing center in the brain. The
temperature near the surface of the body is lowered because of the poor blood flow; so the face, arms, and
legs feel cold to the touch. Sweating is likely to be very noticeable. A person in shock is usually very
pale, but in some cases the skin may have a bluish or reddish color. As mentioned previously when we
were discussing electric shock, in the care of victims with dark skin, it may be necessary to rely primarily
on the color of the mucous membranes on the inside of the mouth or under the eyelid or under the nail
bed. A person in or going into shock has a bluish color to these membranes instead of a healthy pink. The
pupils of the eyes are usually dilated (enlarged).

     A conscious person in shock may complain of thirst and have a feeling of weakness, faintness, or
dizziness. The victim may feel nauseous, restless, frightened, and/or anxious. As shock deepens, these
signs gradually disappear and the victim becomes less and less responsive to what is going on. Even pain
may not arouse the shock victim. Finally, the victim may become unconscious.

      You will not likely see all these symptoms of shock in any one case. Some of them appear only in
late stages of shock when the disturbance of the blood flow has become so great that the person's life is in
serious danger. Sometimes the signs of shock may be disguised by other signs of injury. You must know
what symptoms indicate the presence of shock, but do not ever wait for symptoms to develop before
beginning the treatment for shock. Remember, EVERY SERIOUSLY INJURED PERSON IS
LIKELY TO DEVELOP SERIOUS SHOCK.

    PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF SHOCK.—You should begin treatment for shock as
soon as possible. Prompt treatment may prevent the occurrence of shock or, if it has already developed,
prevent its reaching a critical point. Keep the victim lying down and warm. If conscious, the victim
should be encouraged and assured that expert medical help will arrive soon.

  KEEP AN INJURED PERSON WARM ENOUGH FOR COMFORT, BUT DO NOT LET THE
                       VICTIM BECOME OVERHEATED.

      The best position to use for the prevention or the treatment of shock is one which encourages the
flow of blood to the brain. If the injured person can be placed on his/her back on a bed, a cot, or a
stretcher, you can raise the lower end of the support about 12 inches so that the feet will be higher than
the head. The circumstances of the accident may prevent the use of a bed, a cot, or a stretcher. In such
cases, you might still be able to raise the feet and legs enough to help the blood flow to the brain.
Sometimes you can take advantage of a natural slope of ground and place the casualty so that the head is
lower than the feet.

      In every case, of course, you will have to consider what type of injury is present before you can
decide on the best position. For example, a person with a chest wound may have so much trouble
breathing that you will have to raise the head slightly. If the face is flushed rather than pale, or if you have
any reason to suspect a head injury, do not raise the feet; instead, you should keep the head level with or
slightly higher than the feet. If the person has broken bones, you will have to judge what position would
be best both for the fractures and for shock. A fractured spine must be immobilized before the victim is
moved at all, if further injuries are to be avoided. If you have any doubts about the correct position to use,
have the victim lie flat on his/her back. THE BASIC POSITION FOR TREATING SHOCK IS ONE
IN WHICH THE HEAD IS LOWER THAN THE FEET. Do the best you can under the particular
circumstances to get the injured person into this position. In any case, never let a seriously injured person
sit, stand, or walk around.




                                                     1-15
     Liquids should be administered sparingly, and not at all if medical attention will be available within
a short time. If necessary, small amounts of warm water, tea, or coffee may be given to a victim who is
conscious. Persons having serious burns are an exception. Burn victims require large amounts of fluids.
Water, tea, fruit juices, and sugar water may be given freely to a victim who is conscious, able to
swallow, and has no internal injuries. Slightly salted water is also beneficial. Alcohol must never be given
to a person in shock.

    An injured person may or may not be in pain. The amount of pain felt depends in part on the person's
physical condition and the type of injury. Extreme pain, if not relieved, can increase the degree of shock.
Make the victim as comfortable as possible. Fractures should be immobilized and supported.
Immobilization greatly reduces, and sometimes eliminates, pain. Normally, you should not administer
drugs, but aspirin may be given for mild pain.

     Heat is important in the treatment of shock to the extent that the injured person's body heat must be
conserved. Exposure to cold, with resulting loss of body heat, can cause shock to develop or to become
worse. You will have to judge the amount of covering to use by considering the weather and the general
circumstances of the accident. Often a light covering will be enough to keep the casualty comfortable.
Wet clothing should be removed and dry covering provided, even on a hot day. Use blankets or any dry
material to conserve body heat. Artificial means of warming (hot water bottles, heated bricks, heated
sand) should not ordinarily be used. Artificial heat may cause loss of body fluids (by sweating) and it
brings the blood closer to the surface, thus defeating the body's own efforts to supply blood to the vital
organs and to the brain. Also, the warming agent may burn the victim.

Burns

     The seriousness of a burn depends on two factors: the extent of the burned area and the depth of the
burn. Shock can be expected from burns involving 15 percent or more of the body. Burns involving 20
percent endanger life. Without adequate treatment, burns of over 30 percent are usually fatal. The depth
of the injury determines whether it is a first, second, or third degree burn.

    First degree burns are mildest. Symptoms are slight pain, redness, tenderness, and increased
temperature of the affected area.

     Second degree burns are more serious. The inner skin may be damaged, resulting in blistering,
severe pain, some dehydration, and possible shock.

     Third degree burns are worst of all. The skin is destroyed, and possibly also the tissue and muscle
beneath it. The skin may be charred, or it may be white and lifeless (from scalds). After the initial injury,
pain may be less severe because of destroyed nerve ends. The person may have chills. Some form of
shock will result.

      Probably the most important aspect is the extent of the burned area. A first degree burn covering a
large area could be more serious than a small third degree burn. A sunburn, for example, ranging from
mild to serious, is easily obtained, particularly if you are not accustomed to the exposure. If you were to
fall asleep while sunbathing, second degree burns, or even third degree burns of a possibly fatal nature,
could result.

     The most effective immediate treatment of burns and of pain is to immerse the burned area in cold
water or to apply cold compresses if immersion is impracticable. Cold water not only minimizes pain, but
also reduces the burning effect in the deeper layers of the skin. Gently pat dry the area with lint-free cloth
or gauze. Aspirin is also effective for the relief of pain. Continue treatment until no pain is felt when the
burned area is exposed to the air.



                                                    1-16
     Burn victims require large amounts of water, which should be slightly salted. Because of the nature
of the injury, most burns are sterile. The best treatment for uninfected burns, therefore, is merely to
protect the area by covering it with the cleanest (preferably sterile) dressing available. Never apply
ointments to a burn nor use petrolatum gauze.

     Do not attempt to break blisters or to remove shreds of tissue or adhered particles of charred
clothing. Never apply a greasy substance (butter, lard, or petroleum jelly), antiseptic preparations, or
ointments. These may cause further complications and interfere with later treatment by medical
personnel.

Heatstroke

      Sunstroke is more accurately called heatstroke since a person does not have to be exposed to the sun
for this condition to develop. It is a less common but far more serious condition than heat exhaustion,
since it carries a 20 percent fatality rate. The main feature of heatstroke is the extremely high body
temperature, 105º F (41º C) or higher, that accompanies it. In heatstroke, the victim has a breakdown of
the sweating mechanism and is unable to eliminate excessive body heat built up while exercising. If the
body temperature rises too high, the brain, kidneys, and liver may be permanently damaged.

     Sometimes the victim may have preliminary symptoms, such as headache, nausea, dizziness, or
weakness. Breathing will be deep and rapid at first, later shallow and almost absent. Usually the victim
will be flushed, very dry, and very hot. The pupils will be constricted (pinpoint) and the pulse fast and
strong. Figure 1-10 compares these symptoms with those of heat exhaustion.




                              Figure 1-10.—Symptoms of heatstroke and heat exhaustion.

    When you provide first aid for heatstroke, remember that this is a true life-and-death emergency. The
longer the victim remains overheated, the higher the chances of irreversible body damage or even death
occurring. First aid treatment for heatstroke is designed to reduce body heat.

     Reduce body heat immediately by dousing the body with cold water, or applying wet, cold towels to
the whole body. Move the victim to the coolest possible place and remove as much clothing as possible.
Maintain an open airway. Place the victim on his/her back, with the head and shoulders slightly raised. If
cold packs are available, place them under the arms, around the neck, at the ankles, and in the groin.
Expose the victim to a fan or air-conditioner since drafts will promote cooling. Immersing the victim in a
cold water bath is also effective. Give the victim (if conscious) cool water to drink. Do not give any hot


                                                    1-17
drinks or stimulants. Get the victim to a medical facility as soon as possible. Cooling measures must be
continued while the victim is being transported.

Heat Exhaustion

     Heat exhaustion (heat prostration or heat collapse) is the most common condition caused by working
or exercising in hot spaces. Heat exhaustion produces a serious disruption of blood flow to the brain,
heart, and lungs. This causes the victim to experience weakness, dizziness, headache, loss of appetite, and
nausea.

      Signs and symptoms of heat exhaustion are similar to those of shock: the victim will appear ashen
gray; the skin will be cold, moist, and clammy; and the pupils of the eyes may be dilated (enlarged). The
vital (blood pressure, temperature, pulse, and respiration) signs usually are normal; however, the victim
may have a weak pulse together with rapid and shallow breathing. Body temperature may be below
normal.

     You should treat heat exhaustion victims as if they were in shock. Loosen the clothing, apply cool
wet cloths, move the victim to either a cool or an air-conditioned area, and fan the victim. Do not allow
the person to become chilled. If the victim is conscious, administer a solution of 1 teaspoon of salt
dissolved in a quart of cool water. If the victim vomits, do not give any more fluids. Transport the victim
to a medical facility as soon as possible.



                                        HELPFUL INFORMATION

     The second part of this handbook has been compiled to provide the technician with a collection of
helpful information. Included are many commonly used formulas, data tables, and general maintenance
hints used in, with, and around electricity.

BASIC ELECTRICAL FORMULAS

     Basic electrical formulas are included to aid you in solving electrical problems. These formulas are
for capacitance, current, inductance, power, reactance, impedance, resistance, voltage, and transformers.
Additional formulas can be found in the appropriate NEETS module.

Capacitance

      The property of an electrical device to store energy is CAPACITANCE. This energy is stored in a
way to oppose a change in voltage. A CAPACITOR is used to store this electrical energy. The FARAD
is the basic unit of measurement of capacitance.

     Formulas for capacitance:




                                                   1-18
     Common insulating materials for capacitors and their dielectric constant are:


     MATERIAL                     CONSTANT

     Vacuum                       1.0000
     Air                          1.0006
     Paraffin paper               3.5
     Glass                        5 to 10
     Mica                         3 to 6
     Rubber                       2.5 to 35
     Wood                         2.5 to 8
     Glycerine (15º C)            56
     Petroleum                    2
     Pure Water                   81



      The time to charge a capacitor to 63.2 percent of applied voltage or discharge it to 36.8 percent of its
initial voltage is known as the TIME CONSTANT (t) of the circuit. Figure 1-11 shows an RC time
constant chart. One time constant (t) in seconds equals R × C, with R in ohms and C in farads.




                                                    1-19
                                         Figure 1-11.—RC time constants.

    Figure 1-12 is a universal time constant chart for RC and LR circuits. One time constant (t) in
seconds equals R × C, with R in ohms and C in farads, or L/R with L in henries and R in ohms.




                         Figure 1-12.—Universal time constant chart for RC and LR circuits.

    Adding capacitors in series:




                                                    1-20
          If only two capacitors are used:




          If more than two capacitors are used:




                                                  CAUTION

                Capacitors retain an electrical charge. Be sure to discharge all capacitors
        and circuits containing capacitors before working on them.

     A more detailed description of capacitors and capacitance can be found in NEETS, Module 2,
Introduction to Alternating Current and Transformers.

Current

     Electrons (negative charges) move through a conductor when an electric field is applied. Electron
current is defined as the directed flow of electrons from negative to positive.

     Current is measured in AMPERES (AMP). One amp of current flows when one coulomb (6.28 ×
1018 electrons) passes a point in one second.

    The Ohm's law formulas for current are:




                                                  1-21
    Ac current formulas are:




    Ohm's law for reactive circuits:




    Ohm's law for circuits containing resistance and reactance:




    Current across the primary (Ip) of a transformer:




    Current across the secondary (Is):




                                                    NOTE

              Human reaction to electrical shock is determined by the amount of current
       flowing through the body. A 100-milliampere shock for 1 second is usually fatal!

    More information about current can be found in NEETS, Module 1, Introduction to Matter, Energy,
and Direct Current.


                                                  1-22
Inductance

    Inductance is the characteristic of an electrical conductor that opposes a change in electrical current.
The symbol for inductance is L and the basic unit of measurement is the HENRY(H).

    An inductor has an inductance of 1 henry if an electromotive force (emf) of 1 volt is induced in the
inductor when the current through the inductor is changing at the rate of one ampere per second.

     Mathematically:




     Mutual inductance:




     Series inductors without magnetic coupling:




     Series inductors with magnetic coupling:




                                                    1-23
     Parallel inductors without coupling:




     Provided the coefficient of coupling between inductors is zero.

     Resistive/inductive circuit:

     The time required for the current in an inductor to increase to 63.2 percent of its final value or
decrease to 36.8 percent is known as the time constant.

     Mathematically expressed:




     Figure 1-13 shows an L/R time constant chart.




                                            Figure 1-13.—L/R time constant.

     You may want to refer back to figure 1-12, which shows the L/R relationship using the universal
time constant chart.




                                                      1-24
    Inductive reactance:




    Ohm's law for reactive circuit:




    You can find more information about inductance in NEETS, Module 2, Introduction to Alternating
Current and Transformers.

Power

    Electrical POWER pertains to the rate at which work is being done. Work is done whenever a force
causes motion. The instantaneous rate at which work is done is called the electric power rate and is
measured in WATTS.

    Formulas for power in dc circuits are:




    For ac circuits:

    True power:



    True power is measured in watts.




                                                1-25
Another way to calculate reactive power is:

Reaction power:




Subtract the smaller from the larger:




Apparent power:




                                              1-26
     You can find more detailed information about power in NEETS, Module 2, Introduction to
Alternating Current and Transformers.

Reactance

     REACTANCE is the result of the difference between the values of X C (capacitive reactance) and
XL (inductive reactance). Reactance is represented by the letter X and its basic measurement is in ohms.

    The formula for reactance is:




     If you want more detailed information on reactance, look in NEETS, Module 2, Introduction to
Alternating Current and Transformers.

Impedance

     IMPEDANCE is the combined opposition of current flow by reactance and resistance and is
represented by the symbol Z.

    Formulas for finding impedance:




                                                  1-27
Resistance

      RESISTANCE is the opposition to current flow. It is measured in ohms and is represented by the
letter R.

     Formulas for resistance:




Voltage

     VOLTAGE exists when a charge exists between two bodies. When a one coulomb charge exists,
one unit of electrical potential energy is created. This is called a difference of potential, an electromotive
force, or a voltage. It is measured in volts and represented by the letter E.

     Formulas for voltage:




                                                     1-28
    Voltage across the primary of a transformer:




    Voltage across the secondary of a transformer:




Transformers

     A TRANSFORMER is a device that transfers electrical energy from one circuit to another by
electromagnetic induction (transformer action). Voltage induced into the secondary from the primary is
determined by the turns ratio.

    Turns ratio formula:




    Turns and current ratios:




    By dividing both sides of the equation by IpNs, you obtain:




                                                   1-29
Since:




Transformer power:




                     1-30
                                                  WARNING

                Transformers are often used to STEP-UP voltage. You may find a low
        voltage across the primary and a much higher voltage across the secondary. Use
        extreme caution, especially when working around television and other crt high
        voltage transformers. They often step voltages up to, or in excess of, 30,000 volts.

BASIC ELECTRONICS FORMULAS

    Basic electronics formulas are included to aid you in solving any electronics problem that you may
encounter. These formulas are for antennas, resonance, transistors, vacuum tubes, wavelength, and radar.
Additional formulas may be found in the appropriate NEETS module.

Antennas

     An antenna is a conductor or a group of conductors used either for radiating electromagnetic energy
into space or collecting it from space or both.

     Antenna gain remains the same for the antenna whether it is transmitting or receiving. Antenna gain
(G) can be described as the effectiveness of a directional antenna in a particular direction, compared to a
standard or reference antenna. Some antenna formulas are shown below:




                                                   1-31
                                             WARNING

               Rf voltages may be induced in ungrounded metal objects such as wire guys,
       wire cables (hawsers), handrails, or ladders. You could receive a shock or rf burn if
       you come in contact with these objects. Obtain proper permission prior to going
       topside or "working aloft."

               Rf burns are usually deep, penetrating, and third degree. They must heal
       from the inside out. If you are burned, seek medical attention. A person in an RF
       field will usually have a body temperature rise. The eyes and reproductive organs
       are especially susceptible to RF energy. Read and heed all warning signs!

    You can find more information about antennas in NEETS, Module 10, Introduction to Wave
Propagation, Transmission Lines, and Antennas.




                                               1-32
Resonance

     RESONANCE is a condition that exists in a circuit when inductance, capacitance, and the applied
frequency are such that inductive reactance and capacitive reactance cancel each other.

    Formula for resonant frequency (fr):




    NOTE: The formula for resonance is the same for series or parallel circuits when XL = X C.

Transistors

     Semiconductor devices that have three or more elements are called TRANSISTORS. The term is
derived from TRANSfer and resISTOR. This term describes the operation of the transistor — the transfer
of an input signal current from a low-resistance circuit to a high-resistance circuit.

    Some transistor formulas are shown below.

    Transistor total current:




                                                 1-33
    Alpha is always less than 1 for a common base configuration.




     TRANSISTOR RUGGEDNESS.—Transistors are generally more rugged mechanically than
electron tubes. They are susceptible to damage by electrical overloads, heat, humidity, and radiation.
Unless you are careful, damage can occur during maintenance.

     DAMAGE PREVENTION.—To prevent damage and avoid electrical shock, use the following
precautions when working on transistorized equipment:

    •    Check your test equipment and soldering irons for leakage current from the power source. If
         leakage current exists, use an isolation transformer to eliminate the current.



                                                   1-34
    •   Connect a ground between the test equipment and circuit under test.

    •   Do not exceed the maximum allowable voltages for circuit components and transistors.

    •   Ohmmeter ranges that require more than one milliampere should not be used for testing
        transistors.

    •   Battery eliminators should not be used to furnish power for transistorized equipment. They have
        poor voltage regulation.

    •   The heat applied to a transistor, when soldered connections are required, should be kept to a
        minimum by the use of low-wattage soldering irons and heat shunts or heat sinks.

    •   When replacing transistors, never pry them from the printed circuit board.

    •   Check all circuits for defects before replacing transistors.

    •   Remove power from the equipment prior to replacing a transistor.

    •   Use extreme care when using test probes on a transistorized circuit. It is easy to short across
        adjacent terminals with conventional probes. Try insulating the probe tips and leaving a very
        short section of the point exposed.

   You can find more about transistors in NEETS, Module 7, Introduction to Solid-State Devices and
Power Supplies.

Vacuum Tubes

    The characteristics of a vacuum tube are measured by two factors: AMPLIFICATION FACTOR,
mu (µ), and TRANSCONDUCTANCE (gm).

    Formula for amplification factor:




    Formula for transconductance (gm) is:




    Information on vacuum tubes can be found in NEETS, Module 6, Introduction to Electronic
Emission, Tubes, and Power Supplies.



                                                   1-35
                                                 CAUTION

                Because vacuum tubes become hot and most are made of glass, use caution
        while removing or replacing them. Use vacuum tube pullers or at least wear some
        type of hand protection.

Wavelength

     Wavelength is the distance in space occupied by one cycle of a radio wave at any given instant. If a
radio wave could be frozen in time and measured, the distance from the leading edge of one cycle to the
leading edge of the next cycle would be the wavelength. Wavelength varies from a few hundredths of an
inch at the high frequencies to many miles at extremely low frequencies. Common practice is to express
wavelength in meters. The Greek letter lambda (λ) is used to signify wavelength. Formulas for
wavelength, period, and velocity are shown below.

    Wavelength formula:




    Frequency formula:




     You can find more information on wavelength, frequency, period, and velocity in NEETS, Module
10, Introduction to Wave Propagation, Transmission Lines, and Antennas.




                                                   1-36
Radar

   Some helpful radar information/formulas are shown below.


   PW         Pulse Width—The width of the transmitted RF pulse from the radar
              (the term can also be used regarding other non-RF information).




   PRT        Pulse Repetition Time—The duration of the time between radar
              transmitter pulses (leading edge of pulse to leading edge of the next
              pulse).




   PRR or     PRF Pulse Repetition Rate or Pulse Repetition Frequency—the
   PRF        number of pulses that occur during one second.




   DC         Duty Cycle—The amount of actual transmitter pulse time (PW)
              divided by the amount of transmitter total time (PRT). For radar
              applications, the duty cycle will always be less than one.




   Ppk        Power Peak (normally referenced in kilowatts)—The actual power of
              the transmitted RF pulse (PW).




   Pavg       Average Power (normally referenced in watts)—The transmitted
              power relative to one PRT.




                                                   1-37
    Minimum radar range = (pulse width + *recovery time) × 164 yards

     *In most modern radar systems, recovery time is negligible and does not need to be considered when
figuring minimum radar range.




    Radar range resolution (in yards) = pulse width × 164 yards per microsecond.

      When you use the term decibel (dB), you are referring to a logarithmic comparison between two
signals, usually the output and the input. In power measurement applications, however, a reference of 0
dBm equalling 1 milliwatt is usually used. The term dBm is used to represent power levels above, below,
or at 1 milliwatt.

    The following formulas are used for figuring dB:




    In circuits where impedances may vary:




    Some basic information to remember:




                                                 1-38
                                     POWER CONVERSION

For ease of power conversion, this listing provides rough, basic data:




                                              1-39
                                   Log or dB           Gain or mw

                                                11                12.5
                                                10              10
                                                 9               8
                                                 8               6.25
                                                 7               5
                                                 6               4
                                                 5               3.125
                                                 4               2.5
                                                 3               2
                                                 2               1.6
                                                 1               1.25
                                                 0               1
                                                -1               0.8
                                                -2               0.625
                                                -3               0.5
                                                -4               0.4
                                                -5               0.312
                                                -6               0.25
                                                -7               0.2
                                                -8               0.16
                                                -9               0.125
                                               -10               0.1
                                               -11               0.08


     The figures in the above listing are not precise, but are accurate for most applications. For figures in
between the above numbers, logarithm interpolation must be done. Table 1-34 provides a seven-place
table of common logarithms.

     The following are examples of power conversion:

     Example 1:




                                                     1-40
    Example 2:




    Example 3:




DATA TABLES

    Data tables are provided for reference. Information in the tables are the usually accepted standards.
Various military standards have also been used to provide these tables.

Capacitor Identification

     Two methods of capacitor identification are used. The first is the typographical method, and the
second is the color code method. Typographically marked identification will be discussed first. It is the
type marking where a number is printed on the capacitor. You should note that on different physical styles
of capacitors, the printed number may be in either microfarads or picofarads. Two styles of capacitors
have been selected from Military Standard 198E (MIL-STD-198E) to show how the part number stamped
on the capacitor is broken down.

    Table 1-1 shows the CB style of capacitor part number breakdown.




                                                   1-41
Table 1-1.—CB Style Capacitor Part Number Breakdown




                    1-42
    Table 1-2 shows how the part number on the CMR style of capacitor is broken down


                             Table 1-2.—CMR Style Capacitor Part Number Breakdown




     Table 1-3 is a partial cross reference list of the CYR10 (MIL-C-23269/1) style of capacitor. As an
example, if you need a 3.3 pF, 500 VDC capacitor in the CYR10 style, with a failure rate (FR) of 1
percent per 1,000 hours, the part number would be M23269/01-3009.


                                                  1-43
                                Table 1-3.—CYR10 Style Capacitor Cross-Reference




     Table 1-3 is not a complete list of the CYR10 style capacitor. The CYR10 is not the only style
capacitor listed this way. You should refer to Military Standard 198E (MIL-STD-198E), Capacitors,
Selection and Use of, for more information.

     The color coding identification method is becoming obsolete. This method is included for the
technician who is required to work on some older model equipment.




                                                   1-44
 Figure 1-14.—Six-dot color code for mica and molded paper capacitors.




Figure 1-15.—Six-band color code for tubular paper dielectric capacitors.


                               1-45
Figure 1-16.—Ceramic capacitor color code.




               1-46
                                Figure 1-17.—Mica capacitor color code.

Table 1-4 shows some principal capacitor applications by type and military specification.




                                              1-47
                                   Table 1-4.—Principal Applications of Capacitors




     Table 1-5 is a capacitor style to military specification cross referencing. This cross reference guide is
included for general information only; some styles are not preferred standards and, therefore, are not
included in this standard.


                              Table 1-5.—Style to Military Specification Cross-Reference
 STYLE      SPECIFICATION         DESCRIPTION                    CLASS         STATUS      REPLACEMENT
CA          MIL-C 12889           Paper, By-Pass                 Non-ER        I           19978
CB          10950                 Mica, Button, Feed-Thru        Non-ER        A
CC          20                    Ceramic, Encap., Temp.         Non-ER        PI          CCR
                                  Comp.
CCR         20                    Ceramic, Encap., Temp.         ER            A
                                  Comp.
CDR         55681                 Ceramic, Chip                  ER            A
CE          62                    Aluminum Electrolytic          Non-ER        PI          39018
CFR         55514                 Plastic, Non-Herm. Sealed      ER            A
CG          23183                 Vacuum or Gas, Variable        Non-ER        A
CH          18312                 Metallized Paper, or Plastic   Non-ER        I           39022
CHR         39022                 Metallized Plastic, Herm.      ER            A
                                  Sealed
CJ          3871                  Aluminum, Motor Start          Non-ER        C           EIA RS-463
                                                                                              39014
CK          11015                 Ceramic, Encapsulated          Non-ER        PI
CKR         39014                 Ceramic, Encapsulated          ER            A
CKS         123                   Ceramic, Encapsulated and      Hi-Rel        A
                                  Chip
CL          3965                  Tantalum, Foil and Wet         Non-ER        I           39006
                                  Slug
CLR         39006                 Tantalum, Foil and Wet         ER            A
                                  Slug
CM          5                     Mica, Molded, Silvered, and    Non-ER        PI          39001
                                  RF




                                                     1-48
                          Table 1-5.—Style to Military Specification Cross-Reference. —Continued
 STYLE        SPECIFICATION          DESCRIPTION                 CLASS         STATUS          REPLACEMENT
CMR           39001                  Mica, Silvered              ER            A
CMS           87164                  Mica, Silvered              Hi-Rel        A
CN            91                     Paper, Non-Metal Cases      Non-ER        C               55514
CP            25                     Paper, Herm. Sealed         Non-ER        I               19978
CPV           14157                  Paper or Plastic, Herm.     Non-ER        C               19978
                                     Sealed
CQ            19978                  Paper or Plastic, Herm.     Non-ER        I               CQR
                                     Sealed
CQR           19978                  Paper or Plastic, Herm.     ER            A
                                     Sealed
CRH           83421                  Metallized Plastic, Herm.   ER            A
                                     Sealed
CRL           83500                  Tantalum, Wet Slug          Non-ER        A
CS            26655                  Tantalum, Solid, Herm.      Non-ER        C               39003
                                     Sealed
CSR           39003                  Tantalum, Solid, Herm.      ER            A
                                     Sealed
CSS           39003                  Tantalum, Solid, Herm.      Hi-Rel        A
                                     Sealed
CT            92                     Air, Variable               Non-ER        A
CTM           27287                  Plastic, Non-Metal Case     Non-ER        I               55514
CU            39018                  Aluminum Electrolytic       Non-ER        PI              CUR
CUR           39018                  Aluminum Electroyltic       ER            A
CV            81                     Ceramic, Variable           Non-ER        A
CWR           55365                  Tantalum, Solid, Chip       ER            A
CX            49137                  Tantalum, Solid, Non-       Non-ER        A
                                     Herm. Sealed
CY            11272                  Glass                       Non-ER        I               23269
CYR           23269                  Glass                       Non-ER        A
CZ            11693                  Metallized Paper or Plastic Non-ER        I               CZR
                                     F.T.
CZR           11693                  Metallized Paper or Plastic ER            A
                                     F.T.
PC            14409                  Piston Trimmer              Non-ER        A
A = Active for design                                ER = Extended reliability
C = Canceled                                   NON-ER = Not extended reliability
I = Inactive for design                        HI-REL = High reliability
PI = Partially Inactive for design



     Military Standard 198E (MIL-STD-198E) contains information concerning capacitors and should be
helpful in selecting any replacement.

Resistor Identification

     This section contains information that will aid you in identifying the specifications indicated on
resistors.




                                                       1-49
                                         Figure 1-18.—Resistor color code.

     Table 1-6 is a resistor selection chart. As an example, let's suppose you need a 1-watt, composition
resistor. Look under the "type" heading to find composition. Then look under the "power and max voltage
ratings" headings to find 1W/500V. The style you select should be RCR32. This is the first part of the part
number. To find the last part of the desired part number, the ohmic value, refer to table 1-7, the resistor
type designation part number breakdown.

    Tables 1-6 and 1-7 are excerpts from Military Standard 199C(MIL-STD-199C) and are included as
examples of the information contained in MIL-STD-199C. If another type of resistor is needed, the
complete part number breakdown can be located in MIL-STD-199C.




                                                    1-50
                                        Table 1-6.—Resistor Selection Chart
Military         Type                       Styles available   Power and max     Resistance       Ohmic range
specification                               in standard        voltage ratings   tolerance
                                                                                 (+ percent)
MIL-R-26         Wirewound (Power           RW29               11W               5, 10            .1 to 5.6 K
                 Type)                      RW31               14W                                .1 to 6.8 K
                                            RW33               26W                                .1 to 18 K
                                            RW35               55W                                .1 to 43 K
                                            RW37               113W                               .1 to 91 K
                                            RW38               159V                               .1 to.15 M
                                            RW47               210W                               .1 to.18 M
                                            RW56               14W                                .1 to 9.1 K
MIL-R-22684      Film (Insulated)           RL42. . .TX        2W/500V           2, 5             10 to 1.5 M
MIL-R-18546      Wirewound (Power           RE77               75W               1                .05 to 29.4 K
                 Type,                      RE80               120W              1                .1 to 35.7 K
                 Chassis Mounted)
MIL-R-39008      Composition                RCR05              .125W/150V        5, 10            2.7 to 22 M
                 (Insulated), Established   RCR07              .25W/250V                          2.7 to 22 M
                 Reliability                RCR20              .5W/350V                           1.0 to 22 M
                                            RCR32              1W/500V                            1.0 to 22 M
                                            RCR42              2W/500V                            10 to 22 M
MIL-R-55182      Film, Established          RNR50              .05W/200V         .1, .5, 1        10 to.796 M
                 Reliability                                   .1W/200V
                                            RNR55              .1W/200V                           10 to 2.0 M
                                                               .125/200V
                                            RNR60              .125W/250V                         1.0 to 4.02 M
                                                               .25W/300V
                                            RNR65              .25W/300V                          1.0 to 8.06 M
                                                               .5W/350V
                                            RNR70              .5W/350V                           1.0 to 15 M
                                                               .75W/500V
                                            RNR75              1W/750V                            24.9 to 2 M
                                                               2W/750V
                                            RNC90              .3W/300V
                                            .                  6W/300V           .05, .01, .005   4.99 to 100K
1/ M = megohms; K = kilohms.




                                                    1-51
                                  Table 1-6.—Resistor Selection Chart—Continued
Military         Type                      Styles available   Power and max       Resistance        Ohmic range
specification                              in standard        voltage ratings     tolerance
                                                                                  (+ percent)
MIL-R-39005      Wirewound (Accurate),     RBR52              .5W/600V            .01, .05, .1, 1   .1 to.806 M
                 Established Reliability   RBR53              .33W/300V                             .1 to.499 M
                                           RBR54              .25W/300V                             .1 to.255 M
                                           RBR55              .15W/200V                             .1 to.150 M
                                           RBR56              .125W/150V                            .1 to.1 M
                                           RBR57              .75W/600V                             .1 to 1.37 M
                                           RBR71              .125W/150V                            .1 to.1 M
                                           RRBR75             .125W/150V                            .1 to 71.5 K
MIL-R-39007      Wirewound (Power          RWR78              10W                 .1, .5, 1         .1 to 39.2 K
                 Type), Established        RWR80              2W                                    .1 to 1.21 K
                 Reliability               RWR81              1W                                    .1 to.464 K
                                           RWRB2              1.5W                                  .1 to.931 K
                                           RWR84              7W                                    .1 to 12.4 K
                                           RWR89              3W                                    .1 to 3.57 K
MIL-R-39017      Film (Insulated),         RLR05              .125W/200V          1, 2              4.7 to.3 M
                 Established Reliability   RLR07              .25W/250V                             10 to 2.49 M
                                           RLR20              .5W/350V                              4.3 to 3.01 M
                                           RLR32              1W/500V                               10 to 1.0 M
MIL-R-39009      Wirewound (Power          RER40              5W                  1                 1 to 1.65 K
                 Type, Chassis             RER45              10W                                   1 to 2.80 K
                 Mounted), Established     RER50              20W                                   1 to 6.04 K
                 Reliability               RER55              30W                                   1 to 19.6 K
                                           RER60              5W                                    .1 to 3.32 K
                                           RER65              10W                                   .1 to 5.62 K
                                           RER70              20W                                   .1 to 12.1K
                                           RER75              30W                                   .1 to 39.2 K
MIL-R-55342      Film, Chip, Established   RM0502             .02W/40V            1, 5, 10          5.6 to .1 M
                 Reliability               RM0505             .15W/40V                              5.6 to .47 M
                                           RM0705             .10W/40V                              5.6 to .1 M
                                           RM1005             .15W/40V                              5.6 to .47 M
                                           RM1505             .10W/50V                              5.6 to .1 M
                                           RM2208             .225W/50V                             5.6 to 15 M
1/ M = megohms; K = kilohms.




                                                   1-52
                           Table 1-7.—Resistor Type Designation Part Number Breakdown




Transformer Lead Identification

    This area contains color coding identification as it relates to transformers.

     Figure 1-19 shows the color codes for power transformers, IF transformers, and interstage-audio
transformers.




                                                    1-53
                                    Figure 1-19.—Color code for transformers.



Chassis Wiring Identification

    The standard colors used in chassis wiring for the purpose of equipment circuit identification follow:


    CIRCUIT                                                                     COLOR

    GROUNDS, GROUNDED ELEMENTS, AND RETURNS                                     BLACK
    BEATERS OR FILAMENTS, OFF GROUND                                            BROWN
    POWER SUPPLY +Vcc/+Ebb                                                      RED
    SCREEN GRIDS                                                                ORANGE
    EMITTERS/CATHODES                                                           YELLOW
    BASES/CONTROL GRIDS                                                         GREEN
    COLLECTORS/PLATES                                                           BLUE
    POWER SUPPLY, -Vcc /-Ebb                                                    VIOLET (PURPLE)
    AC POWER LINES                                                              GRAY
    MISCELLANEOUS, ABOVE OR BELOW GROUND RETURNS,                               WHITE
    AUTOMATIC VOLUME CONTROL (AVC)



Semiconductor Case Outlines, Color Coding, Lead Identification, and Pin Placement

     Case outlines, color coding, lead identification, and pin placements of common semiconductor
devices are used frequently by the technician and are included in figures 1-20, 1-21, and 1-22.



                                                   1-54
Figure 1-20.—Semiconductor diode markings and color code system.




                          1-55
Figure 1-21.—Transistor lead identification and case outline.




                         1-56
                                Figure 1-22.—IC identification and pin placement.

Batteries

    The two fundamental types of batteries are the PRIMARY CELL and SECONDARY CELL.
Primary cells are those commonly used in flashlights and some portable, hand-held test equipment.
Common sizes and part numbers are:


                         SIZE            PART NUMBER

                         AA              BA58
                         C               BA42
                         D               BA30



    Secondary cell batteries are the type used in automobiles. They are rechargeable.

     Safety precautions concerning charging, handling, and storage of batteries can be found in the
Electronics Installation and Maintenance Book (EIMB), General, NAVSEA SE000-00-EIM-100. Stock

                                                   1-57
numbers and part numbers can be found in NAVSUP Publication 4400, the Afloat Shopping Guide. The
federal supply classification (FSC) number for batteries is 6135. You can also find more information on
batteries in NEETS, Module 1, Introduction to Matter, Energy, and Direct Current.

Cables

     Tables 1-8 and 1-9 contain type, construction, and application data on shipboard cable. These tables
contain current, discontinued, and some recently obsolete types of cables and cords.


                         Table 1-8.—Types and Construction/Description of Shipboard Cable
    CVSF          400-Hz aircraft servicing: three synthetic rubber insulated conductors and one
                  uninsulated conductor, overall polychloroprene jacket.
    DLT           Divers lifeline and telephone: four rubber insulated conductors cabled around an
                  insulated steel core, reinforced polychloroprene jacket overall.
    DSS           Double conductor, shielded: rubber insulation, overall braided shield, polychloroprene or
                  chlorosulfonated polyethylene jacket.
    DSWS          Double conductor, shielded: rubber insulation, overall braided shield, polychloroprene
                  jacket.
    FSS           Four conductors, shielded: rubber insulated, overall braided shield, polychloroprene or
                  chlorosulfonated polyethylene jacket.
    JAS           Jet aircraft servicing: four rubber insulated conductors, two conductors Navy size 250,
                  two conductors Navy size 6, reinforced polychloroprene jacket.
    MCSF-4        Multiple conductor, acoustic minesweeping, power: two American Wire Gauge (AWG)
                  6 and two AWG 1 conductors, rubber insulation, reinforced polychloroprene jacket.
    MSP           Multiple conductor: fifty-nine conductors, sixteen AWG 22 having fluorocarbon
                  insulation and a braided copper shield, eighteen AWG 20 having polyvinyl chloride
                  insulation and a braided copper shield (nine singles, one triad and three pairs, each
                  shielded), twenty-five Navy size 3 having polyvinyl insulation (eight pairs and three
                  triads, each shielded), polychloroprene jacket.
    MSPW          Multiple conductor: fifty-nine conductors; sixteen AWG 22 having fluorocarbon
                  insulation and a braided copper shield, eighteen AWG 20 having polyvinyl chloride
                  insulation and a braided copper shield (nine singles, one triad and three pairs, each
                  shielded), twenty-five Navy size 3 having polyvinyl insulation (eight pairs and three
                  triads, each shielded), polychloroprene jacket, watertight.
    MWF           Multiple conductor: rubber or cross-linked polyethylene insulation, arctic type neoprene
                  jacket.
    S2S           Two conductors, shielded: cross-linked polyethylene insulations, braided shield, rubber
                  insulation over shield, outer-braided shield; reinforced rubber, insulated, arctic type
                  polychloroprene jacket.
    THOF          Three conductors, heat and oil resistant, flexible: synthetic rubber insulation standard
                  thermoplastic jacket on THOF-42, and polychloroprene jacket on THOF-400 and THOF-
                  500.
    TRF           Single conductor, flexible: rubber insulation, polychloroprene jacket.
    TPUM-6        Telephone, portable, multiple conductor: copper-clad steel conductors, polypropylene
                  insulation, six pairs cabled, polyurethane jacket applied in two layers.
    TRXF          Single conductor: polychloroprene jacket.
    TSP           Twisted pairs: polyvinyl chloride insulated, special thermoplastic jacket, watertight,
                  unarmored.
    TSPA          Twisted pairs: polyvinyl chloride insulated, special thermoplastic jacket, watertight,
                  armored.




                                                     1-58
                     Table 1-8.—Types and Construction/Description of Shipboard Cable—Continued
   TSS                 Three conductors, special purpose, shielded: rubber insulation, overall braided
                       shield, polychloroprene or chlorosulfonated polyethylene jacket.
   1SWF                Singles, shielded: polyethylene insulation, braided shield on each conductor, arctic
                       type polychloroprene jacket.
   2SWF                Pairs, shielded, watertight, flexible: polyethylene insulation, braided shield over
                       each pair, arctic type polychloroprene jacket.
   5SS                 Five conductors, shielded, sonar: rubber insulation, braided shield on one conductor
                       only, and a braided shield over the assembled five conductors, polychloroprene
                       jacket overall.
   7SS                 Seven conductors, shieled: rubber insulation, overall braided shield, polychloroprene
                       or chlorosulfonated polyethylene jacket.




                                      Table 1-9.—Shipboard Cable Application Data
                                                                           Cable type 2
                                                      Non-flexing              Repeated flexing service
   Application                                        service
   Outboard submersible:
   For hydrophones, transducers, outboard dial        MSPW                     MSP, TSP, 5S5,
   telephones, retractable antennae and similar       TSPA                     S2S, DSS, FSS,
   equipment. Types MWF, 1SWF, and 2SWF are           1PR-A20E                 TSS, MWF, DSWS,
   for hydrophones, transducers, and telephone        1PR-16                   MCSF, 1SWF, 2SWF,
   lines in the weather. Types 1PR-A20E, 1PR-         7PR-16                   TPUM
   16, 7PR-16, 3PR-16, 1Q-16, ITR-16, and             2SPR-16
   7SPR-16S are only for submarine outboard use.      3PR-16
                                                      1Q-16
                                                      ITR-16 7SPR-16S
   Welding electrode circuit                                                     TRF
                                                                                 TRXF
   Shore-to-ship power                                                           THOF-400 THOF-500
   Diver's line and telephone                                                    DLT
   400-Hz aircraft servicing                                                     CVSF-4
   DC aircraft servicing                                                         JAS-250
   1/ The order of listing of cables for general application data has no significant meaning for their usage.
   2/ Many cables are manufactured in variations of armored, unarmored, and unarmored with overall
   shielding.



    Table 1-10 provides data on the allowable temperature ratings and current-carrying capacities (in
amperes) of some single copper conductors in free air at a maximum ambient temperature of 86º F (30º
C). With temperatures greater than 86º F, the current-carrying capacity would be less.




                                                        1-59
           Table 1-10.—Current-Carrying Capacities (in Amperes) of Some Single Copper Conductors at 30º C
    Size        Moisture Resistant     Varnished Cambric       Silicone Rubber or   Polytetra-
                Rubber or              or Heat Resistant       Fluorinated Ethylene Fluoroethylene
                Thermoplastic          Thermoplastic           Propylene (FEP)      (Teflon)
      0000                300                   385                  510                       850
       000                260                   330                  430                       725
        00                225                   285                  370                       605
         0                195                   245                  325                       545
         1                165                   210                  280                       450
         2                140                   180                  240                       390
         3                120                   155                  210                       335
         4                105                   135                  180                       285
         6                 80                   100                  135                       210
         8                 55                    70                  100                       115
        10                 40                    55                   75                       110
        12                 25                    40                   55                        80
        14                 20                    30                   45                        60



     More information about electrical cable used aboard ship can be found in NEETS, Module 4,
Introduction to Electrical Conductors, Wiring Techniques, and Schematic Reading; Cable Comparison
Guide, NAVSEA 0981-052-8090; and Design Data Book, NAVSEA 0902-LP-006-0000, Section DDS-
304-1. Cable supply information can be found in NAVSUP Publication 4400, Afloat Shopping Guide,
under federal supply classification (FSC) 6145. Hook-up or chassis wire is covered in Military
Specification 76B (MIL-W-76B). Table 1-11 shows the current-carrying capacity or AMPACITY of
equipment hook-up wire.




                                                      1-60
                      Table 1-11.—Current-Carrying Capacity of Equipment Hook-up Wire—Continued


                                                                       Maximum Current in Amperes

          Wire Size                Copper                   Copper Wire                  Aluminum Wire
                                   Conductor
                                   (100°C)
                                   Nominal
                   Circular        Resistance          Wiring in      Wiring        Wiring in     Wiring
     AWG           Mils            (Ohms/1000 ft)      Free Air       Confined      Free Air      Confined
          32               63.2             188.0             0.53          0.32
          30              100.5             116.0             0.86          0.52
          28              159.8              72.0             1.4           0.83
          26              254.1              45.2             2.2           1.3
          24              404.0              28.4             3.5           2.1
          22              642.4              22.0             7.0           5.0
          20             1022                13.7            11.0           7.5
          18             1624                6.50             16            10
          16             2583                5.15             22            13
          14             4107                3.20             32            17
          12             6530                2.02             41            23
          10           10 380                1.31             55            33
           8           16 510               0.734             73            46           60            38
           6           26 250               0.459            101            60           83            50
           4           41 740               0.290            135            80          108            66
           2           66 370               0.185            181           100          152            82
           1           93 690               0.151            211           125          174           105
           0          105 000               0.117            245           150          202           123
          00          133 100               0.092            283           175          235           145
         000          167 800               0.074            328           200          266           162
        0000          211 600               0.059            380           225          303           190




      Table 1-12 lists the preferred general purpose rf cable selected by the armed services as the most
satisfactory types to be used in electronics equipment.




                                                     1-61
                                 Table 1-12.—Preferred General Purpose RF Cable
      Jan Type         Overall          Impedance          Operating                    Remarks
                    Diameter (ins)       (OHMS)           Voltage (Volts
                                                              RMS)
    RG-11A/U       0.412              75.0                    5,000        Medium size, flexible video cable
    RG-12A/U       0.475              75.0                    5,000        Same as RE-11A/U, armored
    RG-34B/U       0.630              75.0                    6,500        Large size, high power, low
                                                                           attenuation, flexible
    RG-35B/U       0.945              75.0                   10,000        Large size, high power, low
                                                                           attenuation, video and
                                                                           communications, armored
    RG-55B/U       0.206              53.0                    1,900        Small size, double braid
    RG-58C/U       0.195              50.0                    1,900        Small size, flexible
    RG-59B/U       0.242              75.0                    2,300        Small size, video
    RG-84A/U       1.000              75.0                   10,000        Same as RG-35B/U, except with lead
                                                                           sheath vice armor for underground
                                                                           installation
    RG-85A/U       1.565              75.0                   10,000        Same as RG-84A/U except with
                                                                           special armor
    RG-164/U       0.870              75.0                   10,000        Same as RG-35B/U except no armor
    RG-212/U       0.332              50.0                    3,000        Wave, formerly RG-5B/U
    RG-213/U       0.405              50.0                    5,000        Medium size, flexible, formerly RG-
                                                                           8A/U
    RG-214/U       0.425              50.0                    5,000        Medium size, double braid, flexible,
                                                                           formerly RG-9B/U
    RG-215/U       0.475              50.0                   15,000        Same as RG-214/U but armored.
                                                                           Formerly RG-10A/U
    RG-216/U       0.425              75.0                    5,000        Medium size, flexible video and
                                                                           communication, formerly RG-
                                                                           13A/U
    RG-217/U       0.545              50.0                    7,000        Medium size, power transmission
                                                                           line, formerly RG-14A/U
    RG-218/U       0.870              50.0                   11,000        Large size, low attenuation, high
                                                                           power transmission line, formerly
                                                                           RG-17A/U
    RG-219/U       0.945              50.0                   11,000        Same as RG-218/U, but armored,
                                                                           formerly RG-18A/U
    RG-220/U       1.120              50.0                   14,000        Very large, low attenuation, high
                                                                           power transmission line, formerly
                                                                           RG-19A/U
    RG-221/U       1.195              50.0                   14,000        Same as RG-220/U but armored,
                                                                           formerly RG-20A/U
    RG-223/U       0.216              50.0                    1,900        Small size, double braid, formerly
                                                                           RG-55A/U
    RG-224/U       0.615              50.0                    7,000        Same as RG-217/U but armored.



     Specifications on special types of rf cable can be found in the Military Standardization Handbook
216 (MIL-HDBK-216).




                                                   1-62
Connectors

    General purpose connectors and rf connectors are covered in this section. We'll cover the general
purpose connectors first.

     General purpose connectors were formerly designated with the prefix "AN." You may find older
connectors with this prefix. The superseding connector has the same part number except the "AN" has
been replaced by "MS." Table 1-13 shows the method used to break down a connector for identification.
This breakdown is for MIL-C-5015 connectors. Identification breakdown for other MIL-C connectors can
be found in Naval Shore Electronics Criteria, Installation Standards and Practices, NAVELEX 0280-
LP-900-8000.




                                                  1-63
Table 1-13.—MS Connector Identification




              1-64
    Supply information on connectors can be found in NAVSUP Publication 4400, Afloat Shopping
Guide, under federal supply classification (FSC) 5935.

     Insert arrangements for MS type connectors, MIL-C-5015, are shown in figure 1-23. Alternate
positions of connector inserts are shown in figure 1-24.




                          Figure 1-23.—Insert arrangements type connectors, MIL-C-5015.




                                                   1-65
Figure 1-23.—Insert arrangements type connectors, MIL-C-5015. —Continued.




                               1-66
                                Figure 1-24.—Alternate positions of connector inserts.



     MIL-C-5015, MIL-C-26482, and MIL-C-26500 connectors are designated with an MS number such
as MS3101. MIL-C-81511, MIL-C-83723, and other later specifications identify the connector by the
specification number, a slash, and the connector number. For example: MIL-C-81511/3.

     Rf connectors and coaxial cable assemblies are used to carry radio frequency (rf) power from one
point to another with a known rate of loss. Rf connectors are available as plugs, jacks, panel jacks, and
receptacles. Plugs and jacks are attached to the ends of coaxial cables; panel jacks and receptacles are
mounted to panels and chassis.

     Baby N connector (BNC) series connectors are small, lightweight, and feature a quick
connect/disconnect, bayonet-lock coupling. The connectors use small rf cables such as RG-58/U or RG-
59/U and operate up to peak voltages of 500 volts. Manufacture is under Military Specification C-3608A
(MIL-C-3608A). Figure 1-25 shows three typical BNC connectors. Figure 1-26 shows you how to attach
BNC connectors to coaxial cable. Table 1-14 indicates which BNC connector to use with what coaxial
cable type.




                                                     1-67
        Figure 1-25.—Typical BNC connectors.




Figure 1-26.—Attaching BNC connectors to coaxial cable.


                      1-68
                            Table 1-14.—BNC Series Connectors with Associated Cables
            Plug                 Jack              Panel Jack            For Use With Cable Types
    Improved Version:
    UG-88E/U                UG-89C/U            UG-291C/U            RG-55/U, 58/U and 223/U
    UG-260D/U               UG-261C/U           UG-262C/U            RG-59/U, 62/U and 71/U
    Captivated Contact Version (Amphenol):
    31-301                  31-302              31-300               RG-55/U, 58/U, 141/U and 142/U
    31-304                  31-305              31-303               Rg-59/U, 62/U, 71/U and 140/U



     HN series connectors have a 50-ohm impedance and threaded coupling connectors designed for
high-voltage applications. These connectors are weatherproof. The frequency range is 0-4 gigahertz. The
HN series is used with medium size coaxial cable such as RG-8/U, RG-9/U, RG-87/U, RG-213/U, RG-
214/U, and RG-225/U. Figure 1-27 shows three typical HN connectors. Figure 1-28 shows how HN
connectors are attached to coaxial cable. Table 1-15 indicates which HN connector to use with what
coaxial cable type.

    N series connectors are low-voltage, 50-ohm, threaded coupling connectors designed for use with
small and medium size rf cable. They have a 1,000 volts peak rating and are weatherproof. There is a
group of N series connectors that are 70 ohms and are numbered UG-98A/U and UG-96A/U. These 70-
ohm N connectors are designed for cables such as RG-61C, RG-11/U, and RG-13/U. The 70-ohm
connectors will not mate with 50-ohm connectors of this series. Figure 1-29 shows three typical N series
connectors. Figure 1-30 illustrates the method used to attach N connectors to coaxial cable. Table 1-16
shows which N connector to use with what rf cable type.




                                        Figure 1-27.—Typical HN connectors.




                                                    1-69
                              Figure 1-28.—Attaching HN connectors to coaxial cable.



                             Table 1-15.—HN Series Connectors with Associated Cables
       Plug                Jack                Panel Jack            For Use With Cable Types

    *UG-59E/U         *UG-60E/U              *UG-61E/U              RG8/U, 9/U,
   **UG-1213/U       **UG-1214/U            **UG-1215/U             213/U and 214/U
        Improved Version; **Captivated Contact Version



     C series connectors are weatherproof, quick-connect/disconnect, bayonet-locking type connectors.
They are used with medium size cables, such as RG-5/U, RG-8/U, and RG-9/U. They operate up to a
peak of 1,000 volts and at frequencies up to 10 gigahertz. Their impedance is 50 ohms. Figure 1-31 shows
three typical C series connectors. Figure 1-32 shows you how to attach the C series connectors to a
coaxial cable.




                                                   1-70
        Figure 1-29.—Typical N connectors.




Figure 1-30.—Attaching N connectors to coaxial cable.




                     1-71
                        Table 1-16.—N Series Connectors with Associated Cables
Plug             Jack                Panel Jack          For Use With Cable Types

Improved Version:
UG-18D/U          UG-20D/U           UG-19D/U            RG-5/U, 6/U, 21/U and
                                                         212/U
UG-21E/U           UG-23E/U          UG-23E/U            RG-8/U, 9/U, 213/U and
UG-594A/U                            UG-160D/U           214/U
UG-536B/U                                                RG-55/U and 58/U
Captivated Contact Version:
UG-1185/U          UG-1186/U         UG-1187/U           RG-8/U,9/U,213/
                                                         U AND 214/U




                                 Figure 1-31.—Typical C connectors.




                                             1-72
                        Figure 1-32.—Attaching C connectors to coaxial cable.




                       Table 1-17.—C Series Connectors with Associated Cables
    Plug              Jack               Panel Jack             For Use With Cable Types

UG-573B/U         UG-572A/U          UG-570A/U                 RG-8/U, 9/U, 213/U and
UG-701B/U                            UG-571A/U                 214/U
UG-626B/U         UG-633A/U          UG-629A/U                 RG-5/U, 6/U, and 212/U
                                     UG-630A/U
UG-707A/U
                                                               RG-14/U and 217/U


You can find more information on rf connectors in Military Handbook 216 (MIL-HDBK-216).




                                             1-73
Insulation, Heat Shrinkable Sleeving (Shrink, Tubing), and Cable Straps

     Heat shrinkable sleeving is intended for use as a snug-fitting electrical insulator. It is used to insulate
wire bundles, splices, bus bars, connectors, terminals, metal, or fibrous tubing. It is also used as extra
insulation over hotspot areas and as a cable blast shield in rocket launchings. Heat shrinkable sleeving is
found under Military Specification I-23053C (MIL-1-23053C). Part numbers under this military
specification are coded as follows:




     Color code designations are:


         DESIGNATOR                 COLOR                DESIGNATOR                  COLOR

     0                       Black                   7                        Violet (Purple)
     1                       Brown                   8                        Gray (Slate)
     2                       Red                     9                        White
     3                       Orange                  C                        Clear
     4                       Yellow                  P                        Pink
     5                       Green                   T                        Tan
     6                       Blue


     The particular uses for heat shrinkable sleeving depend on the specific properties described by the
individual specification sheet. Intended uses are indicated below:




                                                     1-74
Military
Part Number

         M23053/1:          Intended for use on heavy duty cables or harness systems such as ground support.
         /2 and /3:         Used for light-duty harnessing or wire bundling.
                /4:         Used for one-step potting, encapsulation, or moisture sealing and corrosion protection of
                            electrical components or terminations.
                  /5:       Used for light-duty harness jackets, wire color coding, marking, or identification.
                  /6:       Used for wire identification, marking, or strain relief.
                  /7:       Used for light-duty wire identification and component covering.
                  /8:       Used for wire or termination strain relief at elevated temperatures.
                  /9:       Canceled.
                 /10:       Used for high-or low-temperature applications or where resistance to melting in high-blast
                            flame is required.
                 /11:       Used where strain relief is necessary at high temperatures.
                 /12:       Used at high temperatures where resistance to flame is important to protect high-
                            temperature cable, components, and terminations.
                 /13:       Used in elevated-temperature applications or where exposure to elevated-temperature
                            solvents is expected.
                 /14:       Used as component and electronic lead strain relief where low expansion ratios are
                            satisfactory. Operates over a fairly wide temperature range.
                 /15:       Used for repair of heavy duty cables and splice covers.
                  /16       Used on heavy duty cables or harness systems that are subjected to high levels of physical
                            abuse and exposure to fuels and oils coupled with high-and low- temperature extremes.



    Tables 1-18 and 1-19 provide part numbers for two types of shrinkable tubing, M23053/5 and
M23053/4. These were chosen because of their wide range of sizes (M23053/5) and their abilities to
provide potting, encapsulating, or moisture sealing of electrical components (M23053/4).


                                      Table 1-18.—Shrinkable Tubing Part Numbers

                        Military                 As supplied                 After unrestricted
                                                                              shrinkage
                    Part Number
                                                  I.D. min.                     I. D. max.
                    Class 1                                Inches                       Inches
              M23053/5-101-*                 .046                           .023
              M23053/5-102-*                 .063                           .031
              M23053/5-103-*                 .093                           .046
              M23053/5-104-*                 .125                           .062
              M23053/5-105-*                 .187                           .093
              M23053/5-106-*                 .250                           .125
              M23053/5-107-*                 .375                           .187
              M23053/5-108-*                 .500                           .250
              M23053/5-109-*                 .750                           .375
              M23053/5-110-*                1.000                           .500
              M23053/5-111-*                1.500                           .750
              M23053/5-112-*                2.000                         1.000
              M23053/5-113-*                3.000                         1.500
              M23053/5-114-*                4.000                         2.000
              * Asterisk in the part number shall be replaced by color code designations.



                                                       1-75
                                    Table 1-19.—Shrinkable Tubing Part Numbers

                     Military                  As supplied                 After unrestricted

                   Part Number                                                 shrinkage

                                                I.D. min.                      I.D. max.
                    Class 1                              Inches                        Inches
             M23053/4-101-*           .125                           .023
             M23053/4-102-*           .187                           .060
             M23053/4-103-*           .250                           .080
             M23053/4-104-*           .375                           .135
             M23053/4-105-*           .500                           .195
             M23053/4-106-*           .750                           .313
             M23053/4-107-*           1.000                          .400
             M23053/4-108-*           .300                           .050
             Class 2
             M23053/4-201-*           .238                           .125
             M23053/4-202-*           .355                           .187
             M23053/4-203-*           .475                           .250
             M23053/4-204-*           .712                           .375
             M23053/4-205-*           .950                           .500
             M23053/4-206-*           1.425                          .750
             Class 1 = Semi-rigid, flame retardant
             Class 2 = Flexible, flame retardant
             * Asterisk in the part number shall be replaced by color code designations.



     When ordering, you should replace the asterisk (*) in the part number with the color code
designation.

    For example: The part number for M23053/4, one-half inch, class 1, black shrinkable tubing would
be M23053/4-105-0.




                                                     1-76
     Table 1-20 provides data on adjustable nylon cable straps. These straps are adjustable only in one
direction. They are not designed to be loosened.


                                  Table 1-20.—Adjustable Nylon Cable Strap Data




Fuses and Circuit Breakers

     New type military fuse designations can be identified by using table 1-21. Old style military fuse
designations can be identified by using table 1-22.




                                                   1-77
Table 1-21.—New Style Military Fuse Identification




Table 1-22.—Old Style Military Fuse Identification




                   1-78
     Commercial fuse identification and a fuse cross-reference can be found in NEETS, Module 3,
Introduction to Circuit Protection, Control, and Measurement; and in Military Standard 1360A (MIL-
STD-1360A). These will assist you in selecting or identifying fuses.

     Circuit breakers are too numerous to cover in this text. They are used in houses, vehicles, ships, and
airplanes. Military Standard 1498 (MIL-STD-1498) contains information to help you select or identify
circuit breakers.

Classification of Rf Emissions

    The system of designating rf emissions is arranged according to modulation type, mode, and
supplementary characteristics. For example: A3B indicates amplitude modulation, telephony, two
independent sidebands, and a suppressed carrier. Table 1-23 will assist you in breaking down the
emission classification code.
                                           Table 1-23.—Emission Types
               Emission                                                       Type

               Modulation Types
               Amplitude                                                       A
               Frequency                                                       F
               Pulse                                                           P
               Modulation (Transmission Mode)
               None                                                            0
               Telegraphy (keyed r-f carrier)                                  1
               Telegraphy (tone)                                               2
               Telephony                                                       3
               Facsimile                                                       4
               Television                                                      5
               Four Channel Diplex Telegraphy                                  6
               Multichannel Voice Frequency Telegraphy Complex                 7
               Forms
               Supplemental Characteristics
               Double Sideband                                                 none
               Single Sideband
               -reduced carrier                                                A
               -full carrier                                                   H
               -suppressed carrier                                             J
               Two Independent Sidebands
               -suppressed carrier                                             B
               Vestigial Sideband Pulse                                        C
               -amplitude modulated                                            D
               -width modulated                                                E
               -phase modulated                                                F
               -code modulated                                                 G
               *Capital or lower case letter
               **Commercial practice is to reduce carrier 20 dB, to provide sufficient
               carrier for receiver afc lock-in, where afs receivers are used.

               Note: a number preceding the emission designation indicates the
               bandwidth in kilohertz.


                                                   1-79
Conversion and Equivalent Tables

     Table 1-24 provides the multiplying factors necessary to convert from one unit of measure to another
and vice versa.


                                         Table 1-24.—Conversion Chart
                                                                                    Conversely,
    To Convert                   To                            Multiply By          Multiply By
    Acres                        Square feet                   4.356 x 104          2.296 х 10-5
    Acres                        Square meters                 4047                 2.471 х 10-4
    Ampere-hour                  Coulombs                      3600                 2.778 х 10-4
    Amperes                      Microamperes                  1,000,000            0.000,001
    Amperes                      Milliamperes                  1,000                0.001
    Amperes per sq cm            Amperes per sq in             6.452                0.1550
    Amperes-turns                Gilberts                      1.257                0.7958
    Amperes-turns per cm         Amperes-turns per inch        2.540                0.3937
    Amperes-turns per cm         Oersteds                      1.257                0.7958
    Ampere-turns per in          Oersteds                      0.495                2.02
    Ampere-turns per meter       Oersteds                      .01257               79.58
    Ampere-turns per weber       Gilberts per maxwell          1.257 х 10-8         7.958 х 107
    Atmospheres                  MM of mercury at 0º C         760                  1.316 х 10-8
    Atmospheres                  Feet of water at 4º C         33.90                2.950 х 10-2
    Atmospheres                  Inches of mercury at 0º C     29.92                3.342 х 10-2
    Atmospheres                  Kilograms per sq meter        1.033 х 104          9.678 х 10–5
    Atmospheres                  Pounds per sq inch            14.70                6.804 х 10-2
    BTU                          Foot-pounds                   778.3                1.285 х 10-3
    BTU                          Joules                        1054.8               9.480 х 10-4
    BTU                          Kilogram-calories             0.2520               3.969
    BTU per hour                 Horsepower-hours              3.929 х 10–4         2545
    Bushels                      Cubic feet                    1.2445               0.8036
    Celsius (Centigrade) deg     Fahrenheit deg                (º C х 9/5) + 32     (º F - 32) х 5/9
    Circular Mils                Sq centimeters                5.067 х 10-6         1.973 х 105
    Circular mils                Square mils                   0.7854               1.273
    Cubic feet                   Cords                         7.8125 х 10-3        128
    Cubic feet                   Gallons (liquid US)           7.481                0.1337
    Cubic feet                   Liters                        28.32                3.531 х 10-2
    Cubic inches                 Cubic centimeters             16.39                6.102 х 10-2
    Cubic inches                 Cubic feet                    5.787 х 10-4         1728
    Cubic inches                 Cubic meters                  1.639 х 10-5         6.102 х 10-4
    Cubic inches                 Gallons (liquid US)           4.329 х 10-3         231
    Cubic meters                 Cubic feet                    35.31                2.832 х 10-2
    Cubic meters                 Cubic yards                   1.381                0.7646
    Degrees (angle)              Radians                       1.745 х 10-2         57.30
    Dynes                        Pounds                        2.248 х 10-6         4.448 х 105
    Ergs                         Foot-pounds                   7.367 х 10-8         1.356 х 107
    Fards                        Microtarads                   1,000,000            0.000,001
    Farads                       Picofarads                    1,000,000,000,000    0.000,000,000,001
    Fathoms                      Feet                          6                    0.16666



                                                  1-80
                          Table 1-24.—Conversion Chart—Continued
                                                                    Conversely,
To Convert              To                          Multiply By     Multiply By
Feet                    Centimeters                 30.48           3.281 х 10-2
Feet                    Varas                       0.3594          2.782
Feet of water at 4º C   Inches of mercury at 0º C   0.8826          1.133
Feet of water at 4º C   Kilograms per sq meter      304.8           3.281 х 10-3
Feet of water at 4º C   Pounds per sq foot          62.43           1.602 х 10-2
Foot-pounds             Horsepower-hours            5.050 х 10 –7   1.98 х 10-6
Foot-pounds             Kilogram-meters             0.1383          7.233
Foot-pounds             Kilowatt-hours              3.766 х 10-7    2.655 х 106
Gallons                 Cubic meters                3.785 х 10-8    264.2
Gallons (liquid US)     Gallons (liquid Br Imp)     0.8327          1.201
Gausses                 Lines per sq inch           6.452           0.1550
Gilberts per cm         Oersteds                    1               1
Grains (for humidity    Pounds (avoirdupois)        1.429 х 10-4    7000
calculations)
Grams                   Dynes                       980.7           1.020 х 10-3
Grams                   Grains                      15.43           6.481 х 10-2
Grams                   Ounces (avoirdupois)        3.527 х 10-2    28.35
Grams                   Poundals                    7.093 х 10-2    14.10
Grams per cm            Pounds per inch             5.600 х 10–3    178.6
Grams per cu cm         Pounds per cu in            3.613 х 10-3    27.68
Grams per sq cm         Pounds per sq ft            2.0481          0.4883
Hectares                Acres                       2.471           0.4047
Henrys                  Microhenrys                 1,000,000       0.000,001
Henrys                  Millihenrys                 1000            0.001
Henrys per meter        Gausses per Oersted         7.958 х 105     1.257 х 10–6
Horsepower (boiler)     BTU per hour                3.347 х 104     2.986 х 10-5
Horsepower (metric)     BTU per minute              41.83           2.390 х 10-2
(542.5 ft-lb per sec)
Horsepower (metric)     Ft-lb per minute            3.255 х 104     3.072 х 10-5
(542.5 ft-lb per sec)
Horsepower (metric)     Kilogram-calories           10.54           9.485 х 10-2
(542.5 ft-lb per sec)   per min
Horsepower              BTU per minute              42.41           2.357 х 10-2
(550 ft-lb per sec)
Horsepower              Ft-lb per minute            3.3 х 104       3.030 х 10-5
(550 ft-lb per sec)
Horsepower              Kilowatts                   0.745           1.342
(550 ft-lb per sec)
Horsepower              Watts                       746             1.342 х 10-3
(550 ft-lb per sec)
Horsepower (metric)     Horsepower                0.9863            1.014
(542.5 ft-lb per sec)   (550 ft-lb per sec)
Horsepower              Kilogram-calories per min 10.69             9.355 х 10-2
(550 ft-lb per sec)




                                           1-81
                              Table 1-24.—Conversion Chart—Continued
                                                                       Conversely,
To Convert                  To                          Multiply By    Multiply By
Inches                      Centimeters                 2.540          3.3937
Inches                      Feet                        8.33 х 10-2    12
Inches                      Miles                       1.578 х 10-5   6.336 х 104
Inches                      Mil                         1000           0.001
Inches                      Yards                       2.778 х 10-2   36
Inches of mercury at 0º C   Pounds per sq inch          0.4912         2.036
Inches of water at 4º C     Kilograms per sq meter      25.40          3.937 х 10-2
Inches of water at 4º C     Ounces per sq inch          0.5782         1.729
Inches of water at 4º C     Pounds per sq foot          5.202          0.1922
Inches of water at 4º C     Inches of mercury           7.355 х 10-2   13.60
Joules                      Foot-pounds                 0.7376         1.356
Joules                      Ergs                        10 7           10-3
Kilogram-calories           Kilogram-meters             426.9          2.343 х 103
Kilogram-calories           Kilojoules                  4.186          0.2389
Kilograms                   Tons, long                  9.842 х 10-4   1016
                            (avdp 2240 lb)
Kilograms                   Tons, short                 1.102 х 10-8   907.2
                            (avdp 2000 lb)
Kilograms                   Pounds (avoirdupois)        2.205          0.4536
Kilograms per sq meter      Pounds per sq foot          0.2048         4.882
Kilometers                  Feet                        3281           3.048 х 10-4
Kilovolts                   Volts                       1000           0.001
Kilowatt-hours              BTU                         3413           2.930 х 10-4
Kilowatt-hours              Foot-pounds                 2.655 х 106    3.766 х 10-7
Kilowatt-hours              Joules                      3.6 х 107      2.778 х 10-7
Kilowatt-hours              Kilogram-calories           860            1.163 х 10-3
Kilowatt-hours              Kilogram-meters             3.671 х 105    2.724 х 10-7
Kilowatt-hours              Pounds carbon oxidized      0.235          4.26
Kilowatt-hours              Pounds water evaporated     3.53           0.283
                            from and at 212º F
Kilowatt-hours              Pounds water raised from    24.52          4.078 х 10-2
                            32º to 212º F
Kilowatts                   Watts                       1000           0.001
Leagues                     Miles                       2.635          0.3795
Lines per inch 2            Gausses                     0.1550         6.452
Liters                      Bushels (dry, US)           2.838 х 10-2   35.24
Liters                      Cubic Centimeters           1000           0.001
Liters                      Cubic meters                0.001          1000
Liters                      Cubic inches                61.02          1.639 х 10-2
Liters                      Gallons (liq US)            0.2642         3.785
Liters                      Pints (liq US)              2.113          0.4732
Log N                       Log 10N                     0.4343         2.303
Lumens per sq ft            Foot-candles                1              1
Lux                         Foot-candles                0.0929         10.764
Maxwells                    Lines                       1              1
Maxwells                    Webers                      10-2           108



                                            1-82
                              Table 1-24.—Conversion Chart—Continued
                                                                         Conversely,
To Convert                  To                           Multiply By     Multiply By
Maxwells per cm2            Gausses                      1               1
Meters                      Yards                        1.094           0.9144
Meters                      Varas                        1.179           0.848
Meters per min              *Knots (naut mi per hour)    30.866          30.866
Meters per min              Feet per minute              3.281           0.3048
Meters per min              Kilometers per hour          0.06            16.67
Mhos                        Micromhos                    1,000,000       0.000,001
Microhms per cm cube        Microhms per inch cubs       0.3937          2.540
Miles (nautical             Feet                         6076.103        1.645 х 10-4
Miles (nautical)            Kilometers                   1.852           0.5396
Miles (statute)             Kilometers                   1.609           0.6214
Miles (statute)             *Miles (nautical)            0.8688          1.151
Miles (statute)             Fast                         5280            1.894 х 10-4
Miles par hour              Kilometers per mi            2.682 х 10-2    37.28
Miles per hour              Feet per minute              88              1.136 х 10-2
Miles par hour              *Knots (naut mi per hr)      0.8688          1.151
Miles per hour              Kilometers per hour          1.609           0.6214
Nepers                      Decibels                     8.686           0.1151
Picofarads                  Microfarads                  0.000,001       1,000,000
Pounds of water (dist)      Cubic feet                   1.603 х 10-2    62.38
Pounds of water (dist)      Gallons                      0.1198          8.347
Pounds per cu ft            Kilograms per cu meter       16.02           6.243 х 10-2
Pounds per cu inch          Pounds per cu foot           1728            5.787 х 10-4
Pounds per sq ft            Pounds per sq inch           6.944 х 10-3    144
Pounds per sq in            Kilograms per sq meter       703.1           1.442 х 10-3
Poundals                    Dynes                        1.383 х 104     7.233 х 10-5
Poundals                    Pounds (avoirdupois)         3.108 x 10-2    32.17
Radians                     Mils                         103             10-3
Radians                     Minutes                      3.438 x 103     2.909 х 10-4
Radians                     Seconds                      2.06265 х 105   4.848 х 10-6
Slugs                       Pounds                       32.174          3.108 х 10-2
Sq inches                   Circular mils                1.273 х 106     7.854 х 10-7
Sq inches                   Sq centimeters               6.452           0.1550
Sq feet                     Sq meters                    9.290 х 10-2    10.76
Sq miles                    Sq yards                     3.098 х 10-6    3.228 х 10-7
Sq miles                    Acres                        640             1.562 х 10-3
Sq miles                    Sq kilometers                2.590           0.3861
Sq millimeters              Circular mils                1973            5.067 х 10-4
Tons, short (avdp 2000      Tonnes (1000 kg)             0.9072          1.102
lb)
Tons, long (avdp 2240 lb)   Tonnes (1000 kg)             1.016           0.9842
Tons, long (avdp 2240 lb)   Tons, short (avdp 2000 lb)   1.120           0.8929
Tons, (U.S. Shipping)       Cubic feet                   40              0.025
Watts                       BTU per minute               5.689 х 10-2    17.58
Watts                       Ergs per second              107             10-7




                                            1-83
                                     Table 1-24.—Conversion Chart—Continued
                                                                                       Conversely,
     To Convert                   To                        Multiply By                Multiply By
     Watts                        Ft-lb per minute          44.26                      2.260 х 10-2
     Watts                        Horsepower (550 ft-lb per 1.341 х 10-3               745.7
                                  sec)
     Watts                        Horsepower (metric)       1.360 х 10-3               735.5
                                  (542.5 ft-lb per sec)
     Watts                        Kilogram-calories per min 1.433 х 10-2               69.77
     Webers                       Volt-seconds              .1                         1
     Webers per ampere-turn       Maxwell per gilbert       7.958 х 10-7               1.257 х 10-8
     Webers per Meter2            Gausses                   104                        10-4



Electrical, Electronic/Logic, and Fiber Optic Symbols.

     Figures 1-33, 1-34, and 1-35 contain symbols used in electrical, electronic/logic, and fiber optic
circuits.




                                                    1-84
Figure 1-33.—Electrical symbols.




          1-85
Figure 1-33.—Electrical symbols.—Continued.




                1-86
Figure 1-34.—Electronic/logic symbols.




             1-87
Figure 1-34.—Electronic/logic symbols.—Continued.




                   1-88
Figure 1-34.—Electronic/logic symbols.—Continued.




                   1-89
Figure 1-34.—Electronic/logic symbols.—Continued.



                   1-90
Figure 1-34.—Electronic/logic symbols.—Continued.


                   1-91
Figure 1-34.—Electronic/logic symbols.—Continued.


                   1-92
Figure 1-34.—Electronic/logic symbols.—Continued.




                      1-93
Figure 1-35.—Fiber optic symbols.


           1-94
                                   Figure 1-35.—Fiber optic symbols.—Continued.


Frequency Spectrum Designation

     The complete spectrum of communications frequencies is broken down into ranges or bands. The
United States practice is to designate a two- or three-letter abbreviation for the name. The practice of the
International Telecommunications Union (ITU) is to designate a number. Table 1-25 shows the bands and
their designators. Table 1-26 indicates the frequency spectrum broken down as to usage.


                                         Table 1-25.—Frequency Spectrum


         FREQUENCY                              DESIGNATOR                                IUT
                                                                                      DESIGNATOR

      BELOW 300 Hz             ELF (EXTREMELY LOW FREQUENCY)                                     --
      300 Hz - 3 kHz           ILF (INFRA LOW FREQUENCY) SOMETIMES                               --
                               VF (VOICE FREQUENCY)
      3 kHz - 30 kHz           VLF (VERY LOW FREQUENCY)                                           4
      30 kHz - 300 kHz         LF (LOW FREQUENCY)                                                 5
      300 kHz - 3 MHz          MF (MEDIUM FREQUENCY)                                              6
      3 MHz - 30 MHz           HF (HIGH FREQUENCY)                                                7
      30 MHz - 300 MHz         VHF (VERY HIGH FREQUENCY)                                          8
      300 MHz - 3 GHz          UHF (ULTRAHIGH FREQUENCY)                                          9
      3 GHz - 30 GHz           SHF (SUPERHIGH FREQUENCY)                                         10
      30 GHz - 300 GHz         EHF (EXTREMELY HIGH FREQUENCY)                                    11
      300 GHz – 3 THz          THF (TREMENDOUSLY HIGH FREQUENCY)                                 12




                                                    1-95
                                    Table 1-26.—Frequency Spectrum Usage
    DIVISION                   RANGE                     USAGE
        ELF                    Long                      Communication, Navigation,
                                                         Experimental
         ILF                   Long                      Communication, Navigation,
                                                         Experimental
         VLF                   Long                      Communication, Navigation
         LF                    Long Medium               Communication, Broadcasting, Navigation
         MF                    Medium                    Communication, Broadcasting,
                                                         Navigation
         HF                    Long                      Communication, Broadcasting
         VHF                                             Communication Television, Radar
         (Lower) (Upper)       Medium Beyond
                               horizon
         UHF                   Beyond line of sight      Communication
                               Line of sight             Radar
         SHF                   Line of sight             Radar, Doppler
         EHF                   Line of sight             Short-range radar
         THF                   Line of sight             Experimental


Television Channel Assignments

    Table 1-27 lists the VHF and UHF television channel frequencies. The video carrier is 1.25 MHz
above the lower channel limit. The sound carrier is .25 MHz below the upper channel limit. For example:
Channel 10 sound carrier is 197 MHz, and the video carrier is 193.25 MHz.




                                                 1-96
                Table 1-27.—Television Channel Frequencies
Channel        Band Limits                  Channel            Band Limits
                 (MHz)                                           (MHz)
       2   54-60                    43                       644-650
       3   60-66                    44                       650-656
       4   66-72                    45                       656-662
       5   76-82                    46                       662-668
       6   82-88                    47                       668-674
       7   174-180                  48                       674-680
       8   180-186                  49                       680-686
       9   186-192                  50                       686-692
      10   192-198                  51                       692-698
      11   198-204                  52                       698-704
      12   204-210                  53                       704-710
      13   210-216                  54                       710-716
      14   470-476                  55                       716-722
      15   476-482                  56                       722-728
      16   482-488                  57                       728-734
      17   488-494                  58                       734-740
      18   494-500                  59                       740-746
      19   500-506                  60                       746-752
      20   506-512                  61                       752-758
      21   512-518                  62                       758-764
      22   518-524                  63                       764-770
      23   524-530                  64                       770-776
      24   530-536                  65                       776-782
      25   536-542                  66                       782-788
      26   542-548                  67                       788-794
      27   548-554                  68                       794-800
      28   554-560                  69                       800-806
      29   560-566                  70                       806-812
      30   566-572                  71                       812-818
      31   572-578                  72                       818-824
      32   578-584                  73                       824-830
      33   584-590                  74                       830-836
      34   590-596                  75                       836-842
      35   596-602                  76                       842-848
      36   603-608                  77                       848-854
      37   608-614                  78                       854-860
      38   614-620                  79                       860-866
      39   620-626                  80                       866-872
      40   626-632                  81                       872-878
      41   632-638                  82                       878-884
      42   638-644                  83                       884-890




                               1-97
Joint Electronic Type Designation System (JETDS)

     This system, formerly known as the Joint Army-Navy (AN) nomenclature system, was designed so
that a common designation could be used for all the services' equipment. Figure 1-36 shows you how to
identify equipment in the JETDS (AN) System.




                           Figure 1-36.—Joint Electronics Type Designation System (AN).



Microcircuit Part Numbers.

     The military designator for microcircuits is M38510. Table 1-28 shows by example how the military
part number M38510/00104BCB is broken down.




                                                   1-98
                                 Table 1-28.—Microcircuit Part Number Breakdown
               1             2              3              4              5                 6
           M38510/      001            04            B              C                  B
           1. Military Specification Designator
           2. Detail Specification (Group of devices of similar function)
           3. Device Type (Specific part type in group)
           4. Device Class:
              Class A - Manual space program
              Class B - Avionics, space satellites
              Class C - Prototype, noncritical ground systems
           5. Case outline:
              A--1/4" х 1/4" Flat Pack 14 Pin
              B--1/4" х 1/8" Flat Pack 14 Pin
              C--Dip 14 Pin
              D--1/4" х 3/8" Flat Pack 14 Pin
              E--Dip 16 Pin
              F--1/4" х 3/8" Flat Pack 16 Pin
              G--Can to 99 8 Pin
              H--1/4" х 1/4" Flat Pack 10 Pin
              I--Can to 100 10 Pin
              J--Dip 24 Pin
              K--3/8" х 5/8" Flat Pack 24 Pin
              L--3/8" х 1/2" Flat Pack 24 Pin
              X--To 5
              Y--To 3
              Z--1/4" х 3/8" Flat Pack 24 Pin
           6. Lead finish:
              A--Hot Solder
              B--Tin Plate
              C--Gold Plate



     Table 1-29 is a microcircuit-part-number-to-circuit-type crossover list. By using this table and table
1-28, we find our example part number M38510/00104BCB is a 5400 microcircuit type in class B, with
14 pin DIP, and tin plate leads.




                                                    1-99
                   Table 1-29.—Microcircuit Part Numbers to Circuit Type Crossover List

 M38510/Ckt Type    M38510/Ckt Type       M38510/Ckt Type        M38510/Ckt Type           M38510/Ckt Type
00101/5430         00102/5420            00103/5410             00104/5400                00105/5404
00106/5412         00107/5401            00108/5405             00109/5403                00201/5472
00202/5473         00203/54107           00204/5476             00205/5474                00206/5470
00207/5479         00301/5440            00302/5437             00303/5438                00401/5402
00402/5423         00403/5425            00404/5427             00501/5450                00502/5451
00503/5453         00504/5454            00601/5482             00602/5483                00603/9304
00604/5480         00701/3121            00701/5486             00801/5406                00802/5416
00803/5407         00804/5417            00805/5426             00901/5495                00902/5496
00903/54164        00904/54165           00905/54194            00906/54195               00909/54198
00910/54166        01001/5442            01002/5443             01003/5444                01004/5445
01005/54145        01006/5446            01007/5447             01008/5448                01009/5449
01101/54181        01101/7181            01101/9341             01101/54182               01102/9342
01201/54121        01202/54122           01203/54123            01204/9601                01205/9602
01301/5492         01302/5493            01303/54160            01304/54163               01305/54162
01306/54161        01307/5490            01308/54192            01309/54193               01310/54196
01311/54197        01312/54177           01401/54150            01402/9312                01403/54153
01404/9309         01405/54157           01405/9322             01406/54151               01501/5475
01502/5477         01503/54116           01503/9308             01504/9314                01601/5408
01602/5409         01701/54174           01702/54175            01703/54173               01801/54170
01901/54180        01902/556             02001/54L30            02002/54L20               02003/54L10
02004/54L00        02005/54L04           02006/54L01            02006/54L03               02101/54L71
02102/54L72        02103/54L73           02104/54L78            02105/54L74               02201/54H72
02202/54H73        02203/54H74           02204/54H76            02205/54H101              02206/54H103
02301/54H30        02302/54H20           02303/54H10            02304/54H00               02305/54H04
02306/54H01        02307/54H22           02401/54H40            02501/54L90               02502/54L93
02503/54L193       02504/93L10           02505/93L16            02601/54L86               02603/7644
02701/54L02        02801/54L95           02802/54L164           02803/93L28               02804/93L00
02805/76L70        02901/54L42           02902/54L43            02903/54L44               02904/54L46
02905/54L47        02906/76L42A          02907/93L01            03001/15930               03001/930
03002/15935        03002/19535           03002/935              03002/940                 03003/15936
03003/936          03004/15946           03004/946              03005/15962               03005/962
03101/15932        03102/15944           03103/15957            03104/15958               03105/15933
03201/15951        03301/15945           03302/15948            03303/15950               03304/9094
03501/MH0026       03604/54LS96          04001/54H50            04002/54H51               04003/54H53
04004/54H54        04005/54H55           04101/54L51            04102/54L54               04103/54L55
04201/54L121       04202/54L122          04301/93L18            04401/93L24               04501/93L14
04502/93L08        04601/93L09           04602/93L12            04603/93L22               05001/4011A
05002/4012A        05003/4023A           05101/4013A            05102/4027A               05103/4043A
05201/4000A        05202/4001A           05203/4002A            05204/4025A               05301/4007A
05302/4019A        05303/4030A           05401/4008A            05501/4009A               05502/4010A
05503/4049A        05504/4050A           05505/4041A            05601/4017A               05602/4018A
05603/4020A        05604/4022A           05605/4024A            05701/4006A               05702/4014A
05703/4015A        05704/4021A           05705/4031A            05706/4034A               05801/4016A
05802/4066A        05901/4028A           06001/10501            06002/10502               06003/10505
06004/10506        06005/10507           06006/10509            06101/10531               06102/10531
06103/10576        06104/10535           06201/10504            06202/10597               06301/10524
06302/10525        07001/54S00           07002/54S03            07003/54S04               07004/54S05
07005/54S10        07006/54S20           07007/54S22            07008/54S30               07009/54S133
07010/54S134       07101/54S74           07102/54S112           07103/54S113              07104/54S114
07105/54S174       07106/54S175          07201/54S40            07301/54S02               07401/54S51
07402/54S64        07403/54S65           07501/54S86            07502/54S135              07601/54S194
07602/54S195       07701/54S138          07702/54S139           07703/54S280              07801/54S181
07802/54S182       07901/54S151          07902/54S153           07903/54S157              07904/54S158
07905/54S251       07906/54S257          07907/54S258           07908/54S253              08001/54S11
08002/54S15        08003/54S08           08004/54S09            08101/54S140              08201/54S85




                                               1-100
              Table 1-29.—Microcircuit Part Numbers to Circuit Type Crossover List—Continued

M38510/Ckt Type     M38510/Ckt Type       M38510/Ckt Type        M38510/Ckt Type        M38510/Ckt Type
10101/UA741        10101/52741           10101/741              10102/52747            10102/7A747
10102/747          10103/LM101A          10103/52101A           10104/LM108A           10104/52108A
10105/LH2101A      10106/LH2108A         10107/LM118            10108/1558             10201/LM723
10201/UA723        10201/52723           10201/723              10202/LM104            10203/LM105
10301/UA710        10301/52710           10301/710              10302/UA711            10302/52711
10302/711          10303/LM106           10303/52106            10304/LM111            10304/52111
10305/LH2111       10305/LM2111          10401/55107            10402/55108            10403/55114
10403/9614         10404/55115           10404/9615             10405/55113            10406/7831
10407/7832         10501/UA733           10501/52733            10601/LM102            10602/LM110
10602/52110        10603/LH2110          10603/LM2110           10701/LM109            10701/52109
10702/LM141H-05    10703/LM141H-12       10704/LM141H-15        10705/LM141H-24        10706/LM140K-05
10707/LM140K-12    10708/LM140K-15       10709/LM140K-24        10801/3018A            10802/3045
10901/SE555        10901/555             10902/SE556            11001/LM148            11002/LM149
11003/4141         11003/4156            11004/4136             11005/LM124            11101/DG181A
11102/DG182A       11103/DG184A          11104/DG185A           11105/DG187A           11106/DG188A
11107/DG190A       11108/DG191A          11201/LM139            11202/LM193            11301/DAC-08
11302/DAC-08A      11401/LF155           11402/LF156            11403/LF157            11404/LF155A
11405/LF156A       11406/LF157A          11501/LM120H-05        11502/79M05            11502/LM120H-12
11502/79M12        11503/LM120H-15       11503/79M15            11504/LM120H-24        11504/79M24
11505/LM120K-05    11505/7905            11506/LM120K-12        11506/7912             11507/LM120K-15
11507/7915         11508/LM120K-24       11508/7924             11901/061              11902/062
11903/064          11904/LF151           11904/071              11904/771              11905/LF153
11905/072          11905/772             11906/LF147            11906/074              11906/774
15001/5485         15002/9324            15101/5413             15102/5414             15102/7414
15103/54132        15201/54154           15201/9311             15202/54155            15203/54156
15204/8250         15205/8251            15206/8252             15206/9301             15301/54125
15302/54126        15401/54120           15501/MC3101           15501/54H08            15502/MC3106
15502/54H11        15503/MC3111          15503/54H21            15601/54147            15602/54148
15603/9318         15701/9338            15801/9321             15802/9317             15901/9300
15902/9328         16001/9334            16101/5432             16201/5428             16301/54365
16302/54366        16303/54367           16304/54368            20101/MCM5303          20101/54186
20102/MCM5304      20201/IM5603A         20201/IM5603           20201/54S387           20202/IM5623
20301/AM27S10      20301/5300-1          20301/7610             20301/82S126           20301/93417
20302/AM27S11      20302/5301-1          20302/7611             20302/82S129           20302/93427
20401/IM5604       20401/5305-1          20401/7620             20401/82S130           20401/93436
20402/IM5624       20402/5306-1          20402/7621             20402/82S131           20402/93446
20501/HHX7620-8    20502/HMX7621-8       20601/HMX7640-8        20601/5352-1           20601/7642
20601/82S136       20601/93452           20602/HMX7641-8        20602/5353-1           20602/7643
20602/82S137       20602/93453           20603/7644             20701/5330             20701/7602
20701/82S23        20702/5331            20702/7603             20702/82S123           20801/5340-1
20801/7640         20801/82S140          20801/93438            20802/5341-1           20802/7641
20802/82S141       20802/93448           20803/82S115           20804/5348-1           20805/5349-1
20901/7684         20901/82S184          20902/7685             20902/82S185           20903/5380-1
20903/7680         20903/82S180          20903/93450            20904/5381-1           20904/7681
20904/82S181       20904/93451           20905/82S2708          20905/93461            20906/93460
21001/53S1680      21001/76160           21001/82S190           21001/93510            21002/53S1681
21002/76161        21002/82S191          21002/93511            22001/2708             23001/93410
23002/93411        23003/93421           23004/93L420           23101/82S10            23102/82S11
23102/93425        23103/93L415          23104/93L425           23403/54LS244          23501/TMS4060
23502/TMS4050      23503/TMS4060         23504/TMS4050          23505/MM5280           23506/MM5280
23601/MCM6605      23602/MCM6604A        23602/MKB4096          23603/MCM6605          23604/MCM6604A
23604/MKB4096      23701/AM9130CFC       23702/AM9130AFC        23703/AM9130CDM        23703/AM9130CFM
23704/AM9130ADM    23704/AM9130AFM       23705/AM91L30CF        23706/AM91L30AF        23707/AM91L30CDM
23707/AM91L30CFM   23708/AM91L30ADM      23708/AM91L30AFM       23709/AM9140CFC        23710/AM9140AFC
23711/AM9140CDM    23711/AM9140CFM       23712/AM9140ADM        23712/AM9140AFM        23713/AM91L40CFC
23714/AM91L40AFC   23715/AM91L40CDM      23715/AM91L40CFM       23716/AM91L40ADM       23716/AM91L40AFM




                                               1-101
                 Table 1-29.—Microcircuit Part Numbers to Circuit Type Crossover List—Continued

  M38510/Ckt Type      M38510/Ckt Type       M38510/Ckt Type        M38510/Ckt Type        M38510/Ckt Type
 23901/54C929         23901/6508            23902/54C930           23902/6518             24001/2117
 24002/2117           24002/4116            30001/54LS00           30002/54LS03           30003/54LS04
 30004/54LS05         30005/54LS10          30006/54LS12           30007/54LS20           30008/54LS22
 30009/54LS30         30101/54LS73          30102/54LS74           30103/54LS112          30104/54LS113
 30105/54LS114        30106/54LS174         30107/54LS175          30108/54LS107          30109/54LS109
 30110/54LS76         30201/54LS40          30202/54LS37           30203/54LS38           30204/54LS28
 30301/54LS02         30302/54LS27          30303/54LS266          30401/54LS51           30401/9LS51
 30402/54LS54         30402/9LS54           30501/54LS32           30502/54LS86           30601/54LS194
 30602/54LS195        30603/54LS95          30605/54LS164          30606/54LS295          30607/54LS395
 30608/54LS165        30609/54LS166         30701/54LS138          30702/54LS139          30703/54LS42
 30704/54LS47         30801/54LS181         30901/54LS151          30902/54LS153          30903/54LS157
 30904/54LS158        30905/54LS251         30906/54LS257          30907/54LS258          30908/54LS253
 30909/54LS298        31001/54LS11          31002/54LS15           31003/54LS21           31004/54LS08
 31005/54LS09         31101/54LS85          31201/54LS83A          31202/54LS283          31301/54LS13
 31302/54LS14         31303/54LS132         31401/54LS123          31402/54LS221          31403/54LS122
 31501/54LS90         31502/54LS93          31503/54LS160          31504/54LS161          31505/54LS168
 31506/54LS169        31507/54LS192         31508/54LS193          31509/54LS191          31510/54LS92
 31511/54LS162        31512/54LS163         31513/54LS190          31601/54LS75           31602/54LS279
 31603/54LS259        31604/54LS375         31701/54LS124          31702/54LS324          31801/54LS261
 31901/54LS670        32001/54LS196         32002/54LS197          32003/54LS290          32004/54LS293
 32101/93415          32102/54LS26          32201/54LS365          32202/54LS366          32203/54LS367
 32204/54LS368        32301/54LS125         32302/54LS126          32401/54LS240          32402/54LS241
 32501/54LS273        32502/54LS373         32503/54LS374          32504/54LS377          32601/54LS155
 32602/54LS156        32701/54LS390         32702/54LS393          32703/54LS490          32801/54LS242
 32802/54LS243        32803/54LS245         32901/54LS280          33106/25LS174          33107/25LS175
 36001/54LS148        36002/54LS348         40001/6800             42001/8080A            42101/54S412
 42101/8212           42201/8224            42301/8228             44001/2901A            44101/2905
 44102/2906           44103/2907            44104/2915             44105/2916             44106/2917
 44201/2918           46001/9900A           47001/1802




    You can find more information on microcircuits by referring to Military Specification 38510 (MIL-
M-38510), Military Standard 1562D (MIL-STD-1562D), and NEETS, Module 14, Introduction to
Microelectronics.

Shipboard Announcing System

    Table 1-30 is a breakdown list of the shipboard announcing system matched to the circuit designator.




                                                  1-102
                 Table 1-30.—Shipboard Announcing System
CIRCUIT                             SYSTEM
    *1MC      General
    *2MC      Propulsion plant
    *3MC      Aviators'
     4MC      Damage Control
    *5MC      Flight Deck
    *6MC      Intership
     7MC      Submarine Control
     8MC      Troop administration and control
    *9MC      Underwater troop communication
   *10MC      Dock Control (obsolete)
              Turret (obsolescent)
   *11-16MC
   *17MC      Double Purpose Battery (obsolescent)
    18MC      Bridge
    19MC      Aviation Control
   *20MC      Combat Information (obsolescent)
    21MC      Captain's Command
    22MC      Electronic Control
    23MC      Electrical control
    24MC      Flag Command
    25MC      Ward Room (obsolescent)
    26MC      Machinery Control
    27MC      Sonar and Radar Control
   *28MC      Squadron (obsolescent)
   *29MC      Sonar Control and Information
    30MC      Special Weapons
    31MC      Escape trunk
    32MC      Weapons control
    33MC      Gunnery Control (obsolescent)
    34MC      Lifeboat (obsolescent)
    35MC      Launcher Captains'
    36MC      Cable Control (obsolete)
    37MC      Special Navigation (obsolete)
    38MC      Electrical (obsolete)
    39MC      Cargo Handling
    40MC      Flag Administrative
    41MC      Missile Control and Announce (obsolete)
    42MC      CIC Coordinating
    43MC      Unassigned
    44MC      Instrumentation Space
    45MC      Research operations
   *46MC      Aviation Ordnance and Missile Handling
    47MC      Torpedo Control
    48MC      Stores conveyor (obsolescent)
    49MC      Unassigned
    50MC      Integrated operational intelligence center
    51MC      Aircraft Maintenance and handling control
    52MC      Unassigned




                                1-103
                               Table 1-30.—Shipboard Announcing System—Continued
               CIRCUIT                                   SYSTEM
                   53MC          Ship Administrative
                   54MC          Repair officer's control
                   55MC          Sonar Service
                   56MC          Unassigned
                   57MC          Unassigned
                   58MC          Hanger Deck Damage Control
                   59MC          SAMID Alert

          *- Central amplifier systems


Shipboard Alarm and Warning Systems

     Table 1-31 is a breakdown list of the shipboard alarm and warning systems matched to a circuit
designator.




                                                  1-104
          Table 1-31.—Shipboard Alarm and Warning System
CIRCUIT                                SYSTEM
BZ        Brig cell door alarm and lock operating
BW        Catapult Bridle Arresterman safety Ind.
CX        Bacteriological Lab. & Pharmacy Comb. Refer Failure
DL        Secure communications space door position alarm
DW        Wrong direction alarm
EA        Reactor compartment or fireroom emergency alarm
1EC       Lubricating oil low pressure alarm-propulsion machinery
2EC       Lubricating oil low pressure alarm-auxiliary machinery
1ED       Generator high temperature alarm
2ED       Oxygen-nitrogen generator plant low temperature alarm
EF        Generator bearing high temperature alarm
EG        Propeller pitch control, hydraulic oil system low pressure alarm
EH        Gas turbine exhaust high temperature alarm
EJ        Feed pressure alarm
1EK       Pneumatic control air pressure alarm
3EK       Catapult steam cutoff and alarm
EL        Radar cooling lines temperature and flow alarm
EP        Gas turbine lubricating oil high temperature alarm
1EQ       Desuperheater high temperature alarm
2EQ       Catapult steam trough high temperature alarm
3ES       Reactor fill alarm
ET        Boiler temperature alarm
EV        Toxic vapor detector alarm
1EW       Propulsion engines circulating water high temperature
2EW       Auxiliary machinery circulating water high temperature
EZ        Condenser vacuum alarm
F         High temperature alarm
4F        Combustion gas and smoke detector
9F        High temperature alarm system-ASROC launcher
11F       FBM storage area temperature and humidity alarm
12F       Gyro ovens temperature and power failure alarm
FD        Flooding alarm
FH        Sprinkling alarm
FR        Carbon dioxide release alarm
FS        Flight Deck Readylight Signal system
FZ        Security alarm (CLASSIFIED)
4FZ       Torpedeo alarm (CLASSIFIED)
HF        Air flow indicator and alarm
LB        Steering Emergency Signal system
LS        Submersible steering gear alarm
MG        Gas turbine overspeed alarm
NE        Nuclear facilities air particle detector alarm
NH        Navigation Horn Operating System




                            1-105
                          Table 1-31.—Shipboard Alarm and Warning System—Continued
              CIRCUIT                                       SYSTEM
              QA               Air lock warning
              QD               Air filter and flame arrester pressure differential alarm, or
                               gasoline compartment exhaust blower alarm
              QX               Oxygen-nitrogen plant ventilation exhaust alarm
              RA               Turret emergency alarm
              RD               Safety observer warning
              RW               Rocket and torpedo warning
              4SN              Scavenging air blower high temperature alarm
              SP               Shaft position alarm
              TD               Liquid level alarm
              1TD              Boiler water level alarm
              2TD              Deaerating feed tank water level alarm
              5TD              Reactor compartment bilge tank alarm
              6TD              Primary shield tank, expansion tank level alarm
              7TD              Reactor plant fresh water cooling expansion tank level alarm
              8TD              Reactor secondary shield tank level alarm
              9TD              Lubricating oil sump tank liquid level alarm
              11TD             Induction air sump alarm
              12TD             Diesel oil sea water compensating system tank liquid level alarm
              14TD             Auxiliary fresh water tank low level alarm
              16TD             Pure water storage tank low level alarm
              17TD             Reserve feed tank alarm
              18TD             Effluent tanks and contaminated laundry tank high level alarm
              19TD             Sea water expansion tank low level alarm
              20TD             Gasoline drain tank high level alarm
              21TD             Moisture separator drain cooler high level alarm
              24TD             Reactor plant on board discharge tank level alarm
              25TD             Crossover drains high level alarm
              29TD             Sonar dome fill tank low level alarm
              30TD             JP-5 fuel drain tank high level alarm
              TW               Train Warning system
              W                Whistle Operating System



Sound-Powered Telephone Circuits

     Table 1-32 is a breakdown list of the sound-powered telephone circuits matched to circuit
designators.




                                                 1-106
            Table 1-32.—Sound-Powered Telephone Circuits
CIRCUIT                          PRIMARY CIRCUITS
                                           TITLE
JA        Captain's battle circuit
JC        Weapons control circuit
10JC      Missile battery control circuit
JD        Target detectors circuit
JF        Flag officer's circuit
1JG       Aircraft control circuit
2JG       Aircraft information circuit
2JG1      Aircraft strike coordination circuit
2JG2      Aircraft strike requirement and reporting circuit
2JG3      Aircraft information circuit CATTC direct line
3JG       Aircraft service circuit
4JG1      Aviation fuel and vehicular control circuit
4JG2      Aviation fueling circuit forward
4JG3      Aviation fueling circuit aft
5JG1      Aviation ordnance circuit
5JG2      Aviation missile circuit
6JG       Arresting gear and barricade control circuit
9JG       Aircraft handling circuit
10JG      Airborne aircraft information circuit
11JG      Optical landing system control circuit
JH        Switchboard cross connecting circuit
JL        Lookouts circuit
JK        Double purpose fuse circuit
JM        Mine control circuit
JN        Illumination control circuit
JO        Switchboard operators circuit
2JP       Dual purpose battery control circuit
4JP       Heavy machine gun control circuit
5JP       Light machine gun control circuit
6JP       Torpedo control circuit
8JP       ASW weapon control circuit
9JP       Rocket battery control circuit
10JP      Guided missile launcher control circuit
3JV       Engineer's circuit (boiler)
4JV       Engineer's circuit (fuel and stability)
5JV       Engineer's circuit (electrical)
6JV       Ballast control circuit
11JV      Waste control circuit
JW        Ship control bearing circuit
JX        Radio and signals circuit
2JZ       Damage and stability control
3JZ       Main deck repair circuit




                            1-107
           Table 1-32.—Sound-Powered Telephone Circuits—Continued
CIRCUIT                             PRIMARY CIRCUITS
                                              TITLE
4JZ           Forward repair circuit
5JZ           After repair circuit
6JZ           Midships repair circuit
7JZ           Engineer's repair circuit
8JZ           Flight deck repair circuit
9JZ           Magazine sprinkling and ordnance repair circuit forward
10JZ          Magazine sprinkling and ordnance repair circuit aft
11JZ          Gallery deck and island repair circuit




                Table 1-32.—Sound-Powered Telephone Circuits
CIRCUIT                            PRIMARY CIRCUITS
                                          TITLE

              Auxiliary Circuits
XJA           Auxiliary captain's battle circuit
X1JG          Auxiliary aircraft control circuit
X1JV          Auxiliary maneuvering and docking circuit
XJX           Auxiliary radio and signals circuit
X2JZ          Auxiliary damage and stability control circuit

              Supplementary Circuits
X1J           Ship administration circuit
X2J           Leadsman and anchor control circuit
X3J           Engineer watch officer's circuit
X4J           Degaussing control circuit
X5J           Machinery room control circuit
X6J1          Electronic service circuit
X6J7          ECM service circuit
X6J11-14      NTDS service circuits
X7J           Radio-sonde information circuit
10JP1         Starboard launcher circuit
10JP2         Port launcher circuit
11JP          FBM checkout and control circuit
JQ            Double purpose sight setters circuit
JR            Debarkation control circuit
JS            Plotters' transfer switchboard circuit
1JS           CIC information circuit
2JS           NTDS coordinating circuit No. 1
3JS           NTDS coordinating circuit No. 2
20JS1         Evaluated radar information circuit
20JS2         Evaluator's circuit
20JS3         Radar control officer's circuit




                                 1-108
          Table 1-32.—Sound-Powered Telephone Circuits—Continued
CIRCUIT                           PRIMARY CIRCUITS
                                         TITLE

                     SUPPLEMENTARY CIRCUITS (CONTINUED)
20JS4        Weapons liaison officer's circuit
21JS         Surface search radar circuit
22JS         Long range air search radar circuit
23JS         Medium range air search radar circuit
24JS         Range height finder radar circuit
25JS         AEW radar circuit
26JS         Radar information circuit
31JS         Track analyzer No. 1 air radar information check
32JS         Track analyzer No. 2 air radar information check
33JS         Track analyzer No. 3 air radar information check
34JS         Track analyzer No. 4 air radar information check
35JS         Raid air radar information circuit
36JS         Combat air patrol air radar information circuit
61JS         Sonar information circuit
80JS         ECM plotters' circuit
81JS         ECM information circuit
82JS         Supplementary radio circuit
JT           Target designation control circuit
1JV          Maneuvering and docking circuit
2JV          Engineers' circuit (engines)
X8J          Replenishment-at-sea circuit
X9J          Radar trainer circuit
X10J         Cargo transfer control circuit
X10J1        Cargo transfer circuit-Lower decks
X10J10       Cargo transfer circuit-Upper decks
X11J         Captain's and admiral's cruising circuit
X12J         Capstan control circuits
X13J         Aircraft crane control circuits
X14J         Missile handling and nuclear trunk crane circuit
X15J         SINS information circuit
X16J         Aircraft elevator circuit
X17J         5-inch ammunition hoist circuit
X18J         Machine gun ammunition hoist circuits
X19J         Missile component elevator circuit
X20J         Weapons elevator circuits
X21J         Catapult circuit
X22J         Catapult steam control circuit
X23J         Stores conveyor circuit
X24J         Cargo elevator circuit
X25J         Sonar service circuit
X26J         Jet engine test circuit
X28J         Dumbwaiter circuit




                               1-109
                           Table 1-32.—Sound-Powered Telephone Circuits—Continued
             CIRCUIT                               PRIMARY CIRCUITS
                                                          TITLE

                                     SUPPLEMENTARY CIRCUITS (CONTINUED)
             X29J             Timing and recording circuit
             X34J             Alignment cart service circuit
             X40J             Casualty communication circuit
             X41J             Special weapons shop service circuit
             X42J             Missile assembly and handling circuit
             X43J             Weapons system service circuit
             X44J             ASROC service circuit
             X45J             Special weapons security circuit
             X50J             Fog foam circuit
             X61J             Nuclear support facilities operations and handling circuit




Screw, Drill, and Tap Data

    Table 1-33 contains machine screw information, such as threads per inch, drill, and tap information.




                                                 1-110
                                    Table 1-33.—Screw, Drill, and Tap Data
       MACHINE               THREADS                  CLEARANCE
        SCREW                PER INCH                   DRILL                TAP DRILL

    NO.       DIA.       COARSE         FINE NO.             DIA.        NO.        DIA.
       0        0.060                      80           52       0.063        56        0.046
       1        0.073              64      72           47       0.078        53        0.059
       2        0.086              56      64           42       0.093        50        0.079
                                   48                                         47        0.079
       3        0.099                                   37       0.104
                                           56                                 45        0.082
                                   40                                         43        0.089
       4        0.112                                   31       0.120
                                           48                                 42        0.093
                                   40                                         38        0.101
       5        0.125                                   29       0.136
                                           44                                 37        0.104
                                   32                                         36        0.107
       6        0.138                                   27       0.144
                                           40                                 33        0.113
                                   32                                         29        0.136
       8        0.164                                   18       0.169
                                           36                                 29        0.136
                                   24                                         25        0.149
      10        0.190                                    9         .196
                                           32                                 21        0.159
                                   24                                         16        0.177
      12        0.216                                              .228
                                           28                                 14        0.182
                                   20                                          7          .201
     1/4        0.250                                            17/64
                                           28                                  3          .213
    *Size for use in hand-topping brass or soft steel; for copper, aluminum, bakelite, or
    similar material use one size larger.



Logarithms, Common

   Table 1-34 is a seven-place table of logarithms.




                                                 1-111
                                          Table 1-34.—Common Logarithms
N       0         1         2         3           4              5         6         7          8        9
10   0000000   0043214   0086002   0128372    0170333         0211893   0253059   0293838   0334238   0374265
11   0413927   0453230   0492180   0530784    0569049         0606978   0644580   0681859   0718820   0755470
12   0791812   0327854   0863598   0899051    0934217         0969100   1003705   1038037   1072100   1105897
13   1139434   1172713   1205739   1238516    1271048         1303338   1335389   1367206   1398791   1430148
14   1461280   1492191   1522883   1553360    1583625         1613680   1643529   1673173   1702617   1731863

15   1760913   1789769   1818436   1846914    1875207         1903317   1931246   1958997   1986571   2013971
16   2041200   2068259   2095150   2121876    2148438         2174839   2201081   2227165   2253093   2278867
17   2304489   2329961   2355284   2380461    2405492         2430380   2455127   2479733   2504200   2528530
18   2552725   2576786   2600714   2624511    2648178         2671717   2695129   2718416   2741578   2764618
19   2787536   2810334   2833012   2855573    2878017         2900346   2922561   2944662   2966652   2988531

20   3010300   3031961   3053514   3074960    3096302         3117539   3138672   3159703   3180633   3201463
21   3222193   3242825   3263359   3283796    3304138         3324385   3324538   3364597   3384565   3404441
22   3424227   3443923   3463530   3483049    3502480         3521825   3541084   3560259   3579348   3598355
23   3617278   3636120   3654880   3673559    3692159         3710679   3729120   3747483   3765770   3783979
24   3802112   3820170   3838154   3856063    3873898         3891661   3909351   3926970   3944517   3961993

25   3979400   3996737   4014005   4031205    4048337         4065402   4082400   4099331   4116197   4132998
26   4149733   4166405   4183013   4199557    4216039         4232459   4248816   4265113   4281348   4297523
27   4313638   4329693   4345689   4361626    4377506         4393327   4409091   4424798   4440448   4456042
28   4471580   4487063   4502491   4517864    4533183         4548449   4563660   4578819   4593925   4608978
29   4623980   4638930   4653829   4668676    4683473         4698220   4712917   4727564   4742163   4756712

30   4771213   4785665   4800069   4814426    4828736         4842998   4857214   4871384   4885507   4899585
31   4913617   4927604   4941546   4955443    4969296         4983106   4996871   5010593   5024271   5037907
32   5051500   5065050   5078559   5092025    5105450         5118834   5132176   5145478   5158738   5171959
33   5185139   5198280   5211381   5224442    5237465         5250448   5263393   5276299   5289167   5301997
34   5314789   5327544   5340261   5352941    5365584         5378191   5390761   5403295   5415792   5428254
35   5440680   5453071   5465427   5477747    5490033         5502284   5514500   5526682   5538830   5505944

36   5563025   5575072   5587086   5599066    5611014         5622929   5634811   5646661   5658478   5670264
37   5682017   5693739   5705429   5717088    5728716         5740313   5751878   5763414   5774918   5786392
38   5797836   5809250   5820634   5831988    5843312         5854607   5865873   5877110   5888317   5899496
39   5910646   5921768   5932861   5943926    5954962         5965971   5976952   5987905   5998831   6009729

40   6020600   6031444   6042261   6053050    6063814         6074550   6085260   605944    6106602   6117233
41   6127839   6138418   6148972   6159501    6170003         6180481   6190933   6201361   6211763   6222140
42   6232493   6242821   6253125   6263404    6273659         6283889   6294096   6304279   6314438   6324573
43   6334685   6344773   6354837   6364879    6374897         6384893   6394865   6404814   6414741   6424645
44   6434527   6444386   6454223   6464037    6473830         6483600   6493349   6503075   6512780   6522463

45   6532125   6541765   6551384   6560982    6570559         6580114   6589648   6599162   6608655   6618127
46   6627578   6637099   6646420   6655810    6665180         6674530   6683859   6693169   6702459   6711728
47   6720979   6730209   6739420   6748611    6757783         6766936   6776070   6785184   6794279   6803355
48   6812412   6821451   6830470   6839471    6848454         6857417   6866363   6875290   6884198   6893089
49   6901961   6910815   6919651   6928469    6937269         6946052   6954817   6963564   6972293   6981005

50   6989700   6998377   7007037   7015680    7024305         7032914   7041505   7050080   7058637   7067178
51   7075702   7084209   7092700   7101174    7109631         7118072   7126497   7134905   7143298   7151674
52   7160033   7168377   7176705   7185017    7193313         7201593   7209857   7218106   7226339   7234557
53   7242759   7250945   7259116   7267272    7275413         7283538   7291648   7299743   7307823   7315888
54   7323938   7331973   7339993   7347998    7355989         7363965   7371926   7379873   7387806   7395723




                                                      1-112
                                       Table 1-34.—Common Logarithms—Continued
N        0          1          2          3          4              5         6         7         8         9
55    7403627   7411516    7419391     7427251    7435098        7442930   7450748   7458552   7466342   7474118
56    7481980   7489629    7497363     7505084    7512791        7520484   7528164   7535831   7543483   7551123
57    7338749   7566361    7573960     7581546    7589119        7596678   7604225   7611758   7619278   7626786
58    7634280   7641761    7649230     7656686    7664128        7671559   7678976   7686381   7693773   7701153
59    7708520   7715875    7723217     7730547    7737864        7745170   7752463   7759743   7767012   7774268

60    7781513   7788745    7795965     7803173    7810369        7817554   7824726   7831887   7839036   7846173
61    7853298   7860412    7867514     7874605    7881684        7888751   7895807   7901852   7909885   7916906
62    7923917   7930916    7937904     7944880    7951846        7958800   7965743   7972675   7979596   7986506
63    7993405   8000294    8007171     8014037    8020893        8027737   8034571   8041394   8048207   8055009
64    8061800   8068580    8075350     8082110    8088859        8095597   8102325   8109043   8115750   8122447

65    8129134   8135810    8142476     8149132    8155777        8162413   8169038   8175654   8182259   8188854
66    8195439   8202015    8208580     8215135    8221681        8228216   8234742   8241258   8247765   8254261
67    8260748   8267225    8273693     8280151    8286599        8293038   8299467   8305887   8312297   8318698
68    8325089   8331471    8337844     8344207    8350561        8256906   8363241   8369567   8375884   8382192
69    8388491   8394780    8401061     8407332    8413505        8419848   8426092   8432328   8438554   8444772

70    8450980   8457180    8463371     8469553    8475727        8481891   8488047   8494194   8500333   8506462
71    8512583   8518696    8524800     8530895    8536982        8543060   8549130   8555192   8561244   8567289
72    8573325   8579353    8585372     8591383    8597386        8603380   8609366   8615344   8621314   8627275
73    8633229   8639174    8645111     8651040    8656961        8662873   8668778   8674675   8680564   8686444
74    8692317   8698182    8704039     8709888    8715729        8721563   8727388   8733206   8739016   8744818

75    8750613   8756399    8762178     8768950    8773713        8779470   8785218   8790959   8796692   8802418
76    8808136   8813847    8819550     8825245    8830934        8836614   8842288   8847954   8853612   8859263
77    8864907   8870544    8876173     8881795    8887410        8893017   8898617   8904210   8909796   8915375
78    8920946   8926510    8932068     8937618    8943161        8948697   8954225   8959747   8965262   8970770
79    8976271   8981765    8987252     8992732    8998205        9003671   9009131   9014583   9020029   9025468

80    9030900   9036325    9041744     9047155    9052560        9057959   9063350   9068735   9074114   9079485
81    9084850   9090209    9095560     9100905    9106244        9111576   9116902   9122221   9127533   9132839
82    9138139   9143432    9148718     9153998    9159272        9164539   9169800   9175055   9180303   9185545
83    9190781   9196010    9201233     9206450    9211661        9216865   9222063   9227255   9232440   9237620
84    9242793   9247960    9253121     9258276    9263424        9268567   9273704   9278834   9283959   9289077

85    9294189   9299296    9304396     9309490    9314579        9319661   9324738   9329808   9334873   9339932
86    9344985   9350032    9355073     9360108    9365137        9370161   9375179   9380191   9385197   9390198
87    9395193   9400182    9405165     9410142    9415114        9420081   9425041   9429996   9434945   9439889
88    9444827   9449759    9454686     9459607    9464523        9469433   9474337   9479236   9484130   9489018
89    9493900   9498777    9503649     9508515    9513375        9518230   9523080   9527924   9532763   9537597

90    9542425   9547248    9552065     9556878    9561684        9566486   9571282   9576073   9580858   9585639
91    9590414   9595184    9599948     9604708    9609462        9614211   9618955   9623693   9628427   9633155
92    9637878   9642596    9647309     9652017    9656720        9661417   9666110   9670797   9675480   9680157
93    9684829   9689497    9694159     9698816    9703469        9708116   9712758   9717396   9722028   9726656
94    9731279   9735896    9740509     9745117    9749720        9754318   9758911   9763500   9768083   9772662

95    9777236   9781805    9786369     9790929    9795484        9800034   9804579   9809119   9813655   9818186
96    9822712   9827234    9831751     9836263    9840770        9845273   9849771   9854265   9858754   9863238
97    9867717   9872192    9876663     9881128    9885590        9890046   9894498   9898946   9903389   9907827
98    9912261   9916690    9921115     9925535    9929951        9934362   9938769   9943172   9947569   9951963
99    9956352   9960737    9965117     9969492    9973864        9978231   9982593   9986952   9991305   9995655



     Trigonometric Functions

         Table 1-35 is a table of trigonometric functions.

                                                         1-113
                                  Table 1-35.─Trigonometric Functions
deg   sin      cos     tan      cot               deg    sin    cos     tan      cot
  0.0   .00000  1.0000   .00000            90.0     4.0 .06976 0.9976     .06993 14.301              86.0
   .1   .00175  1.0000   .00175   573.0      .9       .1 .07150   .9974   .07168 13.951                .9
   .2   .00349  1.0000   .00349   286.5      .8       .2 .07324   .9973   .07344 13.617                .8
   .3   .00524  1.0000   .00524   191.0      .7       .3 .07498   .9972   .17519 13.300                .7
   .4   .00698  1.0000   .00698  143.24      .6       .4 .07672   .9971   .07695 12.996                .6
   .5   .00873  1.0000   .00873  114.59      .5       .5 .07846   .9969   .07870 12.706                .5
   .6   .01047  0.9999   .10147   95.49      .4       .6 .08020   .9968   .08046 12.429                .4
   .7   .01222   .9999   .01222   81.85      .3       .7 .08194   .9966   .08221 12.163                .3
   .8   .01396   .9999   .01396   71.62      .2       .8 .08368   .9965   .08397 11.909                .2
   .9   .01571   .9999   .01571   63.66      .1       .9 .08542   .9963   .08573 11.664                .1

 1.0   .01745   0.9998   .01746    57.20   89.0      5.0    .08716      0.9962     .08749   11.430   85.0
  .1   .01920    .9998   .01920    52.08     .9       .1    .08889       .9960   .089215    11.205     .9
  .2   .02094    .9998   .02095    47.74     .8       .2    .09063       .9959     .09101   10.988     .8
  .3   .02269    .9997   .02269    44.07     .7       .3    .09237       .9957     .09277   10.780     .7
  .4   .02443    .9997   .02444    40.92     .6       .4    .09411       .9956     .09453   10.579     .6
  .5   .02618    .9997   .02619    38.19     .5       .5    .09585       .9954     .09629   10.385     .5
  .6   .02792    .9996   .02793    35.80     .4       .6    .09758       .9952     .09805   10.199     .4
  .7   .02967    .9996   .02968    33.69     .4       .7    .09932       .9951     .09981   10.019     .3
  .8   .03141    .9995   .03143    31.82     .2       .8    .10106       .9949     .10158    9.845     .2
  .9   .03316    .9995   .03317    30.14     .1       .9    .10279       .9947     .10334    9.677     .1

 2.0   .03490   0.9994   .03492    28.64   88.0      6.0    .10453      0.9945    .10510     9.514   84.0
  .1   .03664    .9993   .03667    27.27     .9       .1    .10626       .9943    .10687     9.357     .9
  .2   .03839    .9993   .03842    26.03     .8       .2    .10800       .9942    .10863     9.205     .8
  .3   .04013    .9992   .04016    24.90     .7       .3    .10973       .9940    .11040     9.058     .7
  .4   .04188    .9991   .04191    23.86     .6       .4    .11147       .9938    .11217     8.915     .6
  .5   .04362    .9990   .04366    22.90     .5       .5    .11320       .9936    .11394     8.777     .5
  .6   .04536    .9990   .04541    22.02     .4       .6    .11494       .9934    .11570     8.643     .4
  .7   .04711    .9989   .04716    21.20     .3       .7    .11667       .9932    .11747     8.513     .3
  .8   .04885    .9988   .04891    20.45     .2       .8    .11840       .9930    .11924     8.386     .2
  .9   .05059    .9987   .05066    19.74     .1       .9    .12014       .9928    .12101     8.264     .1

 3.0   .05234   0.9986   .05241   19.081   87.0      7.0    .12187      0.9925    .12278     8.144   83.0
  .1   .05408    .9985   .05416   18.464     .9       .1    .12360       .9923    .12456     8.028     .9
  .2   .05582    .9984   .05591   17.886     .8       .2    .12533       .9921    .12633     7.916     .8
  .3   .05756    .9983   .05766   17.343     .7       .3    .12706       .9919    .12810     7.806     .7
  .4   .05931    .9982   .05941   16.832     .6       .4    .12880       .9917    .12988     7.700     .6
  .5   .06105    .9981   .06116   16.350     .5       .5    .13053       .9914    .13165     7.596     .5
  .6   .06279    .9980   .06291   15.895     .4       .6    .13226       .9912    .13343     7.495     .4
  .7   .06453    .9979   .06467   15.464     .3       .7    .13399       .9910    .13521     7.396     .3
  .8   .06627    .9978   .06642   15.056     .2       .8    .13572       .9907    .13698     7.300     .2
  .9   .06802    .9977   .06817   14.669     .1       .9    .13744       .9905    .13876     7.207     .1
        cos      sin      cot      tan     deg                cos        sin       cot       tan




                                             1-114
                                        Table 1-35.─Trigonometric Functions─Continued
deg      sin       cos        tan         cot                deg    sin         cos       tan        cot
  8.0     .13917    0.9903     .14054        7.115   82.0    12.0     0.2079     0.9781     0.2126    4.705   78.0
    .1    .14090      .9900    .14232        7.026     .9      .1      .2096      .9778      .2144    4.665     .9
    .2    .14263      .9898    .14410        6.940     .8      .2      .2133      .9774      .2162    4.625     .8
    .3    .14436      .9895    .14588        6.855     .7      .3      .2130      .9770      .2180    4.586     .7
    .4    .14608      .9893    .14767        6.772     .6      .4      .2147      .9767      .2199    4.548     .6
    .5    .14781      .9890    .14945        6.691     .5      .5      .2164      .9763      .2217    4.511     .5
    .6    .14954      .9888    .15124        6.612     .4      .6      .2181      .9759      .2235    4.474     .4
    .7    .15126      .9885    .15302        6.535     .3      .7      .2198      .9755      .2254    4.437     .3
    .8    .15299      .9882    .15481        6.460     .2      .8      .2215      .9751      .2272    4.402     .2
    .9    .15471      .9880    .15660        6.386     .1      .9      .2233      .9748      .2290    4.366     .1

  9.0    .15643     0.9877    .15836         6.314   81.0    13.0     0.2250    0.9744     0.2309    4.331    77.0
   .1    .15816      .9874    .16017         6.243     .9      .1      .2267     .9740      .2327    4.297      .9
   .2    .15988      .9871    .16196         6.174     .8      .2      .2284     .9736      .2345    4.264      .8
   .3    .16160      .9869    .16376         6.107     .7      .3      .2300     .9732      .2364    4.230      .7
   .4    .16333      .9866    .16555         6.041     .6      .4      .2317     .9728      .2382    4.198      .6
   .5    .16505      .9863    .16734         5.976     .5      .5      .2334     .9724      .2401    4.165      .5
   .6    .16677      .9860    .16914         5.912     .4      .6      .2351     .9720      .2419    4.134      .4
   .7    .16849      .9857    .17093         5.850     .3      .7      .2368     .9715      .2438    4.102      .3
   .8    .17021      .9854    .17273         5.789     .2      .8      .2385     .9711      .2456    4.071      .2
   .9    .17193      .9851    .17453         5.730     .1      .9      .2402     .9707      .2475    4.041      .1

 10.0     .1736     0.9848     .1763         5.671   80.0    14.0     0.2419    0.9703     0.2493    4.011    76.0
   .1     .1754      .9845     .1781         5.614     .9      .1      .2436     .9699      .2512    3.981      .9
   .2     .1771      .9842     .1799         5.558     .8      .2      .2453     .9694      .2530    3.952      .8
   .3     .1788      .9839     .1817         5.503     .7      .3      .2470     .9680      .2549    3.923      .7
   .4     .1805      .9836     .1835         5.449     .6      .4      .2487     .9686      .2568    3.895      .6
   .5     .1822      .9833     .1853         5.396     .5      .5      .2504     .9681      .2586    3.867      .5
   .6     .1840      .9829     .1871         5.343     .4      .6      .2521     .9677      .2605    3.839      .4
   .7     .1857      .9826     .1890         5.292     .3      .7      .2538     .9673      .2623    3.812      .3
   .8     .1874      .9823     .1908         5.242     .2      .8      .2554     .9668      .2642    3.785      .2
   .9     .1891      .9820     .1926         5.193     .1      .9      .2571     .9664      .2661    3.758      .1

 11.0     .1908     0.9816     .1944         5.145   79.0    15.0     0.2588    0.9659     0.2679    3.732    75.0
   .1     .1925      .9813     .1962         5.097     .9      .1      .2605     .9655      .2698    3.706      .9
   .2     .1942      .9810     .1980         5.050     .8      .2      .2622     .9650      .2717    3.681      .8
   .3     .1959      .9806     .1998         5.005     .7      .3      .2639     .9646      .2736    3.655      .7
   .4     .1977      .9803     .2016         4.959     .6      .4      .2656     .9641      .2754    3.630      .6
   .5     .1994      .9799     .2035         4.915     .5      .5      .2672     .9636      .2773    3.606      .5
   .6     .2011      .9796     .2053         4.872     .4      .6      .2689     .9632      .2792    3.582      .4
   .7     .2028      .9792     .2071         4.829     .3      .7      .2706     .9627      .2811    3.558      .3
   .8     .2045      .9789     .2089         4.787     .2      .8      .2723     .9622      .2830    3.534      .2
   .9     .2062      .9785     .2107         4.745     .1      .9      .2740     .9617      .2849    3.511      .2
          cos        sin       cot           tan     deg               cos       sin        cot       tan     deg




                                                        1-115
                            Table 1-35.─Trigonometric Functions─Continued
deg    sin     cos     tan     cot                deg    sin     cos     tan     cot
 16.0 0.2756 0.9613 0.2867 3.487           74.0    20.0 0.3420 0.9397 0.3640 2.747              70.0
    .1   .2773   .9608   .2886 3.465         .9       .1   .3437   .9391   .3659 2.733            .9
    .2   .2790   .9603   .2905 3.442         .8       .2   .3453   .9385   .3679 2.718            .8
    .3   .2807   .9598   .2924 3.420         .7       .3   .3469   .9379   .3699 2.703            .7
    .4   .2823   .9593   .2943 3.398         .6       .4   .3486   .9373   .3719 2.689            .6
    .5   .2840   .9588   .2962 3.376         .5       .5   .3502   .9367   .3739 2.675            .5
    .6   .2857   .9583   .2981 3.354         .4       .6   .3518   .9361   .3759 2.660            .4
    .7   .2874   .9578   .3000 3.333         .3       .7   .3535   .9354   .3779 2.646            .3
    .8   .2890   .9573   .3019 3.312         .2       .8   .3551   .9348   .3799 2.633            .2
    .9   .2907   .9568   .3038 3.291         .1       .9   .3567   .9342   .3819 2.619            .1

17.0   0.2924   0.9563   0.3067   3.271    73.0     21.0   0.3584     0.9336   0.3839   2.605   69.0
  .1    .2940    .9558    .3076   3.271      .9       .1    .3600      .9330    .3859   2.592     .9
  .2    .2957    .9553    .3096   3.230      .8       .2    .3616      .9323    .3879   2.578     .8
  .3    .2974    .9548    .3115   3.211      .7       .3    .3633      .9317    .3899   2.565     .7
  .4    .2990    .9542    .3134   3.191      .6       .4    .3649      .9311    .3919   2.552     .6
  .5    .3007    .9537    .3153   3.172      .5       .5    .3665      .9304    .3939   2.539     .5
  .6    .3024    .9532    .3172   3.152      .4       .6    .3681      .9298    .3959   2.526     .4
  .7    .3040    .9527    .3191   3.133      .3       .7    .3697      .9291    .3979   2.513     .3
  .8    .3057    .9521    .3211   3.115      .2       .8    .3714      .9285    .4000   2.500     .2
  .9    .3074    .9516    .3230   3.096      .1       .9    .3730      .9278    .4020   2.488     .1

18.0   0.3090   0.9511   0.3249   3.078    72.0     22.0   0.3746     0.9272   0.4040   2.475   68.0
  .1    .3107    .9505    .3269   3.060      .9       .1    .3762      .9265    .4061   2.463     .9
  .2    .3123    .9500    .3288   3.042      .8       .2    .3778      .9259    .4081   2.450     .8
  .3    .3140    .9494    .3307   3.024      .7       .3    .3795      .9252    .4101   2.438     .7
  .4    .3156    .9489    .3327   3.006      .6       .4    .3811      .9245    .4122   2.426     .6
  .5    .3173    .9483    .3346   2.989      .5       .5    .3727      .9239    .4142   2.414     .5
  .6    .3190    .9478    .3365   2.971      .4       .6    .3843      .9232    .4163   2.402     .4
  .7    .3206    .9472    .3385   2.954      .3       .7    .3859      .9225    .4183   2.391     .3
  .8    .3223    .9466    .3404   2.937      .2       .8    .3875      .9219    .4204   2.379     .2
  .9    .3239    .9461    .3424   2.921      .1       .9    .3891      .9212    .4224   2.367     .1

19.0   0.3256   0.9455   0.3443   2.904    71.0     23.0   0.3907     0.9205   0.4245   2.356   67.0
  .1    .3272    .9449    .3463   2.888      .9       .1    .3923      .9198    .4265   2.344     .9
  .2    .3289    .9444    .3482   2.872      .8       .2    .3939      .9191    .4286   2.333     .8
  .3    .3305    .9438    .3502   2.856      .7       .3    .3955      .9184    .4307   2.322     .7
  .4    .3322    .9432    .3522   2.840      .6       .4    .3971      .9178    .4327   2.311     .6
  .5    .3338    .9426    .3541   2.824      .5       .5    .3987      .9171    .4348   2.300     .5
  .6    .3355    .9421    .3561   2.808      .4       .6    .4003      .9164    .4369   2.289     .4
  .7    .3371    .9415    .3581   2.793      .3       .7    .4019      .9157    .4390   2.278     .3
  .8    .3387    .9409    .3600   2.778      .2       .8    .4035      .9150    .4411   2.267     .2
  .9    .3403    .9403    .3620   2.762      .1       .9    .4051      .9143    .4431   2.257     .1
        cos      sin      cot      tan     deg              cos        sin      cot      tan    deg




                                            1-116
                                  Table 1-35.─Trigonometric Functions─Continued
deg     sin      cos      tan        cot              deg     sin         cos      tan      cot
24.0   0.4067   0.9135   0.4452     2.246    66.0     28.0   0.4695      0.8829   0.5317    1.881   62.0
  .1    .4083    .9128    .4473     2.236      .9       .1    .4710       .8821    .5340    1.873     .9
  .2    .4099    .9121    .4494     2.225      .8       .2    .4726       .8813    .5362    1.865     .8
  .3    .4115    .9114    .4515     2.215      .7       .3    .4741       .8805    .5384    1.857     .7
  .4    .4131    .9107    .4536     2.204      .6       .4    .4756       .8796    .5407    1.849     .6
  .5    .4147    .9100    .4557     2.194      .5       .5    .4772       .8788    .5430    1.842     .5
  .6    .4163    .9092    .4578     2.184      .4       .6    .4787       .8780    .5452    1.834     .4
  .7    .4179    .9085    .4599     2.174      .3       .7    .4802       .8771    .5475    1.827     .3
  .8    .4195    .9078    .4621     2.164      .2       .8    .4818       .8763    .5498    1.819     .2
  .9    .4210    .9070    .4642     2.154      .1       .9    .4833       .8755    .5520    1.811     .1

25.0   0.4226   0.9063   0.4663     2.145    65.0     29.0   0.4848      0.8746   0.5543    1.804   61.0
  .1    .4242    .9056    .4684     2.135      .9       .1    .4863       .8738    .5566    1.797     .9
  .2    .4258    .9048    .4706     2.125      .8       .2    .4879       .8729    .5589    1.789     .8
  .3    .4274    .9041    .4727     2.116      .7       .3    .4894       .8721    .5612    1.782     .7
  .4    .4289    .9033    .4748     2.106      .6       .4    .4909       .8712    .5635    1.775     .6
  .5    .4305    .9028    .4770     2.097      .5       .5    .4924       .8704    .5658    1.767     .5
  .6    .4321    .9018    .4791     2.087      .4       .6    .4939       .8695    .5681    1.760     .4
  .7    .4337    .9011    .4813     2.078      .3       .7    .4955       .8686    .5704    1.753     .3
  .8    .4352    .9003    .4834     2.069      .2       .8    .4970       .8678    .5726    1.746     .2
  .9    .4368    .8996    .4856     2.059      .1       .9    .4985       .8669    .5750    1.739     .1

26.0   0.4384   0.8988   0.4877     2.050    64.0     30.0   0.5000      0.8660   0.5774   1.7321   60.0
  .1    .4399    .8980    .4899     2.041      .9       .1    .5015       .8652    .5797   1.7251     .9
  .2    .4415    .8973    .4921     2.032      .8       .2    .5030       .8643    .5820   1.7162     .8
  .3    .4431    .8965    .4942     2.023      .7       .3    .5045       .8634    .5844   1.7113     .7
  .4    .4446    .8957    .4964     2.014      .6       .4    .5040       .8625    .5867   1.7045     .6
  .5    .4462    .8949    .4986     2.006      .5       .5    .5075       .8616    .5890   1.6977     .5
  .6    .4478    .8942    .5008     1.997      .4       .6    .5090       .8607    .5914   1.6909     .4
  .7    .4493    .8934    .5029     1.988      .3       .7    .5105       .8599    .5938   1.6842     .3
  .8    .4509    .8926    .5051     1.980      .2       .8    .5120       .8590    .5961   1.6715     .2
  .9    .4524    .8918    .5073     1.971      .1       .9    .5135       .8581    .5985   1.6709     .1

27.0    0.4540 0.8910 0.5095 1.963 63.0               31.0    0.5150   0.8572 0.6009 1.6643 59.0
  .1     .4555    .8902   .5117 1.954   .9              .1     .5165     .8643   .6032 1.6577   .9
  .2     .4571    .8894   .5139 1.946   .8              .2     .5180     .8554   .6056 1.6512   .8
  .3     .4586    .8886   .5161 1.937   .7              .3     .5195     .8545   .6080 1.6447   .7
  .4     .4602    .8878   .5184 1.929   .6              .4     .5210     .8536   .6104 1.6383   .6
  .5     .4617    .8870   .5206 1.921   .5              .5     .5225     .8526   .6128 1.6319   .5
  .6     .4633    .8862   .5228 1.913   .4              .6     .5240     .8517   .6152 1.6255   .4
  .7     .4648    .8854   .5250 1.905   .3              .7     .5255     .8508   .6176 1.6191   .3
  .8     .4664    .8846   .5272 1.897   .2              .8     .5270     .8499   .6200 1.6128   .2
  .9     .4679    .8838   .5295 1.889   .1              .9     .5284     .8490   .6224 1.6066   .1
       cos     sin      cot     tan   deg                    cos     sin       cot     tan    deg




                                                    1-117
                              Table 1-35.─Trigonometric Functions─Continued
deg    sin     cos     tan     cot                 deg    sin     cos     tan     cot
 32.0 0.5299 0.8480 0.6249 1.6003           58.0    36.0 .05878 0.8090 0.7265 1.3764              54.0
    .1   .5314   .8471   .6273 1.5941         .9       .1   .5892   .8080   .7292 1.3713            .9
    .2   .5329   .8462   .6297 1.5880         .8       .2   .5906   .8070   .7319 1.3663            .8
    .3   .5344   .8453   .6322 1.5818         .7       .3   .5920   .8059   .7346 1.3613            .7
    .4   .5358   .8443   .6346 1.5757         .6       .4   .5934   .8049   .7373 1.3564            .6
    .5   .5373   .8434   .6371 1.5697         .5       .5   .5948   .8039   .7400 1.3514            .5
    .6   .5388   .8425   .6395 1.5637         .4       .6   .5962   .8028   .7427 1.3465            .4
    .7   .5402   .8415   .6420 1.5577         .3       .7   .5976   .8018   .7454 1.3416            .3
    .8   .5417   .8406   .6445 1.5517         .2       .8   .5990   .8007   .7481 1.3367            .2
    .9   .5432   .8396   .6469 1.5458         .1       .9   .6004   .7997   .7508 1.3319            .1

33.0   0.5446   0.8387   0.6494   1.5399    57.0    37.0    0.6018     0.7986   0.7536   1.3270   53.0
  .1    .5461    .8377    .6519   1.5340      .9      .1     .6032      .7976    .7563   1.3222     .9
  .2    .5476    .8368    .6544   1.5282      .8      .2     .6046      .7965    .7590   1.3175     .8
  .3    .5490    .8358    .6569   1.5224      .7      .3     .6060      .7955    .7518   1.3127     .7
  .4    .5505    .8348    .6594   1.5166      .6      .4     .6074      .7944    .7646   1.3079     .6
  .5    .5519    .8339    .6619   1.5108      .5      .5     .6088      .7934    .7673   1.3032     .5
  .6    .5534    .8329    .6644   1.5051      .4      .6     .6101      .7923    .7701   1.2985     .4
  .7    .5548    .8320    .6669   1.4994      .3      .7     .6115      .7912    .7729   1.2938     .3
  .8    .5563    .8310    .6694   1.4938      .2      .8     .6129      .7902    .7757   1.2892     .2
  .9    .5577    .8300    .6720   1.4882      .1      .9     .6143      .7891    .7785   1.2846     .1

34.0   0.5592   0.8290   0.6745   1.4826    56.0    38.0    0.6157     0.7880   0.7813   1.2799   52.0
  .1    .5606    .8281    .6771   1.4770      .9      .1     .6170      .7869    .7841   1.2753     .9
  .2    .5621    .8271    .6796   1.4715      .8      .2     .6184      .7859    .7869   1.2708     .8
  .3    .5635    .8261    .6822   1.4659      .7      .3     .6198      .7848    .7898   1.2662     .7
  .4    .5650    .8251    .6847   1.4605      .6      .4     .6211      .7837    .7926   1.2617     .6
  .5    .5664    .8241    .6873   1.4550      .5      .5     .6225      .7826    .7954   1.2572     .5
  .6    .5678    .8231    .6899   1.4496      .4      .6     .6239      .7815    .7983   1.2527     .4
  .7    .5693    .8221    .6924   1.4442      .3      .7     .6252      .7804    .8012   1.2482     .3
  .8    .5707    .8211    .6950   1.4388      .2      .8     .6266      .7793    .8040   1.2437     .2
  .9    .5721    .8202    .6970   1.4335      .1      .9     .6280      .7782    .8069   1.2393     .1

35.0    0.5736 0.8192 0.7002 1.4281 55.0            39.0    0.6293 0.7771 0.8098 1.2349     51.0
  .1     .5750    .8181   .7028 1.4229   .9           .1     .6307    .7760   .8127 1.2305     .9
  .2     .5764    .8171   .7054 1.4176   .8           .2     .6320    .7749   .8156 1.2261     .8
  .3     .5779    .8161   .7080 1.4124   .7           .3     .6334    .7738   .8185 1.2218     .7
  .4     .5793    .8151   .7107 1.4071   .6           .4     .6347    .7727   .8214 1.2174     .6
  .5     .5807    .8141   .7133 1.4019   .5           .5     .6361    .7716   .8243 1.2131     .5
  .6     .5821    .8131   .7159 1.3968   .4           .6     .6474    .7705   .8273 1.2088     .4
  .7     .5835    .8121   .7186 1.3916   .3           .7     .6388    .7694   .8302 1.2045     .3
  .8     .5850    .8111   .7212 1.3865   .2           .8     .6401    .7683   .8332 1.2002     .2
  .9     .5864    .8100   .7239 1.3814   .1           .9     .6414    .7672   .8361 1.1960     .1
       cos     sin      cot     tan    deg                 cos     sin      cot     tan    deg




                                              1-118
                                  Table 1-35.─Trigonometric Functions─Continued
deg sin     cos    tan     cot                         deg sin      cos     tan     cot
40.0 0.6428 0.7660 0.8291 1.1918               50.0    43.0 0.6820 0.7314 0.9325 1.0724                47.0
  .1  .6441  .7649   .8421 1.1875                .9       .1  .6833   .7302   .9358 1.0686               .9
  .2  .6455  .7638   .8451 1.1833                .8       .2  .6845   .7290   .9391 1.0649               .8
  .3  .6468  .7627   .8481 1.1792                .7       .3  .6858   .7278   .9424 1.0612               .7
  .4  .6481  .7615   .8511 1.1750                .6       .4  .6871   .7266   .9457 1.0575               .6
  .5  .6494  .7604   .8541 1.1708                .5       .5  .6884   .7254   .9490 1.0538               .5
  .6  .6508  .7593   .8571 1.1667                .4       .6  .6896   .7242   .9523 1.0501               .4
  .7  .6521  .7581   .8601 1.1626                .3       .7  .6909   .7230   .9556 1.0464               .3
  .8  .6534  .7570   .8632 1.1585                .2       .8  .6921   .7218   .9590 1.0428               .2
  .9  .6547  .7559   .8662 1.1544                .1       .9  .6934   .7206   .9623 1.0392               .1

41.0   0.6561    0.7547    0.8693     1.1504   49.0    44.0    0.6947     0.7193    0.9657    1.0355   46.0
  .1    .6574     .7536     .8724     1.1463     .9      .1     .6959      .7181     .9691    1.0319     .9
  .2    .6587     .7524     .8754     1.1423     .8      .2     .6972      .7169     .9725    1.0283     .8
  .3    .6600     .7513     .8785     1.1383     .7      .3     .6984      .7157     .9759    1.0247     .7
  .4    .6613     .7501     .8816     1.1343     .6      .4     .6997      .7145     .9793    1.0212     .6
  .5    .6626     .7490     .8847     1.1303     .5      .5     .7009      .7133     .9827    1.0176     .5
  .6    .6639     .7478     .8878     1.1263     .4      .6     .7022      .7120     .9861    1.0141     .4
  .7    .6652     .7466     .8910     1.1224     .3      .7     .7034      .7108     .9896    1.0105     .3
  .8    .6665     .7455     .8941     1.1184     .2      .8     .6794      .7337     .9260    1.0799     .2
  .9    .6678     .7443     .8972     1.1145     .1      .9     .6807      .7325     .9293    1.0761     .1

42.0   0.6691 0.7431 0.9004 1.1106 48.0
  .1    .6704   .7420   .9036 1.1067   .9
  .2    .6717   .7408   .9067 1.1028   .8
  .3    .6730   .7396   .9099 1.0990   .7
  .4    .6743   .7385   .9131 1.0951   .6
  .5    .6756   .7373   .9163 1.0913   .5
  .6    .6769   .7361   .9195 1.0875   .4
  .7    .6782   .7349   .9228 1.0837   .3
  .8    .6794   .7337   .9260 1.0799   .2
  .9    .6807   .7325   .9293 1.0761   .1
       cos    sin     cot     tan    deg                      cos        sin       cot       tan       deg



Julian Date Calendar

     Table 1-36 is a Julian date calendar. In leap years you should add one day after 28 February. Leap
years occur every four years. The last leap year was 1992; therefore, the next few leap years will be 1996,
2000, and 2004.




                                                  1-119
                                             Table 1-36.—Julian Date Calendar

Day     Jan      Feb      Mar      Apr     May      June     July   Aug     Sept   Oct   Nov   Dec     Day
 1       001       032      060     091       121      152    182   213     244    274   305   335       1
 2       002       033      061     092       122      153    183   214     245    275   306   336       2
 3       003       034      062     093       123      154    184   215     246    276   307   337       3
 4       004       035      063     094       124      155    185   216     247    277   308   338       4
 5       005       036      064     095       125      156    186   217     248    278   309   339       5
 6       006       037      065     096       126      157    187   218     249    279   310   340       6
 7       007       038      066     097       127      158    188   219     250    280   311   341       7
 8       008       039      067     098       128      159    189   220     251    281   312   342       8
 9       009       040      068     099       129      160    190   221     252    282   313   343       9
10       010       041      069     100       130      161    191   222     253    283   314   344      10
11       011       042      070     101       131      162    192   223     254    284   315   345      11
12       012       043      071     102       132      163    193   224     255    285   316   346      12
13       013       044      072     103       133      164    194   225     256    286   317   347      13
14       014       045      073     104       134      165    195   226     257    287   318   348      14
15       015       046      074     105       135      166    196   227     258    288   319   349      15
16       016       047      075     106       136      167    197   228     259    289   320   350      16
17       017       048      076     107       137      168    198   229     260    290   321   351      17
18       018       049      077     108       138      169    199   230     261    291   322   352      18
19       019       050      078     109       139      170    200   231     262    292   323   353      19
20       020       051      079     110       140      171    201   232     263    293   324   354      20
21       021       052      080     111       141      172    202   233     264    294   325   355      21
22       022       053      081     112       142      173    203   234     265    295   326   356      22
23       023       054      082     113       143      174    204   235     266    296   327   357      23
24       024       055      083     114       144      175    205   236     267    297   328   358      24
25       025       056      084     115       145      176    206   237     268    298   329   359      25
26       026       057      085     116       146      177    207   238     269    299   330   360      26
27       027       058      086     117       147      178    208   239     270    300   331   361      27
28       028       059      087     118       148      179    209   240     271    301   332   362      28
29       029       *        088     119       149      180    210   241     272    302   333   363      29
30       030                089     120       150      181    211   242     273    303   334   364      30
31       031                090               151             212   243            304         365      31
* In leap year, after February 28, add 1 to the tabulated number.




 Windchill Factor

      The windchill factor is a computation of the still-air temperature that would have the same cooling
 effect on exposed human skin as a given combination of temperature and wind speed. You should use
 table 1-37 as a computation chart to figure windchill factor.




                                                        1-120
                                        Table 1-37.—Windchill Factors




Effects of Heat and Humidity

     Humidity combines with heat to create a more uncomfortable apparent temperature. By using table
1-38 you can figure the apparent temperature caused by various combinations of air temperature and
humidity. Remember, in heat waves the apparent temperatures may run 15 to 30 degrees higher in more
humid areas.




                                                1-121
                                     Table 1-38.—Effects of Heat and Humidity




     When apparent temperatures are between 90 and 105 degrees, heat cramps, heat exhaustion, and
heatstroke are possible after prolonged exposure and physical activity. These become likely when
apparent temperatures are between 105 and 130 degrees. Over 130 degrees, heatstroke is imminent. You
should note that heatstroke can be fatal if medical care is delayed.

GENERAL MAINTENANCE

     The general maintenance section provides you with information on cleaning solvents, lubricants,
corrosion control, use of the oscilloscope, troubleshooting, classes of overhaul, and types of equipment
modifications. It also provides information such as material identification, names of organizations that
provide outside technical assistance, and publications and documents that will assist you in day-to-day
maintenance.

Corrosion Control (Cleaning and Lubricating)

     A corrosive atmosphere can damage unprotected electric and electronic equipment. You should be
aware of the harmful effects of moisture and, in particular, salt spray and salt-impregnated air. To prevent
corrosion, you should maintain an effective cleaning and lubricating schedule. Standard preventive
maintenance (PMS) procedures provide only minimum protection. Any schedule should include dusting
and cleaning, lubrication of moving parts, and the use of approved solvents or wetting agents to remove
any dust, dirt, oil film, salt, or other contaminant.

    Table 1-39 is a list of standard Navy lubricants and solvents and their uses, as specified in Military
Standard 454M (MIL-STD-454M).



                                                   1-122
                                Table 1-39.—Standard Navy Lubricants and Solvents
SPECIFICATION NUMBER                 UNIT OF                  GENERAL USE
AND TITLE                            ISSUE
W-P-236 Petrolatum, Technical        1 lb. can                For use as a light grade of lubricating grease but not
                                     5 lb. can                recommended for use as a lubricant in heavily
                                                              loaded or hot running bearings. It may be used as a
                                                              constituent in certain types of rust preventive
                                                              compounds.
P-D-680 Dry Cleaning Solvent         5 gal. pail              For general cleaning of air filters, electronic
                                                              equipment, and other general purpose cleanup.
MIL-G-23827 Grease, Aircraft         1 oz. tube               In ball, roller, needle bearings, gears and sliding and
and Instrument                       4 oz. tube               rolling surfaces of such equipment as instruments,
                                     8 oz. Tube               cameras, electronic gear and aircraft control
                                     1 lb. can                systems. Particularly suitable for equipment which
                                     5 lb. can                must operate at both very low and very high
                                     35 lb. pail              temperatures for short periods. Does not contain
                                                              extreme pressure or special antiwear additives. It is
                                                              destructive to paint, natural rubber, and neoprene.
MIL-G-81322 Grease, Aircraft         5 lb. can                For lubrication and protection against corrosion of
                                     35 lb. pail              plain ball and roller bearings, and preservation of
                                                              threads on ammunitions.
MIL-L-17331 Lubricating Oil          5 gal.                   In main turbines and gears, auxiliary turbine
Steam Turbine                        55 gal.                  installation, certain hydraulic equipment general
                                                              mechanical lubrication, and air compressors.
MIL-L-2105 Lubrication Oil           5 gal.                   For lubrication of automotive gear units, heavy duty
Gear                                 1 gal.                   industrial-type enclosed gear units, steering gears,
                                     55 gal.                  and fluid-lubricated universal joints of automotive
                                                              equipment.
MIL-L-6085 Lubricating Oil           1 1/2 oz. btl.           For aircraft instruments, electronic equipment, or
Instrument                           4 oz. can                where a low evaporation oil is required for both
                                     1 qt.                    high and low temperature application, and where
                                                              oxidation and corrosion resistance are desirable.
                                                              Destructive to paint, neoprene and rubber.
MIL-L-6086 Lubricating Oil           1 gal. can               For use under extremely low temperature, mild
Gear                                 1 pt. can                extreme pressure-type oil with load carrying
                                     1 gal. can               additive. General use in aircraft use in aircraft gear
                                     5 gal. drum              mechanisms, exclusive of engines.
MIL-L-17331 & MIL-L-17672            1 pt.                    For all applications which require other than special
Lubricating Oil General Purpose      5 gal.                   lubricants, and which are subject to normal variation
                                     55 gal.                  between ambient and operating temperature. Use in
                                                              lieu of MIL-L-6085 when oil will be in contact with
                                                              neoprene.




                                                      1-123
                      Table 1-40.—Old and New Specification Solvents
OLD MILITARY               NEW MILITARY                  REFERENCE
SPECIFICATION              SPECIFICATION
14-P-1                     VV-P-236                      See Table 1-39
14-L-3                     MIL-G-18709                   See Table 1-39
14-G-10                    MIL-G-16908                   See Table 1-39
14-L-11                    VV-G-632                      See Table 1-39
14-O-12                    VV-I-530                      See Table 1-39
14-O-13                    MIL-L-9000                    See Table 1-39
14-O-15                    MIL-L-17331                   See Table 1-39
14-O-20                    MIL-L-6085                    See Table 1-39
AN-O-6a                    MIL-L-7870                    See Table 1-39
KS 7470                    MIL-L-17672                   See Table 1-39
MIL-S-16067                P-D-680                       See Table 1-39
VV-0-401                   VV-I-530                      See Table 1-39
P-S-661                    P-D-680                       See Table 1-39
MIL-G-3545                 MIL-G-81322                   See Table 1-39
MIL-G-3278                 MIL-G-23827                   See Table 1-39




                         Table 1-41.—Manufacturer's Designations


MANUFACTURER DESIGNATION                        MILITARY               UNIT OF ISSUE
                                                SPECIFICATION
Lubri-Plate No. 105                             None                   2 oz.
Lubri-Plate No. 110                             None                   1 lb.
Molykote "G"                                    None                   1 lb.
Molykote M-77                                   None                   1 lb.
Stoddard Solvent                                P-D-680
140-F                                           P-D-680
MOS, Lube-Power                                 MIL-M-7866             10 oz.
GE 10C                                          VV-I-530
GE SS4005                                       MIL-S-8660             1 oz.
Dow-Corning DC-4                                MIL-S-8660             1 oz.
McLube MOS2-210 (formerly MOS2-200)             None                   As Requested
McLube MOS2 - 1118                              None                   As Requested
Thermotex 000                                   None                   1 lb.




                                       1-124
               Table 1-42.—Lubricants Used in Electronics Equipment But Not Listed In MIL-STD-454M
  SPECIFICATION NUMBER AND                  UNIT OF                         GENERAL USE
               TITLE                         ISSUE
51-F-23 Hydraulic Fluid                        5 gal.     Used in connection with the hydraulic transmission
                                              55 gal.     of power. For use with Synthetic Seal.
ASTM D-3699 Kerosene                           5 gal.     General uses such as a cleaner for machinery or
                                                          tools.
MIL-L-7870 Lubrication Oil General              4 oz.     Specially designed for use where an oil of low
Purpose                                         1 qt.     evaporation, possessing rust-protective properties,
                                               1 gal.     is desired.
VV-G-632 General Purpose Grease                35 lb.     Automotive chassis, suitable for lubrication of
                                              100 lb.     machinery equipped with pressure grease fitting.
MIL-G-81322.Grease Aircraft                     1 lb.     Used in antifriction bearings operating at high
                                                8 oz.     speeds and high temperatures.
MIL-C-11090 Cleaning Compound                  5 gal.     Used as a solvent for cleaning grease and oils.
                                              55 gal.
MIL-L-17672 Lubrication Oil General            1 gal.     Used in steam turbines, hydraulic systems, water
Purpose                                       55 gal.     generators and hydraulic turbine governors.
VV-L-751 Lubrication oil                       35 lb.     Cold weather. Warm weather. Hot weather. Used
                                                          for lubricating chain, wire rope, exposed gears.


    Table 1-43 contains a list of common cleaning and preservation materials that were compiled from
Naval Air Technical Manual 16-1-540, Avionic Cleaning and Corrosion Prevention Control.



                                         Table 1-43.—Cleaning Materials
                             Non-abrasive cleaning & polishing pad
                             Isopropyl alcohol TT-I-735
                             General purpose lubricating oil VV-L-800
                             Instrument grease MIL-G-8137
                             General purpose grease MIL-G-81322
                             Zip-lock plastic bags
                             Distilled water
                             Paint brush
                             Toothbrush
                             Pipe cleaners
                             Q tips
                             Face shield
                             Goggles
                             Rubber gloves
                             Magnifying glass
                             Vacuum cleaner
                             Hot air gun
                             Inspection mirror
                             Rubber bucket
                             Plastic spray bottle



                                                  1-125
     Remember to use the proper safety precautions applicable to toxic, volatile solvents and flammable
lubricants. You can refer to Naval Ships' Technical Manual (NSTM), Chapter 670, Stowage, Handling,
and Disposal of Hazardous General Use Consumables, NAVSEA S9086-WK-STM-000.

Using the Oscilloscope

      An oscilloscope can be used for more than just studying the shape of a waveform. By looking at
lissajous patterns and using an octopus, you can compare the phase and frequency relationship of two
signals and check electronic components in a circuit.

     LISSAJOUS PATTERNS.—The simplest lissajous patterns are produced by two sine waves of the
same frequency and amplitude being applied to the horizontal and vertical deflection voltage inputs of an
oscilloscope. Figure 1-37 shows patterns for several common phase relationships. These can be used to
estimate the approximate phase angle of the two signals being studied.




                                                  1-126
                      Figure 1-37.—Lissajous patterns, showing the effects of phase relationships.


     Figure 1-38 will aid you in computing a phase angle if a more precise calculation is needed. We will
use the graticule on the oscilloscope, a ratio formula, and sine (sin) table to compute the angle.




                                                     1-127
                                      Figure 1-38.—Computation of phase angle.


     To find the angle, we should first divide Y1 by Y2. We can then take that number, look it up in the
sine portion of table 1-35, and read the angle.

     For example, let's let each graticule in figure 1-36 represent 1 centimeter. Then,




    If we look for .5 in the sine column of table 1-35, we find that .5 is the value for the sine of 30
degrees.

      The frequency ratio between two sine waves can also be determined from lissajous patterns. Figure
1-39 shows various frequency ratios between signals. Figure 1-40 and 1-41, views A, show how phase
relationship can affect these patterns. If tangent lines are drawn across the top and down the side of the
pattern, the ratio of points (free ends and loops) that touch these lines equals the frequency ratio. Figure 1-
41 is an example of this method. Refer back to figure 1-39 and notice the relationship of loops and open
ends in each example. You can find more detailed information on lissajous patterns in the Electronics
Installation and Maintenance Book (EIMB), Test Methods and Practices, NAVSEA 0976-LP-000-0130.




                                                    1-128
Figure 1-39.—Lissajous patterns of different frequency ratios.




                        1-129
Figure 1-40.—Lissajous patterns for various phase relationships.




                         1-130
                        Figure 1-41—3:1 Lissajous patterns and calculation of frequency ratio.


     THE OCTOPUS.—The octopus is a small, homemade test set used with an oscilloscope to check
electronic components in circuit. It can be made easily and cheaply using parts from the supply system.
Figure 1-42 is a schematic of an octopus that uses either a 6.3-volt filament transformer or an audio
oscillator for input power. The benefits of in circuit troubleshooting with an octopus are (1) reduced
maintenance time, (2) less chance of damage from soldering-iron heat, and (3) a visual display of the
component's condition.




                                                    1-131
                                 Figure 1-42.—Octopus schematic diagram (typical).



     The octopus tests all components for shorts, high resistance, and opens; it checks front-to-back ratios
on junction components (transistors and diodes); and it analyzes ICs and reactive components (capacitors
and inductors). Figure 1-43 shows some typical oscilloscope displays obtained when the octopus is used.
Figures 1-44, 1-45, and 1-46 depict transistor, potentiometer, and combination component displays,
respectively. Detailed operating procedures can be found in topic 6 of NEETS, Module 16, Introduction
to Test Equipment, and in the Electronic Installation and Maintenance Book (EIMB), Test Methods and
Practices, NAVSEA SE000-00-EIM-130.




                              Figure 1-43.—Typical oscilloscope displays for an octopus.


                                                    1-132
Figure 1-44.—Transistor check, single junction.




   Figure 1-45.—Potentiometer noise check.




                 1-133
                                        Figure 1-46.—Combination displays.


Six-Step Troubleshooting Procedure

     You may have the job of maintaining or helping to maintain some electrical or electronic unit,
subsystem, or system. Some of these jobs may be complex, but even a complex job can be broken down
into simple steps. Basically, any repair of electric or electronic equipment should be done in the following
order:

    1. Symptom recognition. This is the action of recognizing some disorder or malfunction in
       electronic equipment.

    2. Symptom elaboration. Obtaining a more detailed description of the trouble symptom is the
       purpose of this step.

    3. Listing probable faulty functions. This step is applicable to equipment that contains more than
       one functional area or unit. From the information you have gathered, where could the trouble
       logically be located?

    4. Localizing the faulty function. In this step you determine which of the functional units of the
       multiunit equipment is actually at fault.



                                                   1-134
     5. Localizing trouble to the circuit. You will do extensive testing in this step to isolate the trouble to
        a specific circuit.

     6. Failure analysis. This step is multipart. Here you determine which part is faulty, repair/replace
        the part, determine what caused the failure, return the equipment to its proper operating status,
        and record the necessary information in a recordkeeping book for other maintenance personnel
        in the future. While not a part of this step, the technician should reorder any parts used in repair
        of the faulty equipment.

    Sometimes you may run into difficulty in finding (or troubleshooting) the problem. Some hints that
may help in your efforts are:


     •   Observe the equipment's operation for any and all faults
     •   Check for any defective components with your eyes and nose
     •   Analyze the cause of the failure for a possible underlying problem

Classes of Overhaul Work

    There are five classes of equipment overhaul (A, B, C, D, and E). The class defines the type and
scope of work to be done on each equipment by the overhauling activity. (Do not confuse equipment
overhaul with the term regular overhaul.)

     CLASS A OVERHAUL.—A class A overhaul includes overhaul, repair, and/or modification; for
example a modification could be an Ordnance Alteration (ORDALT), Special Program Alteration
(SPALT), Ship Alteration (SHIPALT), or a field change that will sustain or improve the performance of a
system or component to meet its most-recent design and technical specifications. The end product should
be like new in appearance and operation.

      CLASS B OVERHAUL.—A class B overhaul includes overhaul and repair that will restore the
performance of a system or component to its original design and technical specifications. Modifications
or alterations are not done unless specified by the customer.

     CLASS C OVERHAUL.—A class C overhaul includes only repair work on a system or component
specified by a work request or work required to correct malfunctions specified by the customer.

     CLASS D OVERHAUL.—A class D overhaul includes work related to the open, inspect and report
type of work request. It is intended to be diagnostic in nature and may require various tests. It is normally
associated with preoverhaul test and inspection (POT& I).

    CLASS E OVERHAUL.—A class E overhaul includes work required to incorporate all alterations
and/or modifications specified for a system or component.

Alterations and Modifications to Equipment

     Alterations and modifications to shipboard systems and equipment may take several forms. Some of
these are Ship Alterations (SHIPALTS), Ordnance Alterations (ORDALTS), Special Program Alterations
(SPALTS), and Air Alterations (AIRALTS). These alterations (with the exception of electronic
equipment field changes) are categorized as follows:




                                                    1-135
     •     A military alteration that changes or improves the operational or military characteristics of a
           ship.

     •     A technical alteration that generally concerns personnel safety and equipment effectiveness.

     •     An alteration-equivalent-to-repair (AER) could be one of three types. One involves substitution,
           without change in design, of approved, different material, available from standard stock. The
           second involves replacement of worn or damaged parts, assemblies, or equipment with those of
           later and more efficient design that have been approved by the responsible systems command.
           The last type is used for strengthening of parts that need repair or replacement to improve the
           reliability of the parts, provided no other change in design is involved.


     ALTERATION RESPONSIBILITIES.—Ship alterations (SHIPALTS) involve material under the
technical control of the Naval Sea Systems Command (NAVSEA). Alterations which affect shipboard
systems and equipment under the technical control of other systems commands; for example, air
alterations (AIRALTS), ordnance alterations (ORDALTS), and special program alterations (SPALTS),
are not SHIPALTS. However, they may require concurrent SHIPALTS if changes affect shipboard
system interface.

     ELECTRONIC EQUIPMENT FIELD CHANGES.—Field changes are identified by type and
class. The type depends on the material included in the change kit or furnished by the installing activity.
The class refers to the funding and the installation responsibility.

     Details concerning various types of and approval authority for alterations can be found in the
Electronics Installation and Maintenance Book (EIMB), General, NAVSEA SE000-00-EIM-100.

Material Identification

     At some time in your work, you will probably have to replace a defective part or component. If you
are familiar with national stock numbers (NSNs), Navy item control numbers (NICNs), part numbers
(PNs), and the Coordinated Shipboard Allowance List (COSAL), getting the replacement should be a
simple chore.

     NATIONAL STOCK NUMBERS (NSNs).—An NSN is a 13-digit stock number used to identify
an item of material in the Federal Catalog System of the Department of Defense. It consists of a four-digit
federal supply classification (FSC) and a nine-digit national item identification number (NIIN). The first
two digits of the FSC denote the group or major division of materials and the last two digits denote the
class of subdivision of material within a group.

     Examples of groups are:

      GROUP            TITLE

      31               Bearings
      48               Valves
      59               Electrical and Electronic Systems Components
      79               Cleaning supplies




                                                     1-136
     A complete listing of groups is provided in NAVSUP P-485, Afloat Supply Procedures. The NIIN
consists of a two-digit national codification bureau (NCB) code and seven digits which, in conjunction
with the NCB code, uniquely identify each NSN item in the Federal Supply System. For example:




     Two NCB codes are assigned for the United States, 00 and 01. Code 00 identifies all FSNs (11-digit
federal stock numbers used prior to NSNs) assigned prior to 31 March 1975. Code 01 identifies the
numbers assigned after that time. The NCBs must be included and be correct, or the material may be
rejected or you may receive the wrong material.

     NAVY ITEM CONTROL NUMBERS (NICNs).—Material not included in the Federal Catalog
System, but stocked or monitored in the Navy Supply System, are listed by 13-character Navy item
control numbers (NICNs). These NICNs are readily identified by a two-position alpha code which
signifies the type of NICN. This code and a seven-position alphanumeric uniquely identify each NICN
item in the Navy Supply System. NICN codes that are currently used and examples of NICNs follow:

NICN CODE          APPLICATION                                        EXAMPLE

LE                 Poseidon items common to Trident                   1220-LE-F00-4016
LF                 Stock numbers for forms                            1018-LF-504-2201
LK                 Aircraft change kit numbers                        1234-LK-UA1-2345
LP                 Stock numbers for publications                     0530-LP-485-0000
LS                 Special programs alteration kit numbers            1234-LS-123-4567
LX                 ASO local control numbers                          1560-LX-NPI-2345
LL                 Local control numbers (Temporary)                  4820-LL-000-1234
                   Local control numbers (Permanent)                  7520-LL-CAO-0001

     Note: The permanent local control number can always be recognized by a C in the seventh position.

     Parts can be ordered by using a NIIN or NICN.

     PART NUMBERS (PNs).—A part number (also known as reference number) may be used to
identify a material item or to assist you in finding the current NSN. Part numbers include old NSNs,
FSNs, electron tube type numbers, and electronic equipment circuit symbol numbers. Two other
important sources for reference numbers are manufacturers' part numbers and Navy drawing and piece

                                                 1-137
numbers. They can be easily converted to NSNs by using the Master Cross-Reference List (MCRL).
Table 1-44 shows excerpts from the MCRL. If the part or reference numbers do not cross to an NSN, the
P/N can be used to order the replacement. A good source of part numbers is the parts list in the equipment
technical manual.


                          Table 1-44.—Excerpts from Master Cross-Reference List (MCRL)




     COORDINATED SHIPBOARD ALLOWANCE LIST (COSAL).—The COSAL can help you to
identify repair or replacement parts. Part IIB of the COSAL is a cross-reference (microfiche only) from
circuit symbol number to PN/NIIN/NICN. These parts are normally carried onboard ship for ready issue.




                                                  1-138
Outside Assistance

     Your command may from time to time request assistance from another activity. This outside
assistance is usually for the purpose of training, technical assistance on unusual design, planning,
installation, or solving maintenance problems. Many of these activities exist throughout the fleet and
shore establishments. Their capabilities and areas of responsibility differ just as equipment and systems
differ. Several of the more widely known activities are included below.

     MOBILE TECHNICAL UNITS (MOTU).—MOTUs provide on-the-job training and technical
assistance for shipboard NAVSEA-SYSCOM/NAVELEXSYSCOM systems and equipment. They are
staffed by senior military personnel and Contractor Engineering and Technical Services (CETS)
representatives. MOTU’s and NAUSEA combined about 10 years ago to form FTSCLANT/PAC.

    MOTUs are located in the following areas:

       FTSCLANT/PAC
       Pearl Harbor, Hawaii
       Norfolk, Va.
       Groton, Conn.
       San Diego, Calif.
       Naples, Italy
       Yokosuka, Japan
       Mayport, Fla.
       NSB Kings Bay, Ga.
       Seattle, Wash.

      NAVAL SEA SYSTEMS COMMAND (NAVSEA).— NAVSEA provides technical assistance
through the use of direct fleet support technicians (TECHREP). These technicians are not to be used
primarily as repairmen. The objective of their services is to promote fleet readiness and maintenance self-
sufficiency. NAVSEATECHREP are located at Naval Sea Support Centers (NAVSEACENs) in
Portsmouth, Va., and San Diego, Calif. They are also located at Fleet Support Offices (FSOs) in Mayport,
Fla., Charleston, S.C., and New London, Conn. Selected equipment may have services provided by
NAVSES, Philadelphia, or NAVSHIPWPNSYSENGSTA (NSWSES), Port Hueneme, Calif.

     NAVAL ELECTRONIC SYSTEMS COMMAND (NAVELEX).— NAVELEX equipment is
supported by the Fleet Liaison Program. Training and technical assistance is provided by civilian
technicians at six NAVELEX field activities. Five are Naval Electronic Systems Engineering Centers
(NESECs) and one is a Naval Electronic Systems Engineering Activity (NESEA). Fleet Liaison Offices
are located at NESEC Washington, D.C., NESEC Charleston, S.C., NESEC Portsmouth, Va., NESEC
San Diego, Calif., NESEC Vallejo, Calif., and NESEA St. Inigoes, Md.

     NAVAL AIR SYSTEMS COMMAND (NAVAIR).— NAVAIR established the Navy Engineering
and Technical Services (NETS) program to provide a source of technical and training assistance
expertise. The program is comprised of military and civilian personnel. These people are qualified to
provide advice, instruction, and training to support the installation, operation, and maintenance of Navy
weapons, weapon-systems, and equipment. NETS technicians are assigned and administered by the
Pacific Missile Test Center, Point Mugu, Calif., and the Naval Aviation Engineering Service Unit
(NAESU), Philadelphia, Pa.

     The Pacific Missile Test Center provides engineering and technical services on air-launched missile
systems, air-launched guided weapons, Navy target systems, conventional ordnance, and associated


                                                   1-139
support equipment. All aircraft equipment and systems not specified above are the responsibility of the
Naval Aviation Engineering Service Unit (NAESU).

     NAVAL AVIATION ENGINEERING SERVICE UNIT (NAESU).— NAESU provides field
engineering assistance and instruction in installation, repair, and operation of all types of aviation systems
and equipment to naval aviation fleet and shore activities throughout the world. This is accomplished by
detachments (NAESU DETs) at the following locations:

  Atlanta, Ga.                        Miramar, Calif.
  Atsugi, Japan                       Misawa, Japan
  Barbers Point, Hawaii               Moffett Field, Calif.
  Beaufort, S.C.                      Naples, Italy
  Bermuda                             New Orleans, La.
  Brunswick, Maine                    New River, N.C.
  Cecil Field, Fla.                   Norfolk, Va
  Cherry Point, N.C.                  Oceana, Va.
  China Lake, Calif.                  Okinawa, Japan
  Corpus Christi, Tex.                Patuxent River, Md.
  Cubi Point, Philippines             Pensacola, Fla.
  Dallas, Tex.                        Point Mugu, Calif.
  Detroit, Mich.                      Rota, Spain
  El Toro, Calif.                     San Diego, Calif.
  Glenview, Ill.                      Sigonella, Sicily
  Agana, Guam                         South Weymouth, Mass.
  Iwakuni, Japan                      Washington, D.C.
  Jacksonville, Fla.                  Whidbey Island, Wash.
  Kaneohe Bay, Hawaii                 Willow Grove, Pa.
  Key West, Fla.                      Yuma, Ariz.
  Lemoore, Calif                      Memphis, Tenn

     CARRIER AND FIELD SERVICE UNITS (CAFSUs).— CAFSUs furnish technical guidance
and assistance to shipyards, ship repair facilities, and shore and fleet personnel concerning the
installation, operation, maintenance, and testing of shipboard NAVAIR equipment. This equipment
includes catapults, arresting gear, visual landing aids, flight deck lighting, pilot landing aid television
(PLAT) systems, Fresnel-lens optical landing systems (FLOLS), and integrated launch and recovery
television surveillance (ILARTS) systems.

    CAFSUs are under the administrative control of the Naval Air Engineering Center (NAEC),
Lakehurst, N.J., and are located at the following activities:

NAS Norfolk, Va.                      SRF Subic Bay, Philippines
NAVSTA Mayport, Fla.                  NAEC Philadelphia, Pa.
NAF Naples, Italy                     SRF Yokosuka, Japan
NAS North Island, Calif.              NAS Alemeda, Calif.

     INTERMEDIATE MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES (IMAs).—Afloat IMAs (tenders and repair
ships) and shore IMAs (SIMAs) provide maintenance support for repairs beyond the capabilities of ship's
force. IMAs also have facilities for test equipment calibration and emergency parts manufacture.
Electrical, electronic, and ordnance repair divisions provide repairs on various equipment including
gyrocompasses, navigational equipment, film projectors, internal communications, sonar, radar, IFF,

                                                    1-140
radio receivers and transmitters, test antennas, guns and small arms, torpedoes, fire control, and missile
systems. Table 1-45 lists the various IMAs and their locations.


                                  Table 1-45.—Intermediate Maintenance Activities
        A. DESTROYER TENDER (AD)
        SIERRA                                      AD            18            CHARLESTON
        YOSEMITE                                    AD            19            MAYPORT
        SAMUEL GOMPERS                              AD            37            SAN DIEGO
        PUGET SOUND                                 AD            38            GAETA
        YELLOWSTONE                                 AD            41            NORFOLK
        ACADIA                                      AD            42            SAN DIEGO
        CAPE COD                                    AD            43            SAN DIEGO
        SHENANDOAH                                  AD            44            NORFOLK

        B. REPAIR SHIP (AR)
        VULCAN                                      AR            5             NORFOLK
        JASON                                       AR            8             PEARL HARBOR

        C. SUBMARINE TENDER (AS)
        FULTON                                      AS            11            QUINCY
        ORION                                       AS            18            LA MADDALENA
        PROTEUS                                     AS            19            GUAM
        HUNLEY                                      AS            31            HOLY LOCH
        HOLLAND                                     AS            32            CHARLESTON
        SIMON LAKE                                  AS            33            KINGS BAY
        CANOPUS                                     AS            34            CHARLESTON
        L Y SOEAR                                   AS            36            NORFOLK
        DIXON                                       AS            37            SAN DIEGO
        EMORY S LAND                                AS            39            NORFOLK
        FRANK CABLE                                 AS            40            CHARLESTON
        MCKEE                                       AS            41            SAN DIEGO

        D. SHORE INTERMEDIATE MAINTENANCE ACTIVITY
        SIMA CHARLESTON                                                         CHARLESTON
        SIMA GUANTANAMO BAY                                                     GUANTANAMO
        SIMA LITTLE CREEK                                                       LITTLE CREEK
        SIMA (NRMF) NEWPORT                                                     NEWPORT R.I.
        SIMA MAYPORT                                                            MAYPORT
        SIMA NORFOLK                                                            NORFOLK
        SIMA PORTSMOUTH VA                                                      PORTSMOUTH VA
        SIMA (NRMF) PHILADELPHIA                                                NB PHILA
        SIMA SAN DIEGO                                                          SAN DIEGO
        SIMA PEARL HARBOR                                                       PEARL HARBOR
        SIMA SAN FRANCISCO                                                      ALAMEDA
        SIMA LONG BEACH                                                         LONG BEACH




                                                   1-141
Publications and Documents

    Various publications, some of which are discussed below, are available for guidance in maintenance
work or for reference and study. In general, these publications are available from the Naval Publications
and Forms Center through the supply system.

     NAVAL SHIPS' TECHNICAL MANUAL (NSTM).—The Naval Ships' Technical Manual
(NSTM) is a prime reference for information on NAVSEA equipment. Chapter 400, Electronics, is most
useful as it provides major policies and instructions pertaining to electronics work and material under
NAVSEA and NAVELEX responsibility. Other chapters of interest to electrical and electronics
technicians are:

300      Electrical Plant General
302      Electric Motors and Controllers
310      Electric Power Generators and Conversion Equipment
320      Electric Power Distribution Systems
330      Lighting
430      Interior Communication Installations
434      Motion Picture Equipment
491      Electrical Measuring and Test Instruments
510      Ventilating, Heating, Cooling, and Air-Conditioning Systems for Surface Ships
532      Liquid-Cooling Systems for Electronic Equipment
9006     Submarine Antennas and Masts
634      Deck Coverings

     ELECTRONICS INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE BOOK (EIMB).—The Electronics
Installation and Maintenance Book series supplements instructions and data supplied in equipment
technical manuals. The EIMB is intended to reduce time-consuming research on electronic equipment and
circuit theory. These handbooks fall into two categories: general information and equipment-oriented
handbooks. The latter includes general test procedures, adjustments, and general servicing information.
All handbooks of the series are listed below.

TITLE                                                 NUMBERS
                                        GENERAL

General                                       SE000-00-ElM-100
Installation Standards                        0967-LP-000-0110
Electronic Circuits                           0967-000-0120
Test Methods & Practices                      0967-LP-000-0130
Reference Data                                0967-000-0140
EMI Reduction                                 0967-000-0150
General Maintenance                           SE000-00-EIM-160
                                EQUIPMENT-ORIENTED

Communications                                        SE000-00-EIM-010
Radar                                                 SE000-00-EIM-020
Sonar                                                 SE000-00-EIM-030
Test Equipment                                        SE000-00-EIM-040
Radiac                                                0967-000-0050
Countermeasures                                       SE000-00-EIM-07

                                                  1-142
     ENGINEERING INFORMATION BULLETIN (EIB).—The Engineering Information Bulletin is
published biweekly and distributed to all naval ships and electronics installation and maintenance
activities. It is authoritative and is a means of rapid dissemination of advanced hull, mechanical,
electronic, electrical, and related equipment information. It includes information concerning approved
beneficial suggestions, electronics field changes, mechanical alterations (MECHALTS), installation
techniques, maintenance notes and practices, and technical manual availabilities, advance change notices,
and distribution.

     EQUIPMENT TECHNICAL MANUALS.—Technical manuals carry information essential to the
proper operation, maintenance, and repair of specific equipment. These manuals may occasionally contain
errors. In those cases, change notices are provided to correct the manuals. Updates because of equipment
changes are also provided. These changes must be installed in the technical manuals to maintain accuracy
and to prevent the loss of man-hours resulting from the use of obsolete data and/or schematics. The
Guide for User Maintenance of NAVSEA Technical Manuals, NAVSEA S005-AA-GYD-030/TMMP,
provides information on identifying, ordering, deficiency reporting, and updating technical manuals.

     NAVSUP PUBLICATION 2002.—NAVSUP 2002 is the Navy Stock List of Publication and
Forms and provides NSNs for ordering Navy publications and their changes. Each edition is issued
quarterly and supersedes the previous one in its entirety. It is produced in microfiche only and contains
three sections:

          Section 1—Forms

          Section 2—Publications

          Section 3—NAVAIR Technical Directives


     DECKPLATE.—The deckplate is a technical periodical published monthly by NAVSEA. It
contains information on design, construction, conversion, operation, maintenance, and repair of Navy
vessels and their equipment. It also includes articles on personnel safety, service hints, and adopted
beneficial suggestions.

     NAVAL SAFETY CENTER PUBLICATIONS.—The Naval Safety Center publishes bulletins
and several periodicals to keep Navy personnel informed on the subject of accident prevention.

     •   Ship Safety Bulletin—This monthly newsletter contains safety notes and accident data.

     •   Fathom—This quarterly magazine contains a review of surface ship and submarine accident
         prevention and safety articles.

     •   Approach—This magazine is a monthly review of articles concerning aviation safety and
         accident prevention.

     •   MECH—MECH is a bimonthly review of aviation maintenance related mishaps,
         material/personnel hazards, and general aviation ground safety.

     TRAINING MANUALS (TRAMANS).—Training manuals are designed to give enlisted personnel
background knowledge for the proper performance of their assigned jobs. Electrical and electronic theory
and operation and maintenance information on pertinent equipment are presented at different rating levels
in the TRAMANs written for the technical rates.



                                                   1-143
                                             REFERENCES

Afloat Shopping Guide, NAVSUP Publication 4400, Naval Supply Systems Command, Washington, D.C.,
    1991.

Afloat Supply Procedures, NAVSUP Publication 485, 0530-LP-185-7600, Naval Supply Systems
    Command, Washington, D.C., 1989.

Avionic Cleaning and Corrosion Prevention/Control, NAVAIR 16-1-540, Naval Air Systems Command,
    Washington, D.C., 1984.

Basic Military Requirements, NAVEDTRA 10054-F, Naval Education and Training Professional
    Development and Technology Center, Pensacola, Fla., 1986.

Cable Comparison Handbook, Military Standard MIL-STD 299, Department of Defense, Washington,
    D.C., 1989.

Capacitors, Selection and Use of, Military Standard MIL-STD-198E, Department of Defense,
    Washington, D.C., 1984.

Circuit Breakers, Selection and Use of, Military Standard MIL-STD-1498B, Department of Defense,
    Washington, D.C., 1988.

Design Data Book, USN Ships NAVSEA 0902-LP-006-0000, Naval Sea Systems Command, Washington,
    D.C., 1988.

Electrical Connectors, Plug-in Sockets, and Associated Hardware, Selection and Use of, Military
     Standard MIL-STD-1353B, Department of Defense, Washington, D.C., 1980.

Electronics Installation and Maintenance Book (EIMB), General, Naval Sea Systems Command,
     Washington, D.C., NAVSEA SE000-00-EIM-100, 1983.

Electronics Installation and Maintenance Book (EIMB), Test Methods and Practices, NAVSEA 0967-LP-
     000-0130, Naval Sea Systems Command, Washington, D.C., 1980.

Electronics Installation and Maintenance Book (EIMB), Reference Data, Naval Sea Systems Command,
     Washington, D.C., NAVSHIPS 0967-000-0140, 1972.

Electronics Installation and Maintenance Book (EIMB), General Maintenance, Naval Sea Systems
     Command, Washington, D.C., NAVSEA SE000-00-EIM-160, 1981.

Fiber Optic Symbols, Military Standard MIL-STD-1864, Department of Defense, Washington, D.C.,
     1991.

Fuses, Fuseholders, and Associated Hardware, Selection and Use of, Military Standard MIL-STD-1360A,
    Department of Defense, Washington, D.C., 1979.

Glossary of Telecommunication Terms, Federal Standard 1037A, General Services Administration,
    Washington, D.C., 1986.

I C Electrician 3, Naval Education and Training Professional Development and Technology Center,
     Pensacola, Fla., NAVEDTRA 10059-A, 1989.




                                                1-144
Installation Practices-Aircraft Electric and Electronic Wiring, NAVAIR 01-1A-505, Naval Air Systems
     Command, Washington, D.C., 1988.

Installation Standards and Practices, NAVELEX 0280-LP-900-8000, 1977.

Insulation Sleeving, Electrical, Heat-Shrinkable, Polyolefin, Dual-Wall, Outer Wall Crosslinked, Military
     Specification MIL-I-23053/4C, Department of Defense, Washington, D.C., 1988.

Insulation Sleeving, Electrical, Heat-Shrinkable, Polyolefin, Flexible, Crosslinked, Military Specification
     MIL-I-23053/5B, Washington, D.C., 1986.

Linear Integrated Circuits Study Booklet, Module 34, CNTT-E-056, 1981.

List of Standard Microcircuits, Military Standard MIL-STD-1562V, Department of Defense, Washington,
     D.C., 1991.

Microcircuits, General Specification for, Military Specification MIL-M-38510H, Department of Defense,
    Washington, D.C., 1990.

Naval Oceanography Command Instruction 3144.1C, 1983.

Naval Ships' Technical Manual (NSTM), Stowage, Handling, and Disposal of Hazardous General Use
    Consumables, Chapter 670, NAVSEA S9086-WK-STM-010, Naval Sea Systems Command,
    Washington, D.C., 1987.

NEETS, Module 1, Introduction to Matter, Energy, and Direct Current, NAVEDTRA 172-01-00-88, Naval
   Education and Training Professional Development and Technology Center, Pensacola, Fla., 1988.

NEETS, Module 2, Introduction to Alternating Current and Transformers, NAVEDTRA 172-02-00-91,
   Naval Education and Training Professional Development and Technology Center, Pensacola, Fla.,
   1991.

NEETS, Module 3, Introduction to Circuit Protection, Control, and Measurement, NAVEDTRA 172-03-
   00-85, Naval Education and Training Professional Development and Technology Center, Fla., 1995.

NEETS, Module 4, Introduction to Electrical Conductors, Wiring Techniques, and Schematic Reading,
   NAVEDTRA 172-04-00-85, Naval Education and Training Professional Development and
   Technology Center, Pensacola, Fla., 1985.

NEETS, Module 5, Introduction to Generators and Motors, NAVEDTRA 172-05-00-79, Naval Education
   and Training Professional Development and Technology Center, Pensacola, Fla., 1979.

NEETS, Module 6, Introduction to Electronic Emission, Tubes, and Power Supplies, NAVEDTRA 172-06-
   00-82, Naval Education and Training Professional Development and Technology Center, Pensacola,
   Fla., 1982.

NEETS, Module 7, Introduction to Solid-State Devices and Power Supplies, NAVEDTRA 172-07-00-82,
   Naval Education and Training Professional Development and Technology Center, Pensacola, Fla.,
   1982.

NEETS, Module 8, Introduction to Amplifiers, NAVEDTRA 172-08-00-82, Naval Education and Training
   Professional Development and Technology Center, Pensacola, Fla., 1982.




                                                  1-145
NEETS, Module 9, Introduction to Wave Generation and Wave-Shaping Circuits, NAVEDTRA 172-09-
   00-83, Naval Education and Training Professional Development and Technology Center, Pensacola,
   Fla., 1983.

NEETS, Module 13, Introduction to Number Systems, Boolean Algebra, and Logic Circuits, NAVEDTRA
   172-13-00-86, Naval Education and Training Professional Development and Technology Center,
   Pensacola, Fla., 1986.

NEETS, Module 18, Radar Principles, NAVEDTRA 172-18-00-84, Naval Education and Training
   Professional Development and Technology Center, Pensacola, Fla., 1984.

Resistors, Selection and Use of, Military Standard MIL-STD-199E, Department of Defense, Washington,
    D.C., 1991.

Rf Transmission Lines and Fittings, MIL-HDBK-216, Department of Defense, Washington, D.C., 1962.

Shipboard Electronic Material Officer, NAVEDTRA 10478-A1, Naval Education and Training
    Professional Development and Technology Center, Pensacola, Fla., 1982.

Standard General Requirements for Electronics Equipment, Military Standard MIL-STD-454M,
    Department of Defense, Washington, D.C., 1989.




                                               1-146
