COMMUNITY LIFELINES
IMPLEMENTATION TOOLKIT
Comprehensive information and resources for
implementing lifelines during incident response




                                                  Version 2.1
                                                    July 2023
                                                                                            2

Organization
Content in this toolkit is organized into the following four sections:
   1.       Lifelines Overview ……………………………………………………………………………………….Slide 3
   2.       Situational Awareness and Reporting..…………………………………………………………Slide 29
   3.       Lifelines and Operational Planning ……………………………………………………………..Slide 37
   4.       Icons and Templates …………………………………………………………………………………..Slide 59
  Companion documents to the toolkit may include:
   Cover Sheet
   Presenter’s Guide
   Fact Sheet
   Templates
        –     Lifeline Card Template
        –     Tier I, Tier II, and Tier III Reporting Templates
        –     Incident Approach Template



                                                                             Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                     3




     Section I:
Lifelines Overview
                                                                                                                                     4

Incorporating Community Lifelines into Response
FEMA developed the community lifelines construct to increase effectiveness in disaster
operations and better position the Agency to respond to catastrophic incidents. The
construct allows emergency managers to:
       Characterize the incident and identify the root causes of priority issue areas
       Distinguish the highest priorities and most complex issues from other incident information

                                           WHY A LIFELINES CONSTRUCT?
   Lifelines provide an outcome-based, survivor-centric frame of reference that assists responders with the following:
    –    Rapidly determining the scale and complexity of a disaster
    –    Identifying the severity, root causes, and interdependencies of impacts to basic, critical lifesaving and life-sustaining
         services within impacted areas
    –    Developing operational priorities and objectives that focus response efforts on the delivery of these services by the
         most effective means available
    –    Communicating disaster-related information across all levels of public, private, and non-profit sectors using a
         commonly understood, plain language lexicon
    –    Guiding response operations to support and facilitate integration across mission areas

                                                                                                                     Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                      5

   Toolkit 2.1
The 4th Edition of the National Response Framework formalizes the community lifelines
                       construct in national level response doctrine.
      Toolkit Version 2.1 is an interim product, designed to introduce adjustments
        which improve the community lifelines construct. Major changes include:
           Adding an eighth lifeline focused on “Water Systems.”
               This lifeline includes some components previously aligned under the “Food, Water, Shelter”
                lifeline.
         Renaming the “Food, Water, Shelter” lifeline to “Food, Hydration, Shelter.”
         Refining the purpose of the community lifelines construct as an impact assessment
          tool rather than a tool supporting stabilization. The toolkit still addresses stabilization
          as an objective, particularly in response planning.
         Revising the “conditions designations” color coding scheme to focus on community
          impact reporting, rather than progress toward reaching stabilization targets.
         Simplifying and standardizing situational awareness reporting products for a more
          streamlined approach in real world application.
                                                                                                       Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                    6

    Evolution of the Community Lifelines Construct
While Toolkit 2.1 still focuses on the Response Mission Area, FEMA continues to examine
 the application of community lifelines across the disaster lifecycle and all five mission
                                           areas.

      Driving Lifeline Resilience through:
        Preparedness: Reorganizing Threat & Hazard Identification and Risk
         Assessments by lifeline
        Protection: Assessing lifeline infrastructure vulnerability
        Recovery: Transitioning from incident response to recovery
        Mitigation: Reducing lifeline vulnerability through mitigation activities

    The Lifelines Toolkit will continue to be refined as the construct evolves


                                                                                     Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                           7

Lifelines, Core Capabilities, ESFs
The interrelationship of Emergency Support Functions (ESF), Core Capabilities, and
           lifelines can be thought of in terms of means, ways, and ends.
    Means: ESFs and other organizing bodies—the means—are the way we
     organize across departments and agencies, community organizations, and
     industries to enhance coordination and integration to deliver the
     Response Core Capabilities.
    Ways: Response Core Capabilities describe the grouping of response
     actions—the ways—that can be taken to re-establish lifeline infrastructure.
     FEMA executes Lines of Effort (LOE) to operationalize the Core Capabilities
     (the ways) for response and recovery planning and operations.
    Ends: Lifelines describe the critical service infrastructure within a
     community that must be stabilized and re-established to address
     community impact—the ends—by alleviating threats to life and property.
                                                                            Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                          8

    Community Lifeline Implementation
Lifelines reframe incident information to provide decision-makers with impact statements and summarize
    the root causes of disruptions to lifeline services. The community lifelines construct maximizes the
            effectiveness of federally supported, state managed, and locally executed response.

   Incorporating the community lifelines construct primarily impacts how
                                                                                 RESPONSE PROCESSES DO NOT CHANGE;
     incident information is framed, organized, and reported during response
                                                                                HOWEVER, FRAMING THE INCIDENT AROUND
   ESFs, Core Capabilities, response operations, procedures, and key          LIFELINES CREATES SOLUTIONS THAT ADDRESS

     elements of doctrine remain fundamentally the same                        ROOT CAUSES AND BETTER UNDERSTAND AND
                                                                                      ADDRESS INCIDENT IMPACTS
  Implementation of the community lifelines construct provides the
  following benefits:
      –    Understanding, prioritizing, and communicating incident impacts
      –    Structuring and formatting decision-making support products in a
           streamlined approach (e.g., briefings, forms)
      –    Planning for incident impacts and stabilization both prior to and
           during incidents


                                                                                                         Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                 9

      Community Impact
 The community lifelines construct is used to identify and measure impacts that an incident has had on
                          critical infrastructure within an affected community.

 When a lifeline is affected by a disaster, survivors may experience disruptions which
  reduce their ability to receive critical services and recover from the effects of the
  incident. These lifeline impacts are assessed and addressed based on overall impact
  to the community, otherwise known as Community Impact.
 Addressing community impact is an ongoing process, which occurs throughout the
  disaster lifecycle. Community impact is a metric that is re-evaluated from the start of
  an incident through the conclusion of response operations to measure and assess
  progress.
     At the conclusion of response operations, and as efforts turn to recovery, all immediate community
      impacts should be addressed to the point that the impacted state, local, tribal, or territorial (SLTT)
      government no longer needs direct federal support.

                                                                                                  Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                             10

Community Lifelines Defined
    A CONSTRUCT FOR COMMUNITY IMPACT ASSESSMENT AND ANALYSIS

    A lifeline enables the continuous operation of critical government and business
     functions and is essential to human health and safety or economic security.




 Lifelines are the most fundamental services in the community that enable all other aspects
  of society to function.
 Lifelines are the integrated network of assets, services, and capabilities that are used day-to-
  day to support the recurring needs of the community.
 When disrupted, decisive intervention (e.g., rapid service re-establishment or employment of
  contingency response solutions) is required.
                                                                                              Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                        11

Deconstructing Community Lifelines
 Each lifeline is composed of multiple components and
  subcomponents that help define the services that
  make up that lifeline.                                   ORGANIZATION AND BREAKDOWN OF EACH LIFELINE
   Components represent the general scope of
    services for a lifeline.
   The components are further divided into relevant
    subcomponents that provide a granular level of
    enabling functions for the delivery of services to a
    community.
 Lifelines and components are fixed, but the
  subcomponents may be adjusted as necessary.
       Note: Not every incident will impact all
       the lifelines or components.

                                                                                         Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                   12

Community Lifeline Construct
            Example components and subcomponents: Energy Lifeline


   The graphic provides an
    example breakdown of the
    Energy Lifeline into its relevant
    components and
    subcomponents.
   The subcomponents define
    each component and are
    subject to change depending
    on incident circumstances.

                                                                    Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                                   13

 Community Lifeline Components
Multiple components and subcomponents establish the parameters of the lifeline; component-level
               assessment is required to determine the condition of each lifeline.
1. Safety and Security             4. Energy                               7. Hazardous Material
       Law Enforcement/Security              Power Grid                         Facilities
       Fire Service                          Fuel                               HAZMAT, Pollutants, Contaminants
       Search and Rescue
                                   5. Communications
       Government Service                                                 8. Water Systems
                                         Infrastructure
       Community Safety                                                         Potable Water Infrastructure
                                         Responder Communications
                                                                                 Wastewater Management
2. Food, Hydration, Shelter              Alerts, Warnings, and Messages
       Food                             Finance
       Hydration                        911 and Dispatch
       Shelter                                                              ASSESSMENT
       Agriculture                6. Transportation
                                                                                  Status        “What?”
                                          Highway/Roadway/Motor Vehicle
 3. Health and Medical
                                          Mass Transit                          Impact         “So What?”
       Medical Care
                                          Railway
       Public Health
                                          Aviation                              Actions        “Now What?”
       Patient Movement
                                          Maritime
       Medical Supply Chain                                                 Limiting Factors   “What’s the Gap?”
       Fatality Management
                                                                               ETA to Green     “When?”

                                                                                                                    Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                               14

        Safety and Security
           COMPONENTS AND SUBCOMPONENTS
     Law Enforcement/Security                      Fire Service            Search and Rescue
   Police Stations                     Fire Stations               Local Search and Rescue
   Law Enforcement                     Firefighting Resources
   Site Security
   Correctional Facilities




         Government Service                    Community Safety
   Emergency Operation Centers         Flood Control
   Essential Government Functions      Other Hazards
   Government Offices                  Protective Actions
   Schools
   Public Records
   Historic/Cultural Resources

                                                                                                Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                                      15

             Food, Hydration, Shelter
               COMPONENTS AND SUBCOMPONENTS
                  Food                                      Hydration                                      Shelter
   Commercial Food Distribution                Temporary Hydration Missions (e.g.,      Housing (e.g., homes, shelters)
   Commercial Food Supply Chain                 bottled water distribution)              Commercial Facilities (e.g., hotels)
   Food Distribution Programs (e.g., food      Commercial Water Supply Chain
    banks)



               Agriculture
   Animals and Agriculture




                                                                                                                       Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                 16

        Health and Medical
          COMPONENTS AND SUBCOMPONENTS
                     Medical Care                              Public Health
   Hospitals                                 Health Surveillance
   Dialysis                                  Human Services
   Pharmacies                                Behavioral Health
   Long-Term Care Facilities                 Vector Control
   Veterans’ Affairs (VA) Health System      Labs
   Veterinary Services
   Home Care                                              Medical Supply Chain
                                              Blood/Blood Products
                 Patient Movement             Manufacturing
   Emergency Medical Services                    Pharmaceutical Devices
                                                  Medical Gases
                                              Distribution
                Fatality Management           Critical Clinical Research
   Mortuary and Post-Mortuary Services       Sterilization
                                              Raw Materials

                                                                                  Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                     17

       Water Systems
          COMPONENTS AND SUBCOMPONENTS

              Potable Water Infrastructure                    Wastewater Management
   Intake                                      Collection
   Treatment                                   Storage
   Storage                                     Treatment
   Distribution                                Discharge




                                                                                      Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                       18

       Energy
          COMPONENTS AND SUBCOMPONENTS
                   Power Grid                                       Fuel
   Generation Systems                      Refineries/ Fuel Processing
   Transmission Systems                    Fuel Storage
   Distribution Systems                    Pipelines
                                            Fuel Distribution (e.g., gas stations, fuel points)
                                            Off-shore Oil Platforms




                                                                                        Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                  19

        Communications
          COMPONENTS AND SUBCOMPONENTS
                    Infrastructure                     Responder Communications
   Wireless                                   Land Mobile Radio (LMR) Networks
   Cable Systems and Wireline
   Broadcast (TV and Radio)
   Satellite
   Data Centers/Internet

          Alerts, Warnings, and Messages                          Finance
   Local Alert/Warning Ability                Banking Services
   Access to IPAWS (WEA, EAS, NWR)            Electronic Payment Processing
   NAWAS Terminals

                   911 & Dispatch
   Public Safety Answering Points (PSAP)
   Dispatch


                                                                                   Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                          20

          Transportation
              COMPONENTS AND SUBCOMPONENTS
    Highway/Roadway/Motor                           Mass Transit                 Railway
            Vehicle                      Bus                           Freight
   Roads                                Rail                          Passenger
   Bridges                              Ferry




              Aviation                               Maritime
   Commercial (e.g.                    Waterways
    cargo/passenger)                    Ports and Port Facilities
   General
   Military




                                                                                           Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                     21

       Hazardous Materials
          COMPONENTS AND SUBCOMPONENTS

                         Facilities                             HAZMAT, Pollutants, Contaminants
   Oil/HAZMAT Facilities (e.g., chemical, nuclear)      Oil/HAZMAT/Toxic Incidents from Non-Fixed Facilities
   Oil/HAZMAT/Toxic Incidents from Facilities           Radiological or Nuclear Incidents




                                                                                                      Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                        22

   Determining Lifeline Condition
The condition of each lifeline depends on the capability of the underlying components, and is
   informed by situational awareness reports, impact assessments, and conversing with
                  partners across the public, private, and non-profit sectors.

 Applying the following questions and understanding the incident is critical in determining
 the condition of a lifeline and components:
   Did the incident disrupt services to survivors provided by component capabilities?
   What is the extent of the disruption and impact on response and survivors?
   Has a solution to the disruption been identified?
   Has that solution been converted into a plan of action?
   Has that plan of action been resourced?
   Are there limiting factors that are worsening impacts to the community? If so, to what extent are they limiting
    services?
   Are there contingency response solutions in place? How long until emergency repairs are completed?
   When can permanent repairs begin?
   Did the incident create a surge demand exceeding component capabilities?
                                                                                                         Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                                                   23

    Analyzing Components
  Lifeline components can be analyzed using six assessment categories that capture
                 essential information for response decision-makers
       Categories                                                                 Description
        Component             Identify the component.
          Status
                              Summarize the root cause(s) of disruption to lifelines services.
         (What?)
                              Explain the disaster impacts to specific communities, disaster survivors, and response operations. Detail how the
          Impacts
                              survivor experience or response operation will improve if this component is addressed. Specify the impacted areas
        (So What?)
                              and population totals.
         Actions              Describe the actions that are being taken to address the disrupted services. Summarize the most critical actions
       (Now What?)            being taken across the whole community.
      Limiting Factors        Express issues that are preventing services from being re-established. Such issues can stem from another
     (What’s the Gap?)        lifeline/component, resource shortfall, management, policy, etc.

  Estimated Time to Status
Change and Re-establishment
                              Provide current component condition or an estimated timeframe for when a change in condition is expected.
       Requirements
          (When?)

                                                                                                                                    Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                                        24

 Example Component Analysis
          Transportation

              Categories                                                     Description
                                      Mass Transit
Component
                                      Sub-component: Bus
Status                                Bus service is unavailable due to road debris.
                                      100,000 survivors have no access to public transportation nor emergency support
Impacts                               services.

                                      Local jurisdictions are prioritizing route clearance to critical facilities, U.S. Army Corps of
                                      Engineers assigned to supplement state and local authorities with route clearance and
                                      debris removal efforts, modified mass transit schedules are being executed as roads
Actions                               become passable, micro transit being utilized on roads passable to smaller vehicles,
                                      but not buses, messaging of modified routes through numerous
                                      information/messaging platforms and outlets (radio, television, social media).

Limiting Factors                      Full service will not resume until the routes are cleared and roads inspected.

Estimated Time to Status Change and   Full service estimated to resume in a week, with a modified service available as roads
Re-establishment Requirements         become clear.

                                                                                                                         Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                                   25

Colors Indicate Lifeline or Component Condition
Unknown: Grey
  Indicates the extent of disruption and impacts to lifeline services is unknown.
Significant Impact: Red
  Indicates there are severe challenges and obstacles hindering the essential services and resources associated
   with the lifeline. Immediate attention and resources are required to address the situation and restore
   functionality.
Moderate Impact: Yellow
  Indicates that there are disruptions or limitations to the delivery of normal, pre-incident services and resources.
   The situation requires attention and proactive measures to prevent further deterioration and ensure community
   needs are met.
     Restoration of this lifeline is still in progress and the community has not returned to pre-incident levels of
      service. This includes instances in which lifeline restoration is being addressed through temporary means.
Minimal Impact: Green
  Indicates that the lifeline is functioning at pre-incident levels, with only minor disruptions or limitations.
Administrative: Blue
  Does not indicate an operational status or condition; used for administrative purposes such as presentations and
   briefings.

                                                                                                                    Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                   26

Assigning a Condition
 Assess lifeline conditions as incident
  circumstances evolve and over the course of
  response operations.
   –   A color designation represents a snapshot in time for that
       response operational period.

 The baseline to which lifelines should be
  compared is how the lifeline itself functions in
  pre-incident conditions.

 The flowchart shows an example of how
  responders may think through assigning
  lifelines a color.




                                                                    Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                             27

 Example Condition Designations
Below are example analyses for the Highway/Roadway/Motor Vehicle component of the Transportation lifeline
                             and corresponding color determination for each.
                Status                                             Example
                                Assessment teams have been unable to establish status of bridge
       Grey                     infrastructure.

                                The community is unable to be reached via roadway to deliver emergency
                                resources and assistance to survivors. Plans to find alternative means to
       Red                      transport emergency supplies to survivors not yet established. No supplies
                                currently being delivered.
                                Emergency supplies have been identified and resourced, but transportation
       Yellow                   issues are restricting and limiting delivery and therefore not back to pre-
                                disaster conditions.
                                The main transportation route is re-established. All community needs met.
       Green
                                Blue does not indicate an operational status or condition; it is used for
       Blue                     administrative purposes, such as presentations and briefings.


                                                                                                              Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                               28

   FEMA’s Implementation of Community Lifelines
  FEMA incorporates the community lifelines construct into its planning and reporting
products. This section provides an overview and examples of how the lifelines have been
                                  implemented to date.

   Planning products include:               Reporting products include:
         All Hazards Plans                       Tier I: Senior Leadership Brief
         Information Analysis Brief              Tier II: Senior Leadership Brief
         Incident Action Plan
         Incident Approach
         National/Regional Support Plan
          (N/RSP)

                                                                                Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                        29




      Section II:
Situational Awareness
    and Reporting
                                                                                                                         30

    FEMA Standardized Situation Reporting Construct




The Situation Reporting Construct enables the collection, analysis and dissemination of incident information to
generate the What? So What? Now What? And When? for decision makers.
                                                                            Presenter’s Name     June 17, 2003
                                                                                                           Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                                                                                      31


     Lifeline Integrated Reporting Process
 FEMA’s Situation Reporting Construct was revised to better integrate the community lifelines construct by discussing the impacts,
response actions, and issues associated with lifelines, components, and sub-components using a tiered structure across all levels of
                                                           the response.


                                  Tier I: Senior Leadership Brief
                                         Executive Summary of the disaster and lifelines with details on most impacted components
                                         Significant FEMA and/or Interagency Actions
                                              – Information should reflect high level status, impacts, actions being taken to re-establish
                                                  lifelines, or limiting factors for each lifeline
                                  Tier II: Senior Leadership Brief
                                         Synopsis of lifeline condition and response efforts
                                             – Information should reflect status, impacts, actions, limiting factors, and an anticipated
                                                timeline to re-establish each lifeline component as well as more detailed information on
                                                the operational environment and state by state and tribe impacts.
                                  Tier III: Information Collection Process
                                         Granular information regarding lifeline components to include status, actions, key messages,
                                          limiting factors
                                              – Charts, graphs, etc.
                                              – Geographic Information System (GIS) products
                                         Data collection from all incident levels to include field, regions, state, national, and interagency
                                         Answers Essential Elements of Information (EEI) to inform lifeline components and sub-
                                          components
                                                                                                Presenter’s Name             June 17, 2003
                                                                                                                                        Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                                                             32

     Tier I: Senior Leadership Brief
The Tier I: Senior Leadership Brief includes executive-level information summarizing the situation, condition, critical
impacts, actions, and limiting factors for each lifeline.
   Current Situation: Includes the most pertinent information in each stage of response.
   Lifeline Assessment: Assessing and reporting on lifeline conditions is recommended by Situation Unit and
    validated by leadership.
   Lifeline Condition: Is based on the underlying components, and is informed by situational awareness reports,
    impact assessments, and conversing with partners across public, private, and non-profit sectors.
   Additional Products may Include: Force Laydown Map, updated information on Incident Management Assistance
    Team (IMAT) and Liaison Officer (LNO) locations, RRCC status, State Emergency Operations Center (EOC) status,
    and overall posture including Emergency/Disaster Declarations.




                                                                                Presenter’s Name      June 17, 2003
                                                                                                               Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                          33




Presenter’s Name   June 17, 2003
                            Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                                                            34


Tier II: Senior Leadership Brief
   The Tier II: Senior Leadership Brief identifies the status, impact, actions, limiting factors, and estimated
    time to condition change and re-establishment requirements for each lifeline component as well as an
    overall regional response picture.
   This product provides greater detail than a Tier I: Senior Leadership Brief based on information received
    as part of the Tier III: Information Collection Process.
   For smaller events, a Tier I may be utilized over a Tier II if there are limited lifeline impacts.




                                                                              Presenter’s Name       June 17, 2003
                                                                                                              Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                                                 35


 Tier III: Information Collection Process
 The Tier III: Information Collection Process serves as a formalized process for collecting and
  analyzing sub-component, component, and assessed community lifeline statuses and
  impacts.
 It also serves as the basis for compiling Tier I and Tier II reports with EEIs and Critical
  Information Requirements (CIR) associated with the incident.
 The Information Collection Process incorporates Information Collection Plans, Information
  Collection Tools, as well as field, LNO, branch, and/or division reports.




                                                                      Presenter’s Name    June 17, 2003
                                                                                                   Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                     36

Information Collection Process: Visualization Tools
 A Tier III information collection effort
  may still involve visualizations of the
  lifeline and component conditions such
  as:
      GIS products
      Charts, graphs, and other supplemental
       materials which can be used for
       resources such as commodities




                                                      Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                            37




        Section III:
Lifelines and Operational
         Planning
       Lifelines Drive Response and Enable Recovery Transition
   Incident responders assess lifeline conditions, establish priorities, organize lines of effort, and respond
                 until the lifelines are stabilized so that a transition to recovery may occur.




Note: The colors shown in
this graphic are further
explained in Slide 25, titled
“Colors Indicate Lifeline or
Component Condition”
                                                                                                    Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                                39

        Response Planning and Incident Stabilization
    Response planning focuses on providing solutions which will result in incident stabilization. Incident
                  stabilization lessens overall community impacts as recovery begins.

   Stabilization occurs when basic lifeline services are provided to survivors, either by rapid re-
    establishment of lifeline services or through the employment of a contingency response solution.
        Stabilization may occur through the employment of contingency response solutions that are intended to restore
         service, but only for a very limited duration or through a temporary measure.
            An example may include emergency measures to clear debris from a roadway or the provision of mobile
             communications services or the utilization of a "tent" hospital to provide medical care for a community.
            May be necessary to stabilize lifelines until temporary fixes to infrastructure are completed and may require
             sustained resources and continuous evaluation.
        Re-establishment of lifeline services, a longer-term stabilization solution, implies the normal lifeline service
         providers are available within the community through emergency infrastructure repairs or other means,
         alleviating the requirement for contingency response solutions.
            Examples may include emergency repairs, installation of generators to run a critical facility without grid
             power, or resuming the commercial supply chain to a community.


                                                                                                                 Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                                      40

 Lifeline Stabilization Targets (1 of 2)
         Stabilization Targets for each lifeline are developed collaboratively with key
           stakeholders including local, state, regional, and national stakeholders.

Stabilization Targets should reflect goals defined in deliberate planning and should be
                     validated and refined throughout the incident.
    Example stabilization targets:
         Safety and Security Lifeline: Threats to life safety are no longer a concern for all response personnel and impacted
          communities. Government essential functions, including executive leadership, are operational. Sufficient search and
          rescue assets are on-scene to assist all survivors. Sufficient fire resources are available to support fire suppression
          efforts.
         Food, Hydration, Shelter Lifeline: All survivors, their pets, and service animals have access to food and temporary
          drinking water. Sheltering (including reception, capacity, and wrap-around services) is supporting the displaced
          population. Sufficient resources are in place to sustain agricultural requirements.
         Health and Medical Lifeline: All survivors, their pets, and service animals have access to required medical and
          veterinary care. Emergency medical systems are capable of managing patient movement requirements. Public health
          services are accessible to all survivors. Sufficient temporary fatality management support is in place to meet
          processing demand. Medical supply chain capable of adequately resupplying medical care providers.

                                                                                                                       Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                                             41

 Lifeline Stabilization Targets (2 of 2)
         Stabilization Targets for each lifeline are developed collaboratively with key
           stakeholders including local, state, regional, and National stakeholders.

Stabilization Targets should reflect goals defined in deliberate planning and should be
                     validated and refined throughout the incident.
    Example stabilization targets:
         Energy Lifeline: Generators are providing temporary emergency power at critical facilities necessary to stabilize other
          lifelines. Fuel distribution is available for responders. Sufficient fuel distribution is available for survivors, including to
          support individuals dependent on power for life-sustaining medical care.
         Communications Lifeline: Survivors have access to commercial communications infrastructure to contact or be
          contacted by emergency services. LMR communications network is operational. PSAPs are available to the public.
          Survivors have access to financial services.
         Transportation Lifeline: Multimodal routes (air, rail, road, port) are clear of debris and accessible by normal or alternate
          means.
         Hazardous Material Lifeline: All contaminated areas are identified and secure.
         Water Systems: Survivors have access to temporary or permanent infrastructure providing potable water and
          wastewater management services. Sufficient resources are in place to support the temporary or permanent delivery of
          baseline water systems services.
                                                                                                                              Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                                                         42

Community Lifelines Construct and Response Planning
   Deliberate Planning: Incorporate lifelines into deliberate planning products, including defined stabilization
    targets for each lifeline.
   Crisis Action Planning: During an incident, deliberate stabilization targets are adjusted to the active response
    based on an analysis of strategies, operational priorities, and objectives.
     –    This analysis provides support to leadership decisions and prioritization of response activities for each operational
          period, including the development of strategies, operational priorities, and objectives.

                                  Lifelines enable crisis action planning efforts at all levels
                                                                      Strategic planning defines lifeline stabilization targets and the
                                                Strategic Level       specific lines of effort and logistics requirements that will assist
                                                                      communities in stabilizing each lifeline.

                                                                      Operational planning spans multiple operational periods and
                                                  Operational
                                                                      provides greater detail to the analysis and execution of each line of
                                                    Level             effort.


                                                                      Tactical planning directs the employment of resources for the next
                                                Tactical Level        operational period across all lines of effort.

           Example: Energy Lifeline may include three distinct Lines of Effort – Temporary Emergency Power, Power Restoration, and Fuel Distribution.
           Example: Food, Hydration, Shelter Lifeline may include two distinct Lines of Effort – Sheltering and Commodity Distribution.
                                                                                                                                          Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                               43


Deliberate Planning                            Example of Deliberate Planning
        Deliberate Plan Components

   Base Plan – Identifies lifeline
    stabilization targets
   Annex B – Information gathering and
    analysis to support decisions and assess
    progress in achieving stabilization
    targets
   Annexes C & D – Strategy development
    and functional planning through LOEs to
    achieve lifeline stabilization targets




                                                                                Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                              44

Deliberate Planning and All-Hazards Plan Updates
   Deliberate planning incorporates defined stabilization targets for each lifeline and the LOEs
    to stabilize each lifeline
   FEMA is developing stabilization targets for lifelines to include in its update of regional All
    Hazards Plans




                                                                                               Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                                                                  45


 Crisis Action Planning – Products and Relationships

 Stabilization: Incident Approach                              Current State/
    ________________________________________                                                            Stabilization Target                      Required Lines
                                                  Strategic      Estimated
                                                                                                                                                     of Effort
                                                                                                          _____________________________________



                                                    Level         Impacts                               Recovery Outcome
(Recovery Outcomes: Integrated Strategic Plan)



LOE               LOE                LOE
                                                                                                                                                       LOE
                                                 Operational   LOE End State                             LOE Strategy                             Intermediate
                                                   Level                                                                                            Objectives



                                                                  IS Objectives

  Incident Action Plan                             Tactical     _____________________________________      Assigned                                   Work
                                                                                                           Resources                               Assignments
                                                    Level        IM Objectives




                                                                                                                                                    Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                                   46


    Crisis Action Planning - Strategic
 Strategic Level of Planning                                Disaster Strategy Development




                                 Role of Strategic Planning During an Incident
Strategic planning during the response phase of an incident provides an incident-wide approach to
incident management and support. It provides a mechanism for crisis action planning that integrates
deliberate plans into the operation; adapting deliberately planned LOEs to achieve lifeline stabilization.
The resulting Incident Approach, focusing on lifelines, provides guidance and informs resource
deployment and employment decisions, establishment of Task Forces and Crisis Action Planning Teams,
and the development of incident objectives.
                                                                         Presenter’s Name   June 17, 2003
                                                                                                     Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                                                 47


   Current v. End States & Goal Setting
Assessment process that is foundational to FEMA Operations and widely understood
            as the Phase 1 “Leg” of the Incident Action Planning “P.”

 Continuously reassessed and revised
 Current State or Maximum Anticipated Impact
       What do we know? – Facts
       How bad could it be? – Assumptions

 End States and Goals
       What are the Stabilization Goals we are striving to achieve?
       What are the Recovery Outcomes we are striving to achieve?
       How do we know we have been successful?




                                                                       Presenter’s Name   June 17, 2003
                                                                                                   Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                Lifeline Stabilization Problem Frame
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          48
                Planning Factors (Maximum Anticipated or Known Impacts)                                      Lifeline Stabilization Targets                                                     Federal Assistance Lines of Effort
Safety & Security:                                                        Safety & Security: Threats to life-safety are no longer a concern for all response personnel and            Safety & Security
# of buildings with at least extensive damage                             impacted communities. Government essential functions, including executive leadership, are                   • Damage Assessment (Anticipated)
# of fire station facilities with at least moderate damage                operational. Sufficient search and rescue assets are on-scene to assist all survivors. Sufficient fire      • Search and Rescue (In Progress)
# of police station facilities with at least moderate damage              resources are available to support fire suppression efforts.                                                • Restoration of Public Infrastructure – Police, Fire
# of government offices with at least moderate damage                                                                                                                                     (Anticipated)
# of dams/levees at risk of failure and/or at least moderate damage
# of isolated communities
# of facilities requiring federal security support
# of survivors requiring SAR assistance

Food, Hydration & Shelter:                                                Food, Hydration & Shelter: All survivors, their pets, and service animals have access to food, water,       Food, Hydration & Shelter
# of people seeking short-term public shelter                             and sanitation. Sheltering, including cellular reception, capacity, accessibility, and wrap-around          • Sheltering Operations (In Progress)
% of grocery stores w/o power                                             services, is supporting the displaced population. Sufficient resources are in place to sustain              • Temporary Housing [Repair, Rental Assistance, Direct
                                                                          agricultural requirements.                                                                                     Housing] (Anticipated)


Health & Medical:                                                         Health & Medical: All survivors, their pets, and service animals have access to required medical and        Health & Medical
# of total injuries/fatalities                                            veterinary care. Emergency medical systems are capable of managing patient movement requirement.            • Temporary Emergency Power (In Progress)
#/% of total hospital beds function on H+1                                Public health services are accessible to all survivors. Sufficient temporary fatality management            • Healthcare Systems Support (In Progress)
# of medical facilities with at least moderate damage                     support is in place to meet processing demand. Medical supply chain capable of adequately
                                                                          resupplying medical care providers.

Energy (Power & Fuel):                                                    Energy (Power & Fuel): Generators are providing temporary emergency power at critical facilities            Energy (Power & Fuel)
# of households w/o power on H+1                                          necessary to stabilize other lifelines. Fuel distribution is available for responders. Sufficient fuel      • Temporary Emergency Power (In Progress)
# of natural gas pipelines leaks/breaks                                   distribution is available for survivors, including to support individuals dependent on power for life-
#/% of gas stations w/o power or out of fuel                              sustaining medical care.
# of critical facilities w/o power
# of fuel (gallons) needed for generators through H+7

Communications:                                                           Communications: Survivors have access to commercial communications infrastructure to contact or be          Communications
# of facilities with at least moderate damage                             contacted by emergency services. LMR communications network is operational. PSAPs are available to          • Emergency Repairs and Augmentations to Infrastructure
# of banks/ATMs inoperable                                                the public. Survivors have access to financial services.                                                       [Comms] (Anticipated)
                                                                                                                                                                                      • Temporary Emergency Power (In Progress)

Transportation:                                                           Transportation: Multimodal routes (air, rail, road, port) are clear of debris and accessible by normal or   Transportation
# of highway bridges with at least moderate damage                        alternate means.                                                                                            • Emergency Repairs and Augmentations to Infrastructure
# of railway bridges with at least moderate damage                                                                                                                                        [Port] (Anticipated)
# of airport runways with at least moderate damage                                                                                                                                    • Debris Management [Road, Port] (Anticipated)
# of port facilities with at least moderate damage

Hazardous Materials:                                                      Hazardous Materials: All contaminated areas are identified and secure.                                      Hazardous Materials
# of oil systems facilities with at least moderate damage                                                                                                                             • Debris Management [Sunken, Derelict & Displaced
# of total debris (tons)                                                                                                                                                                 Vessels] (Anticipated)
# of hazardous materials facilities damaged                                                                                                                                           • Hazardous Waste (Anticipated)
# of derelict vessels

Water Systems:                                                            Water Systems: Survivors have access to temporary or permanent potable water infrastructure                 Water Systems:
# of households w/o potable water on H+1                                  providing drinking water and wastewater management services. Sufficient resources are in place to           • Emergency Repairs and Augmentations to Infrastructure
#/% of water systems with at least moderate damage                        support the temporary or permanent delivery of baseline water systems services.                                [Water] (Anticipated)
# of wastewater leaks/breaks                                                                                                                      Presenter’s Name                             June 17, 2003
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                                                               49

    Crisis Action Planning - Operational
Operational Level of Planning                              When is an LOE Operational Plan Necessary?
                                               Currently available resources are insufficient.
                                               Unconventional resource delivery sequencing is necessary due to
                                                location or environmental restriction.
                                               Lifeline interdependencies are preventing stabilization.
                                               Atypical resource types or capabilities are required to stabilize a lifeline.
                                               Exceptionally high duration of instability.
                                               Timeframe to achieve either lifeline stabilization or Recovery Outcome
                                                is unnaturally shortened due to external pressures.
                                              Line of Effort Operational Plan
Some LOEs may have complexities that require atypical solution sets. These solution sets should be generated
through the Crisis Action Planning Process and should result in an LOE Operational Plan. This Plan develops details of
the tasks to achieve the intermediate objectives, the resources required, and identifies and mitigates risks that may
inhibit achieving the objectives due to a lack of resources or other non-resource limiting factors.


                                                                                Presenter’s Name       June 17, 2003
                                                                                                                 Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                                                      50


 Defining Lines of Effort
LOEs are the specific mission-sets required to stabilize the lifelines and address community impact.
   For FEMA Operations, LOEs are activities that a state, tribe, or territory can ask FEMA and the
               interagency to manage to address the consequences of an incident.

  LOEs are the operationalization of core capabilities (the ways) for response and recovery planning and
   operations. Core Capabilities are the general competencies required during response used to conduct a
   preparedness assessment. Lifelines identify critical infrastructure that may be impacted by an incident,
   whereas LOEs address solutions to resolve lifeline instability and address impacts.
  Planning for the delivery of each LOE allows the development of strategy across all required ESFs to
   mobilize, employ, and demobilize resources applicable to that mission, including the identification of key
   intermediate objectives or milestones in the execution of that mission.
  LOEs are intended to jump-start crisis action (adaptive) planning. LOEs help incident personnel at all
   levels to visualize how federal interagency capabilities can support lifeline stabilization by clearly
   articulating and communicating the strategy to meet federal assistance requests.
  Functional LOEs are focused on addressing end states which address impacts to lifeline infrastructure.
     •   Note: Each Function may address more than one lifeline

                                                                                                        Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                                                                                                    51

     Lines of Effort
17 standard LOEs below have been agreed upon by all ten FEMA regions to be included in their All Hazards Plans
currently being updated. Additional LOEs may be used or created based on region or incident.




     Damage Assessment                                        Healthcare Systems Support                      Responder Security and Protection
     Debris Management                                        Medical Transportation                          Restoration of Public Infrastructure
     Emergency Repairs or Augmentation to Infrastructure      Natural and Cultural Resource Protection &      Search and Rescue
                                                                Restoration
     Evacuation, Reception, Re-entry, and Return                                                               Sheltering Operations
                                                               Private Sector Coordination
     Fatality Management                                                                                       Temporary Emergency Power
                                                               Public Information and Warning
     Hazardous Waste                                                                                           Temporary Housing (Repair, Rental Assistance, Direct
                                                                                                                 Housing)                              Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                 52


Example: Healthcare Systems Support LOE
                      LOE Dissection




                                       Presenter’s Name   June 17, 2003
                                                                   Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                                                        53

    Phasing
                                  Example LOEs Across Outcome-Focused Phases




Phasing lays out the focus of the execution of LOEs in a logical sequence to break the operation into manageable
parts. LOEs are initiated and conclude at different times in a disaster. It is important to recognize that phase
culmination is often reached at different times in different geographic areas across a single incident.
                                                                            Presenter’s Name     June 17, 2003
                                                                                                          Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                                                            54
   Crisis Action Planning – National/Regional Support Plan
   (N/RSP)                LOEs and the N/RSP


                               3a         3b        3c         3d            3e




                                               Incident Support Objectives
The N/RSP utilize objectives and associated tasks to drive federal support actions either prior to an event (notice) or
immediate post event (no-notice). Objectives in an N/RSP generally involve the ordering, activating, staging, and
outfitting of resources for further employment at the incident management (IM) level. Many, if not all, objectives in an
N/RSP can serve as the starting point for LOEs as defined in deliberate planning. Due to the limited scope of RRCC
and National Response Coordination Center (NRCC) tactical control during initial response, most, if not all, LOEs will
be in an early stage of execution upon transfer to IM.
                                                                                  Presenter’s Name   June 17, 2003
                                                                                                              Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                                                          55

    Crisis Action Planning - Tactical
  Tactical Level of Planning                                         Example Line of Effort




                         LOEs and the Incident Action Plan Objectives on the ICS Form 202

Incident objectives are developed and anticipated for each LOE as points across the continuum from the current state
to the end-state for the federal assistance mission. Within a few operational periods, as planning is matured, incident
leadership can anticipate the sequence of incident objectives across the LOE. Similarly, through evaluation of
performance and effectiveness of the LOE, incident leadership can anticipate when incident objectives will be
achieved, and transition to the next incident objective across the LOE.
                                                                             Presenter’s Name      June 17, 2003
                                                                                                            Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                                                      56

  IAP Incident Objectives
               Transitioning Line of Effort Intermediate Objectives into Incident Objectives

                                                                         Incident Objectives
                                                                         1e: Damage Assessment LOE Complete
                                                                         2e: S&R LOE Complete
                                                                         3d: De-install Generators
                                                                         4c: Deliver State Commodity Requests
                                                                         5c: Shelter Consolidation & Transition
                                                                         6d: Sustain Fuel Distribution
                                                                         7b: Conduct Emergency Repairs to
                                                                             Infrastructure
                                                                         8b: Conduct Prioritized Temporary
                                                                             Critical Public Facilities Build-Out
                                                                         9a: Approve Direct Housing Program
                                                                         10a: Process Requests for Public
                                                                             Assistance


IAP objectives can be developed based on the current intermediate objective for each
                                    active LOE.
                                                                      Presenter’s Name       June 17, 2003
                                                                                                        Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                                              57

 Transition to Integrated Strategic Planning
 Once lifelines begin to stabilize, and
  incident personnel can anticipate               Incident Approach             Integrated Strategic
  operations beyond stabilization, the IM
  Planning Section initiates the development
                                                                                Plan
  of the Integrated Strategic Plan (ISP).
 The Incident Approach informs the ISP, and
  once the first ISP is published, the Incident
  Approach is sunset.
 While many LOEs developed in the Incident
  Approach will culminate relatively early in
  the lifecycle of the incident, several LOEs
  developed in the Incident Approach will
  transition to longer-term operations and be
  included in the ISP.
                                                  Lifeline Stabilization         Outcome Driven
                                                                                 Recovery
                                                                    Presenter’s Name   June 17, 2003
                                                                                                Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                                                                                                                             58

    Recovery Outcomes
                                      Recovery Outcomes by Recovery Support Function




    These are the National-level outcomes as approved by Recovery Support Function Leadership Group (RSFLG)
       Undersecretaries, which SLTTs can use as a reference point for tailoring their own recovery outcomes.

When stabilization of community lifelines are achieved, the focus of the mission shifts to achieving Recovery
Outcomes. The Outcome Driven Recovery model drives an approach that emphasizes long-term resilient solutions
across all lifelines and other aspects of a community. To the greatest extent possible, recovery operations will utilize
similar reporting templates contained in this toolkit but modified to reflect recovery outcomes by RSF rather than
stabilization targets by lifelines.
                                                                                Presenter’s Name     June 17, 2003
                                                                                                               Version 2.1 - 7/2023
                      59




     Section IV:
Icons and Templates
                                                                                             60

Templates
 Templates can assist in lifeline implementation during incident response.
 Each emergency management office may adapt these templates to fit their
  specific requirements.
 Current templates within toolkit 2.1 include the following:
       –   Lifeline Card Template
       –   Tier I, Tier II, and Tier III Reporting Templates
       –   Incident Approach Template

All files can be found in the companion folder “Lifeline Templates” included with
this toolkit.




                                                                              Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                  61

Guidance for Using Lifeline Icons
 Lifeline icons should be used consistently and appropriately when added to any
  incident response products
 Icons should be colored blue when representing the state pre-incident and/or when
  no incident status is indicated
 All other colors are defined in Section I with exact color values shown below

                     Name               RGB Value*              Shading
                      Grey            RGB 145-147-149

                       Red             RGB 197-32-56

                     Yellow           RGB 251-186-22

                      Green            RGB 94-156-66

                      Blue             RGB 1-82-135
            *RGB – Red, Green, Blue
                                                                                   Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                                                                    62

Editing Lifeline Icons
 The community lifelines graphic tool provides an easy method for quickly adjusting the
  colors for all lifeline icons.
 Follow the instructions included in the tool to assign colors and then copy over the icons
  to other products as necessary.




                                                                                     Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                       63

Icon Library (1 of 2)




                        Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                       64

Icon Library (2 of 2)




                        Version 2.1 - 07/2023
                                                            65




      Your Feedback Matters!
Please send questions, comments, or feedback to
            Lifelines@fema.dhs.gov


                Thank you!
                                             Version 2.1 - 07/2023
