National Disaster
Recovery Framework
Third Edition – Amended
December 10, 2024




                          i
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended




                               This page left intentionally blank.
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended



Contents
1.     Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 1
       1.1.       Purpose ..................................................................................................................................... 1
       1.2.       Audience ................................................................................................................................... 1
       1.3.       Scope ........................................................................................................................................ 1
       1.4.       National Preparedness Goal .................................................................................................... 2
2.     Disaster Recovery Overview ................................................................................................................ 2
       2.1.       Introduction to Disaster Recovery ........................................................................................... 2
       2.2.       Disaster Recovery Begins During Response........................................................................... 3
       2.3        Achieving Successful Disaster Recovery Outcomes............................................................... 4
3.     Federal Roles and Responsibilities..................................................................................................... 6
       3.1.       FEMA Leadership in the Field .................................................................................................. 6
       3.2.       Interagency Recovery Coordination......................................................................................... 7
       3.3.       Federal Recovery Support Functions ...................................................................................... 7
4.     State, Local, Tribal Nation, and Territorial Roles and Responsibilities.......................................... 18
       4.1.       Local Governments ............................................................................................................... 20
       4.2.       States and Territories ............................................................................................................ 20
       4.3.       Tribal Nations......................................................................................................................... 21
5.     Nongovernmental Resources ........................................................................................................... 22
       5.1.       Long-Term Recovery Groups ................................................................................................. 22
       5.2.       Nongovernmental Organizations .......................................................................................... 23
       5.3.       Philanthropy, Business and Industry, and Academia.......................................................... 24
6.     Conclusion ......................................................................................................................................... 26
Appendix A: Recovery Support Functions and Participating Agencies and Organizations ...................... 1
Appendix B: Acronyms .............................................................................................................................. 15
Appendix C: Glossary ................................................................................................................................... 1
Appendix D: Pre-disaster Recovery Planning and Post-disaster Recovery Planning ............................... 1
Appendix E: Digital Resource Links............................................................................................................. 1
Appendix F: National Preparedness Goal Core Capabilities...................................................................... 1
Appendix G: Document Updates and Maintenance ................................................................................... 1

Figures
Figure 1: Disaster Recovery Lifecycle ......................................................................................................... 2
Figure 2: Recovery Continuum .................................................................................................................... 3
Figure 3: Community-Driven Recovery..................................................................................................... 18



                                                                                i
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


Tables
Table 1: Acronyms.................................................................................................................................. B-15
Table 2: Pre-disaster Recovery Planning ................................................................................................ D-1
Table 3: Post-disaster Recovery Planning .............................................................................................. D-2
Table 4: Strategies for Measuring Progress Through Data ................................................................... D-3
Table 5: NPG Recovery Core Capabilities ................................................................................................ F-1




                                                                           ii
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


1.       Introduction
1.1.        Purpose
Communities nationwide face many threats and hazards, including biological, weather-related,
human-caused, natural, and technological. The guiding principle of the National Disaster Recovery
Framework (NDRF) is that disaster recovery is most successful when it is organized around
community-driven and locally defined goals that promote fairness and support resilient outcomes.
This guiding principle applies to both pre-and post-disaster activities and recognizes that intentional
intergovernmental and cross-sector collaboration is crucial for developing recovery strategies and
projects that help achieve the disaster recovery goals of state, local, Tribal Nation, 1 and territorial
governments (SLTTs).
The NDRF outlines the federal government’s approach for providing disaster recovery resources and
support. It also explains the federal government’s roles and responsibilities for organizing and
deploying disaster recovery assistance. The NDRF enhances effective collaboration among federal
agencies and SLTTs and informs nongovernmental partners.
As a national framework, the NDRF describes high-level disaster recovery roles and responsibilities.
SLTTs may use the federal structure as a model to guide and inform their own disaster recovery
planning and policymaking. The NDRF model can be applied across a broad range of disasters, not
just those that receive a federal disaster declaration. The NDRF Third Edition has been amended to
reflect the issuance of Executive Orders on and after January 20, 2025.
1.2.        Audience
The NDRF is primarily written for SLTT officials, who are the main counterparts to federal recovery
officials. By understanding the federal recovery structure, SLTT officials responsible for guiding their
community’s recovery can more effectively lead and coordinate disaster recovery efforts. This
framework is also valuable for recovery practitioners at all levels, whether they serve in a formal or
informal recovery role during disasters. Disaster recovery practitioners include full time
professionals, like state and county emergency managers, as well as individuals from across the
whole community.
1.3.        Scope
The NDRF explains how the federal government supports disaster-affected SLTTs as they recover
and describes federal and nongovernmental recovery resources that may be available to SLTTs
under federal declarations. This includes support under:
    Stafford Act declarations (e.g., emergency and major disaster declarations);
    Agency declarations (e.g., public health emergencies, drought disasters); and
    Presidentially directed disaster recovery support (e.g., through Executive Order or a Presidential
     Memorandum).
While the NDRF describes how the federal government mobilizes for disaster recovery, it recognizes
that communities constantly respond to and recover from disasters that do not receive federal
declarations. The concepts presented within the NDRF can be adapted by communities so they can
be better equipped to recover and rebuild in a resilient and durable manner.




1 Usage of Tribal Nations herein refers to the list of federally recognized Tribal Nations maintained by Department of the

Interior pursuant to the Federally Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994.



                                                              1
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


1.4.     National Preparedness Goal
The National Preparedness Goal (NPG) outlines five mission areas: prevention, protection, mitigation,
response, and recovery. It also describes the corresponding core capabilities (see Appendix F:
National Preparedness Goal Core Capabilities for more information) necessary to achieve a secure
and resilient nation. By incorporating principles of resilience the NDRF enhances the coordination of
disaster recovery efforts and strengthens whole community resilience, underscoring the importance
of resilience throughout the disaster recovery process. This approach ensures effective recovery and
contributes to broader preparedness for future disasters, to ultimately foster more robust and
adaptable national resilience.

2.     Disaster Recovery Overview
2.1.     Introduction to Disaster Recovery
Disaster recovery is complex. Threats
and hazards present emerging and
intersecting risks to SLTTs, including
increasingly severe and frequent
weather events, hazardous materials
incidents, and catastrophic
technological disasters. Communities
may still be recovering from one
disaster when another occurs.
Disaster recovery is not a linear or
straightforward process but is cyclical
and evolves based on the unique
needs of each community. Mitigation,
response, recovery, and rebuilding are
highly interdependent and often occur
simultaneously. Recovery efforts may
be disrupted, delayed, or forced to
restart as new disasters arise. New
incidents may derail or set back a
community’s ongoing efforts,                           Figure 1: Disaster Recovery Lifecycle
requiring them to pivot or revisit           Recovery is a cyclical, interdependent process where response,
earlier recovery stages. This             rebuilding, and mitigation often overlap. Progress may be disrupted or
complexity highlights the need for           reset by new disasters, requiring flexible, adaptive approaches.
flexible approaches that account for
the interconnected nature of recovery
operations.
Adding to this complexity, demographics, geography, history, and countless other unique community
factors require disaster recovery to be adaptable. Just as no two communities are the same, no two
recoveries will look the same. Recovering from a disaster and rebuilding a community are very
personal undertakings. Therefore, communities are best positioned to identify their own disaster
recovery needs, priorities, goals, and objectives. Communities should take the lead in determining
their disaster recovery milestones while also considering program-specific federal support deadlines.




                                                  2
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


2.2.       Disaster Recovery Begins During Response
During disaster response, the federal government seeks to address the needs of affected
communities through lifesaving and life-sustaining operations and by stabilizing community
lifelines, 2 which are the most fundamental services in a community that support the functioning of
society. Officials coordinate initial response efforts as identified in the National Response Framework
(NRF) and the Response and Recovery Federal Interagency Operational Plan (FIOP), and actions
taken during the response phase often have a major impact on recovery efforts. This coordination is
important to ensure continuity and alignment between response and recovery efforts – from
stabilization to recovery planning and implementation.
The transition from response to recovery is marked by several indicators, such as the stabilization of
immediate threats to life and property, and the restoration of essential community lifelines. As these
indicators emerge, federal engagement in recovery begins, with officials shifting their focus to
assessing and addressing recovery needs. Federal recovery officials coordinate with their response
counterparts and may be co-located at coordination centers to share information. They use data
collected during the response phase to understand the extent of damage and disruption to impacted
communities. This information guides early recovery activities such as conducting preliminary
damage assessments and identifying unmet needs. Critical information on damaged infrastructure,
affected populations, and overall needs of the community provide a foundation for early recovery
actions.
It is imperative to consider and incorporate recovery priorities and outcomes during early post-
disaster goal setting. Recovery goals can be both near-term (e.g., restoration of disaster affected
publicly owned infrastructure, reopening schools, supporting temporary housing solutions,
implementing debris removal plans) and long-term (e.g., housing implementation plans, economic
recovery). Information obtained during response such as geospatial damage assessments, among
other data sets, can serve as the foundation for developing a Recovery Needs Assessment and
disaster recovery plans. As community lifelines are stabilized, the decision to transition from
response to recovery and rebuilding sets the stage for durable and resilient outcomes.




                                          Figure 2: Recovery Continuum
The Recovery Continuum depicts how recovery efforts begin alongside response activities, and gradually scale
up during response operations, highlighting the relationship across these phases. Enhancing resilience through
    mitigation and other risk management strategies spans the entire continuum, guiding the recovery and
  rebuilding process. Investments in mitigation and resilience will enable a community’s ability to prepare for
threats and hazards, adapt to changing conditions, and withstand and recover rapidly from adverse conditions
                                                and disruptions.

2 There are eight community lifelines: Safety and Security; Food, Hydration and Shelter; Health and Medical; Energy;

Communications; Transportation; Hazardous Materials; and Water Systems. Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), Community Lifelines, 2024.



                                                            3
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


2.3      Achieving Successful Disaster Recovery Outcomes
A community-driven, locally executed strategy is critical to successful disaster recovery. Every
community has unique recovery priorities based on its circumstances, challenges, and resources. For
example, some communities may conclude that success requires relocating part or all of their
infrastructure to mitigate future risks. Others may pursue more resilient building practices, thereby
decreasing vulnerability to weather hazards. Ultimately, successful disaster recovery plans are
shaped by the community, clearly communicated, and pursued as part of a unified effort across all
disaster recovery partners.
The disaster recovery process seeks to help communities achieve their disaster recovery goals. A
clear understanding of how all disaster recovery practitioners can best work together maximizes a
community’s ability to leverage available resources. This collaboration supports goals such as
resilience, establishing long-lasting community relationships, and ensuring progress is validated with
data. These topics are further discussed in subsequent sections.
DISASTER RECOVERY PLANNING AND RESILIENCE
Disaster recovery planning presents a unique opportunity to mitigate future risks by rebuilding in a
resilient and durable manner. 3 Effective recovery planning, whether conducted pre- or post-disaster,
is important to enhance community resilience. Active and continuous disaster recovery planning
allows SLTTs to assess their current situation, set recovery goals, and develop strategies to achieve
them.
Pre-disaster recovery planning enables SLTTs to set priorities, establish goals, assess capabilities,
identify gaps, and determine the resources needed before a disaster. This proactive approach
strengthens partner communication, supports measuring recovery progress, and fosters resilience.
By identifying existing threats, hazards, risks, vulnerabilities, and resources, communities can
enhance resilience and develop mitigation strategies including adaptation strategies for extreme
weather events. Incorporating meaningful mitigation opportunities throughout the disaster recovery
process maximizes future resilience and minimizes risks. Communities should leverage existing
mitigation plans when possible, and rigorously assess community factors that may hinder disaster
recovery or long-term resilience goals.
Disaster recovery plans should engage residents, leaders, and organizations from across the whole
community to ensure local needs and priorities are incorporated. Where applicable, recovery plans
should include national, cultural, and historical resources as well. This community-driven approach
supports successful post-disaster recovery and strengthens community resilience by developing
community trust.
Disaster recovery plans should be easy to access and align with existing planning resources to
ensure coordination across sectors and governments. To the extent feasible, post-disaster recovery
planning should also align with the community’s existing planning processes involving relevant
federal and non-federal departments and entities as appropriate.
Resilience planners, including resilience officials, hazard mitigation planners, and community
resilience champions can help strengthen community systems, much like recovery planners. During
rebuilding, communities can pursue opportunities that achieve multiple objectives to support
resilience, durability, and livability. Examples include fostering growth, making smart energy choices,
improving economic competitiveness, and expanding housing options.
For detailed examples of pre- and post-disaster recovery planning activities, see Appendix D. Further
information is provided in Appendix E: Digital Resource Links, including recovery planning and

3 Mitigating future risks includes addressing shocks and stressors, considering the dependencies and interdependencies

between systems.



                                                           4
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


resilience resources such as Pre-Disaster Recovery Planning Guides for SLTTs and the Pre-Disaster
Housing Planning Guide.

  Helping Small Businesses Navigate Recovery Planning

  The Small Business Administration’s (SBA) Business Resilience Guide is a comprehensive
  resource for small business owners who may not be familiar with disaster preparation. This
  easy-to-follow guide leads business owners through creating a robust resilience plan and has six
  sections on how to plan for and recover from disasters. It includes best practices and template
  forms that guide America’s entrepreneurs in their business recovery planning and rebuilding.
  SBA also provides practical tools to support small businesses with its online learning content,
  available at www.sba.gov. The website hosts educational content that is free to small business
  owners and entrepreneurs including a learning journey entitled “Disaster and Economic
  Recovery.” This journey has been the most used educational content on SBA's online learning
  platform since its launch in 2021 and covers the impacts of disasters and disaster recovery
  strategies including how to access financial assistance following a disaster.

LEVERAGING DATA
Data and analytical tools are useful for conducting damage assessments, informing pre- and post-
disaster recovery planning, and tracking progress toward disaster recovery goals. These tools
support data-driven decision making by providing a common understanding of recovery objectives,
guiding resource allocation, and identifying impacts.
To maximize the benefits of data-driven decision making, SLTTs should consider data integrity,
representative sampling in data collection, and the careful selection of data sets and tools, while
also identifying and addressing data gaps. SLTTs may also consider methods to ensure data sources
are integrated, comprehensive, accurate, and reliable (e.g., establishing and maintaining data
sharing agreements with relevant agencies and partners). Local public records can provide insights
into useful services to forecast needs or complete assessments.
Some communities may choose to request technical assistance or guidance to enhance their use of
data in pre- and post-disaster recovery plans, and to analyze information collected prior to or during
response efforts. This support may be sought from federal agencies, data experts, or consultants.
Many recovery partners develop analytical tools to assist SLTT decision making, progress tracking,
and resource allocation (see Appendix A for some examples of analytical tools).
MEASURING PROGRESS THROUGHOUT RECOVERY
Measuring and communicating progress throughout disaster recovery can increase public
confidence by promoting transparency, accountability, and shared outcomes. Key indicators and
recovery measures can vary by community based on disaster impacts and available data.
Establishing these recovery goals early allows local leaders and partners at all levels to collaborate
effectively, align strategies, and identify gaps, resources, and needed support. This process also
helps communities develop lessons learned for future planning and continuous improvement
priorities.
Communities can develop metrics and gather data that track progress on disaster recovery
outcomes. While some metrics may be common across disaster recovery missions, each community
is likely to have its own methods for measuring success. Common recovery metrics include the
percentage of homes rebuilt, diversification of economic portfolios, the amount of disaster recovery
funding applied for and spent, and the number of completed projects. Additionally, metrics might
track services provided by voluntary organizations and progress in specific time periods (e.g.,
monthly, quarterly, annually). Community-specific improvements, such as establishing a farmers’
market in a food desert or forming a partnership to establish a grocery store, can also be measured



                                                   5
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


to address pre-existing challenges and enhance access to essential resources within a community.

3.      Federal Roles and Responsibilities
The federal government can play a critical role in helping disaster-affected SLTTs recover and
rebuild. Individual federal agencies can provide recovery support through multiple avenues, including
their statutory authorities, ongoing steady state programs, established partnerships, and regional
offices. This includes Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) field leadership roles, which
are activated following Stafford Act declarations, as well as the six federal interagency Recovery
Support Functions (RSFs). Once immediate response priorities are addressed, recovery activities
begin with federal and SLTT agencies collaborating to assess needs and coordinate recovery efforts.
3.1.      FEMA Leadership in the Field
When FEMA supports disaster recovery, it designates key individuals to represent the agency in the
impacted area. Three critical field roles carry significant responsibilities: the Federal Coordinating
Officer (FCO) and Federal Disaster Recovery Coordinator (FDRC), who serve as primary field leaders
upon deployment, and the Federal Disaster Recovery Officer (FDRO), who leads the coordination
among federal interagency partners and collaborates closely with the FCOs and FDRCs. These
leaders work together with federal headquarters and regional offices to engage SLTT officials and
recovery representatives, initiating discussions on recovery goals, objectives, and outcomes early in
the disaster recovery process. The FCO, FDRC, and FDRO ensure communication and outreach
engages all partners by working closely with SLTT counterparts to support the recovery mission.
FEDERAL COORDINATING OFFICER
For emergency and major disaster declarations under the Stafford Act, the president appoints an
FCO to implement an operational coordination structure in close collaboration with SLTT response
and recovery leadership. The FCO serves as the counterpart to the lead state, territory, or Tribal
Nation response official and has primary responsibility for coordinating federal disaster response
and recovery support to the whole community in accordance with the NRF, NDRF, and Federal
Interagency Operational Plans (FIOPs). The FCO leads the Joint Field Office (JFO), the central post-
disaster coordinating point for federal resources located within or near the affected community.
FEDERAL DISASTER RECOVERY COORDINATOR
In complex missions, the FDRC may be assigned to lead recovery coordination efforts across the
federal interagency and SLTTs through Interagency Recovery Coordination (IRC) and FEMA programs.
The FDRC is the federal counterpart to the lead state, territory, and Tribal Nation recovery officials
and integrates the IRC team into the JFO. The FDRC serves as the primary conduit for recovery
information, helping affected communities establish recovery goals while addressing interagency
opportunities, challenges, and gaps at the senior level.
The FDRC integrates FEMA recovery programs and RSF operations and activities, while engaging with
SLTT counterparts, business and industry, voluntary, faith-based, disability advocacy, philanthropic,
and community organizations. This role facilitates the development of a recovery plan that aligns
with local recovery goals. The FDRC also facilitates the alignment of federal resources to help
communities implement their recovery plans and achieve their recovery goals.
FEDERAL DISASTER RECOVERY OFFICER
The FDRO, under the leadership of the FCO or FDRC, leads the IRC mission and is the primary
contact for federal interagency recovery partners. The FDRO engages affected SLTTs to understand
their recovery priorities and coordinate delivery of federal recovery support. Responsibilities include
IRC staffing based on the size and scope of projected interagency engagements and managing the
strategic direction of field activities identified by the RSF Field Coordinators to ensure unity of effort



                                                     6
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


among federal agencies.
The FDRO aligns the work of the RSF Field Coordinators, who receive their strategic direction from
the RSF National Coordinators. The FDRO coordinates RSF mission priorities, enhances situational
awareness and reporting across recovery operations, organizes daily disaster recovery activities,
facilitates the development of a Recovery Needs Assessment, and supports the development and
implementation of a comprehensive recovery strategy. Additionally, the FDRO advises the FCO and
FDRC on key recovery issues and projects.
3.2.     Interagency Recovery Coordination
The mission of Interagency Recovery Coordination (IRC) is to help SLTTs achieve their recovery
outcomes effectively, efficiently, and fairly. When activated by the FCO after a major disaster
declaration, IRC mobilizes federal agencies and non-federal partners to collectively identify
community recovery needs, set priorities, and implement solutions to achieve recovery outcomes. By
using an outcome-driven strategic approach, IRC missions provide tangible assistance to SLTTs and
impacted communities throughout disaster recovery. It also enhances communication and
coordination among FEMA, federal agencies, SLTTs, and other members of the IRC mission to
streamline recovery efforts.
The goal of the IRC mission is to convene federal interagency and non-federal resources to help
SLTTs navigate the complex recovery landscape, including identifying unmet needs, gaps, and
recovery priorities. Additionally, the IRC guides communities through the range of available support
from federal agencies, academia, nonprofit organizations, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs),
voluntary organizations, and business and industry partners.

  Interagency Collaboration: Vermont Recovery Structure

  In early July 2023, severe storms in Vermont caused significant flooding, landslides, and
  mudslides. The disaster created many challenges for individuals, households, and public and
  private infrastructure. After President Biden declared a major disaster for Vermont, FEMA
  Region 1 collaborated with the state to identify and address the state’s recovery priorities.
  Vermont organized eight Recovery Task Forces, as counterparts to the six federal RSFs. The
  IRC mission played an important role in aligning these task forces with the appropriate federal
  RSFs. This alignment ensured efficient, coordinated support and demonstrated the IRC’s
  purpose: to facilitate collaboration among state and federal agencies, enabling a flexible and
  adaptive response to evolving recovery needs. By fostering this collaboration, the IRC worked
  to effectively address Vermont’s complex recovery challenges.

3.3.     Federal Recovery Support Functions
INTRODUCTION TO RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTIONS
Disaster recovery often requires expertise outside of emergency management to solve problems. In
Stafford Act declarations, as well as for other federally supported disaster recoveries, the federal
government may activate RSFs as part of the IRC to serve as the coordinating structure to organize
and streamline federal disaster recovery assistance.
The RSFs are six capabilities of federal interagency support and expertise:


           Community Assistance| Economic | Health, Education, and Human Services|
              Housing| Infrastructure Systems| Natural and Cultural Resources|




                                                  7
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


RSFs are led by a federal Coordinating Agency designated based on the agency’s expertise and
resources, and comprised of federal agencies and organizations with relevant capabilities and
expertise. In addition, other departments, agencies, and organizations may participate in a federal
RSF’s mission as needed. These agencies work together within and across RSFs to address the
needs of the community and ensure a comprehensive approach to disaster recovery.
Each RSF has a unique mission aligned with its focus area, aimed at achieving strategic outcomes
through collaboration with SLTTs and nongovernmental partners. RSFs are designed to improve
solution-oriented coordination among recovery officials, practitioners, relevant partners, and experts.
By leveraging collective expertise, resources, and capacity, RSFs strengthen communication and
coordination in preparation for future incidents. While RSF activations are based on the needs of the
community, federal partners may alternate leadership roles throughout the recovery process
depending on which agency’s expertise is most needed. There are no pre-determined timelines for
when RSF support ends; timing is determined by the evolving needs of the affected community.
SLTTs may also use the federal structure to develop, adopt, or adapt their own RSF structures and
coordinate pre- and post-disaster recovery planning and operations. The federal government is
responsible for strategically aligning with the state, Tribal Nation, or territory and their preferred
structure. More detailed RSF information, including examples of disaster assistance provided, is
available in Appendix A.
RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
Federal RSFs can provide in-person or virtual support based on the request of the SLTT and the
capacity of the federal agencies activated. RSF staff and assets may deploy to support interagency
coordination and cross-cutting projects identified by the community’s recovery priorities. Federal RSF
support can be requested individually or collectively to address the critical needs of the community,
including direct agency Mission Assignments based on disaster recovery needs. Disaster recovery
support may scale up later in the recovery continuum depending on what services RSFs provide and
when the affected community is ready to receive that assistance.
Once activated, RSFs closely coordinate with SLTTs, partners, and community leaders to achieve
recovery outcomes and support resilient recovery by helping a community reach its overall goals.
RSF roles and responsibilities include:
   Coordinate with relevant SLTTs, nongovernmental partners, and other counterparts based on
    community needs.
   Develop a Recovery Needs Assessment to evaluate the disaster’s impact on local and regional
    communities and systems by identifying key gaps, needs, and priorities.
   Develop a Recovery Support Strategy, based on the findings of the Recovery Needs Assessment
    and utilizing various sources outlining specific approaches and actions to address identified
    recovery needs and increase community resilience.
   Support SLTT partners to navigate available federal resources and advise on methods to
    optimize resources, such as:
    o   Financial Assistance – Program-specific financial assistance, disaster loans, and grant
        opportunities to help SLTTs plan for and recover from disasters. The Recovery and Resilience
        Resource Library 4 can help navigate available federal support opportunities.
    o   Training – Training opportunities that help communities build disaster recovery skillsets by
        learning through education and exercising recovery processes and policies. This supports


4 FEMA, Recovery and Resilience Resource Library, 2024




                                                         8
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


        SLTT capacity building, which fosters resilient communities and effective recovery (Appendix
        E: Digital Resource Links provides various training opportunities).
    o   Technical Assistance – Support or services to SLTTs in implementing policies, processes,
        programs, metrics, operating systems, tools, and other similar projects. This aims to build
        SLTT capacity, address any existing challenges, and enhance federal-SLTT collaboration.
    o   Technical Expertise – Specialized knowledge, skills, and experience from experts to help
        SLTTs use federal resources effectively. This can be accessed during a recovery through
        deployed FEMA assets in the field, FEMA regional offices, RSF Field Coordinators, and/or RSF
        Advisors.

    Maui Wildfires: Creating A Strong Team

    The 2023 Maui wildfires presented a major challenge and opportunity for interagency
    collaboration. Response and recovery operations immediately integrated many federal
    agencies, and FEMA coordinated across partners to provide technical assistance and expertise
    to the community. Agencies like the Department of Energy, U.S. Forest Service, and the
    Environmental Protection Agency – in addition to the federal RSF coordinating agencies –
    brought critical resources and expertise to address a variety of recovery challenges on Maui,
    including infrastructure repair and environmental remediation. For example, the IRC worked
    with the Council for Native Hawaiian Advancement to open the Kako’o Maui Resource Hub, to
    provide resources to kānaka maoli (Native Hawaiians) and kama‘āina (Hawai’i residents from
    any racial, ethnic, or cultural group) in a comfortable space. Ultimately, this interagency
    collaboration helped produce Maui’s long-term recovery plan which will serve the community in
    the years to come.

Community Assistance 5
   Coordinating Agency: U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS) / FEMA
   Mission: Coordinate assistance and support from across the federal government and
    nongovernmental partners to help SLTTs effectively plan for and manage their recovery.
   Strategic Outcomes:
    o   Local government and community leaders have the knowledge, tools, and data needed to
        support their own recovery planning and strategy development, including community
        engagement, project identification and prioritization, and partnership development.
    o   Communities have a vision, plan, or process in place to support their long-term recovery
        goals and objectives.
    o   Communities and organizations are aware of potential funding sources for project
        implementation.
    o   Communities have access to the information and processes that allow them to recover in a
        resilient and collective manner.
   Responsibilities:
    o   Provide advice, guidance, and/or direct support to communities in the recovery planning
        processes.



5 The Community Assistance RSF was formerly known as the Community Planning and Capacity Building RSF.




                                                         9
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


    o   Support communities in identifying recovery priorities, goals, and milestones to achieve
        successful recovery and increase long-term resilience.
    o   Coordinate with affected community leaders to identify and provide tools and resources to
        address management and planning needs (e.g., technical assistance).
    o   Engage and build relationships with external partners, and facilitate coordination,
        communication, and information sharing across federal, SLTT, and nongovernmental
        partners to support community recovery planning and implementation of community recovery
        priorities.

    RSF Structure in Action: Data-Driven Decision Making

    Following Hurricanes Irma and María in September 2017, the Community Assistance RSF
    deployed to Puerto Rico. Community Assistance staff conducted a Community Conditions
    Assessment, which evaluated communities based on their capacity, vulnerability, and disaster
    impacts. Using this information, the Community Assistance RSF initiated a Community
    Recovery Mapping Project. This project provided technical assistance, training, and support to
    create a map which visualized the results of the assessment. Communities used this data to
    access additional financial resources to serve their unmet recovery needs. This demonstrates
    how data-driven decision making ultimately creates better outcomes for communities post-
    disaster.

Economic
   Coordinating Agency: U.S. Department of Commerce (DOC) / Economic Development
    Administration (EDA)
   Mission: Integrate the expertise of the federal government to help SLTTs and their partners in
    sustaining and rebuilding businesses, revitalizing employment, and developing economic
    opportunities that result in economically resilient communities after large-scale or catastrophic
    incidents.
   Strategic Outcomes:
    o   Disaster-impacted businesses are rapidly stabilized and receive the assistance needed to
        maintain operations and cover workforce payroll expenses.
    o   SLTTs and business and industry can effectively navigate and leverage federal economic
        recovery resources to support priority recovery projects.
    o   SLTTs, business and industry, and nongovernmental partners have increased capacity to
        develop and implement comprehensive economic recovery strategies that guide investment
        in new economic opportunities and enhance economic resilience.
    o   Communities have a greater understanding of future risks and vulnerabilities to consider in
        their economic planning.
   Responsibilities:
    o   Support the capacity of SLTT partners, business and industry, and community members to
        develop and implement comprehensive economic recovery strategies.
    o   Support the capacity of SLTT partners, business and industry, and community members to
        identify and mitigate pre-disaster vulnerabilities that may hinder economic recovery efforts
        and help communities plan for long- term resilience.




                                                  10
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


    o    Facilitate federal interagency communication and collaboration during recovery to ensure the
         aligned investment of resources in support of SLTT economic recovery priorities.
    o    Provide business owners with assistance that is critical to the continuity of operations,
         including access to capital as well as technical guidance, and promote early economic
         stabilization for business and industry partners.

    RSF Structure in Action: Partners in Economic Recovery

    Hurricane Idalia, a Category 3 storm, made landfall approximately 60 miles north of Cedar Key,
    Florida on August 30, 2023. The Florida Department of Agriculture and Consumer Services
    estimated that Florida shellfish and aquaculture processors saw more than $34.1 million in
    losses from Hurricane Idalia. A National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Sea Grant
    aquaculture extension specialist, working with the local growers’ association, estimated that
    Hurricane Idalia impacted more than 80 percent of the clam industry in Cedar Key. This loss
    resulted in layoffs and workers placed on significantly reduced work schedules.
    In September 2023, the Economic RSF met with the U.S. Department of Labor to discuss the
    impacts of the hurricane. This led to a series of strategic discussions between CareerSource
    Florida (state and local Department of Labor-supported workforce boards), Florida Sea Grant,
    and other state/federal partners. In February 2024, a project funded through the U.S.
    Department of Labor National Dislocated Worker Grant program was launched by the partners
    to help clam farmers and their dislocated workers get back to work. Between the start of the
    project and June 2024, a total of $6 million was invested. The local CareerSource Board
    credited the Economic RSF for playing a key role in helping this project come to fruition.

Health, Education, and Human Services 6
   Coordinating Agency: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) / Administration for
    Strategic Preparedness and Response (ASPR)
   Mission: Assist locally led recovery efforts to restore public health, health care, human services,
    education, and behavioral health networks to promote the resilience, health, and well-being of
    affected individuals and communities.
   Strategic Outcomes:
    o    Health care, public health, environmental health, behavioral health, education, and human
         services systems operations that support individuals, families, and communities are restored
         in the affected area.
    o    Enable K-12 schools and institutions of higher education to promptly resume instruction.
    o    Communities prevent long-term student learning disruption due to displacement, emotional
         stresses of the post-disaster environment, and other developmental impacts to children and
         youth over the recovery period.
    o    Service providers are equipped to respond to future hazards and create more resilient and
         sustainable health care, public health, behavioral health, education, and human service
         systems.
    o    Communities are prepared to address pre-disaster health and economic disparities to ensure
         rapid and fairly distributed recovery efforts.



6 The Health, Education, and Human Services RSF was formerly known as Health and Social Services RSF.




                                                         11
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


    o   Communities prevent or mitigate specific medical, psychosocial, developmental, and
        behavioral health harms to individuals and families that often occur during the prolonged
        post-disaster period.
   Responsibilities:
    o   Mitigate post-disaster stress for the affected community, provide additional coping and
        resilience skills support, maintain the behavioral health clinical workforce, and identify
        survivors that require clinical-level intervention.
    o   Restore and adapt health care systems across the spectrum of care services to meet
        community needs in the post-disaster environment and give disaster survivors access to
        health care services.
    o   Assess the post-disaster environment to effectively restore community public and nonprofit
        human services and adapt public health interventions to prevent cascading hazards during
        recovery.
    o   Provide and coordinate financial and technical resources, and assistance for K-12 schools
        and institutions of higher education recovering after a natural disaster, to adapt learning to
        the post-disaster environment and provide effective support for staff and students.
    o   Help communities rebuild in ways that promote public and environmental health and safety
        for individuals and families.

    RSF Structure in Action: Building Public Health Capacity

    In the aftermath of Super Typhoon Mawar in 2023, Guam public health officials recognized a
    critical need to enhance their management of various public health concerns, particularly mold
    mitigation and lead control. In response, the Health, Education, and Human Services RSF, led
    by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, deployed a specialized team of mold
    and lead experts to address the unique challenges faced by communities in Guam. These
    federal experts conducted a thorough assessment to identify specific local challenges and
    developed and delivered customized training sessions to Guam public health officials. These
    sessions were designed to build the public health capacity of Guam, equipping public health
    officials with the knowledge and skills needed to strengthen their internal public health
    capabilities and effectively manage mold and lead issues in the wake of the disaster.

Housing
   Coordinating Agency: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
   Mission: Provide housing development expertise while engaging in and facilitating collaboration
    among federal, state, local, and territorial partners involved in housing recovery. Support
    communities in developing a comprehensive recovery plan and implementation process. Assist
    in assessing impacts, determining key issues, analyzing damage data, and identifying resources,
    tools, and technical assistance to support the communities’ rebuilding.
    Strategic Outcomes:
    o   Communities have identified key long-term recovery considerations, implementation
        strategies and rebuilding priorities through partner engagement.
    o   SLTTs and community recovery partners are aware of the resources, tools, and technical
        assistance available to affected communities along with their administrative, regulatory, and
        programmatic flexibilities available to affected communities.




                                                  12
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


    o   Long-term recovery and rebuilding planning and implementation are built on a foundation of
        resilience, fairness, information sharing, and coalition building.
    o   Communities become more resilient through data-driven recovery planning and
        implementation that examine all areas of impact and identify solutions.
    o   Communities can enhance overall recovery capacity through a continuous process of
        assessment, improvement, and resource identification, and by embracing new and
        strengthening existing partnerships.
   Responsibilities:
    o   Provide affected communities with support, guidance, impact and damage data, and other
        useful housing information to create a recovery plan.
    o   Coordinate the delivery of training and technical assistance opportunities to enhance local
        capacity to identify long-term rebuilding priorities and recovery implementation strategies.
    o   Collaborate with SLTTs and other recovery partners to identify necessary financial resources,
        tools, and technical assistance to support housing recovery planning.
    o   Identify and engage partners to facilitate whole community representation and fairness in
        housing recovery planning.
    o   Communicate to SLTTs the flexibilities and administrative, regulatory, and programmatic
        disaster relief available to affected communities.
    o   Promote and assist coalition building, including information sharing to facilitate successful
        long-term housing recovery.

    RSF Structure in Action: Housing Assessment and Resource Allocation

    Following Hurricane María in Puerto Rico in 2017, the Housing RSF, in collaboration with other
    RSFs and various local and national organizations, conducted a comparative analysis of pre-
    and post-disaster housing stock and housing conditions. By gathering data from multiple
    sources, including an analysis of FEMA-verified loss data for both homeowners and renters, the
    Housing Impact Assessment summarized the hurricane’s impacts and damages to housing.
    This assessment equipped the Commonwealth with actionable insights to support recovery
    planning for affected communities. Puerto Rico used the Assessment to develop its
    comprehensive Community Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery Action Plan, which
    secured an allocation of approximately $20 billion.

Infrastructure Systems
   Coordinating Agency: U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) / U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE)
   Mission: Provide support to SLTTs undertaking the rehabilitation and reconstruction of affected
    infrastructure systems through coordinated delivery of federal resources, while supporting long-
    term infrastructure resilience that highlights the use of new, accessible, and permanent
    infrastructure system options.
   Strategic Outcomes:
    o   SLTTs and business and industry partners receive technical assistance that supports
        infrastructure systems restoration (primarily energy, water/wastewater, transportation,
        communications, and watershed management) while working toward strengthening system
        resilience.




                                                  13
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


    o   SLTT and community leaders are informed about existing federal programs, authorities, and
        available funding that support long-term infrastructure recovery, resilience planning, and
        project implementation.
    o   SLTTs and communities have the resources and support to visualize and develop plans for
        future projects that use available resilient infrastructure technologies, methods, and
        materials.
    o   SLTT and community leaders have the information and data necessary to identify and
        prioritize infrastructure recovery needs, any associated recovery costs, and an understanding
        of federal processes to address infrastructure recovery needs.
   Responsibilities:
    o   Coordinate federal support to help restore infrastructure systems and services while
        advancing resilient options that enable infrastructure systems to withstand and quickly
        recover from future disaster events.
    o   Support SLTT infrastructure system recovery and redevelopment through technical
        assistance and guidance, including resiliency strategies that consider and respect cultural
        and community concerns.
    o   Inform SLTT and communities about federal program eligibility, application processes, and
        project requirements through information sharing and technical assistance.
    o   Help communities envision and plan more resilient and viable infrastructure that considers
        impacts from extreme weather hazards and uses new and efficient technologies.
    o   Enhance a community’s ability to identify, mitigate, and recover from impacts to
        infrastructure systems by addressing additional disaster-dependent concerns such as
        environmental issues, aging infrastructure system failures, adopting modern building codes,
        providing sufficient energy to operate modern systems, and cybersecurity system gaps.

    RSF Structure in Action: Enhancing Recovery for Remote Communities After Typhoon Merbok

    In September of 2022, Typhoon Merbok impacted 1,300 miles of the Alaskan coastline,
    including more than 60 Alaska Native Villages and municipalities. The infrastructure impacts
    were widespread, affecting erosion control, water and wastewater systems, solid waste
    disposal, energy infrastructure, and more. The Infrastructure Systems RSF led coordinated
    efforts to enhance resilience and support recovery across the impacted communities by
    collaborating with multiple partners. Working with the Bureau of Indian Affairs, the
    Infrastructure Systems RSF launched a quarry development initiative designed to benefit
    impacted Alaska Native Villages. This collaboration also addressed critical infrastructure needs
    such as securing funding for new fuel storage tanks. By working closely with the U.S.
    Department of Transportation's Maritime Administration, the Infrastructure Systems RSF
    promoted the use of Port Infrastructure Development Program grants to improve community
    landings in 22 locations, facilitating better access to essential goods and services. They also
    provided vital hazard mitigation planning guidance and collaborated with the Alaska
    Department of Transportation to plan more resilient barge landings across the affected areas.




                                                  14
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


Natural and Cultural Resources
   Coordinating Agency: U.S. Department of the Interior (DOI)
   Mission: Assist SLTTs in the protection, preservation, and recovery of natural and cultural
    resources after disaster. Natural resources are land, fish, wildlife, biota, air, and water. Cultural
    resources are tangible entities or cultural practices that represent the history, art, and traditions
    of our nation.
   Strategic Outcomes:
    o   Communities are equipped to conduct pre- and post-disaster recovery planning for Natural
        and Cultural Resources in alignment with federal priorities.
    o   Time-critical actions have been taken to stabilize affected natural, cultural, artistic, and
        historic resources, and SLTT partners have an implementable strategy in place to address
        long-term restoration, rehabilitation, conservation, and preservation needs according to
        community priorities. This can include sources of potential funding or technical assistance
        for identified projects.
    o   Emergency and long-term actions comply with applicable laws and regulations and have
        been informed by cultural literacy, the best available science, and proven management
        practices to support a fair, enduring, and resilient recovery.
   Responsibilities:
    o   Facilitate technical assistance and resources from various federal, SLTT, nongovernmental
        organization (NGO), and private sources to support the protection, preservation, and recovery
        of natural and cultural resources.
    o   Conduct education and outreach at the federal and SLTT levels to mitigate future damage to
        natural and cultural resources.
    o   Assist SLTT agencies and community organizations with plan development to ensure long-
        term resilience of natural and cultural resources. Plans shall focus on mitigation methods
        based on the best available science, applicable environmental laws, executive orders,
        guidelines, and best management practices.
    o   Assess impacts on natural and cultural resources in the disaster-impacted area by
        coordinating with response personnel.
    o   Identify protections that should be present during stabilization through recovery which foster
        and preserve the potential for rehabilitation and restoration.
    o   Develop a timeline that considers available natural and budgetary resources for addressing
        efforts to repair and restore natural and cultural resources in a resilient manner.
    o   Enhance the capacity of practitioners, tradespersons, and artists necessary to implement
        recovery projects.
    o   Jointly develop infrastructure and ecosystem restoration plans.
    o   Preserve and restore natural and cultural resources as part of an overall community recovery
        that is achieved through the coordinated efforts of subject-matter experts and the recovery
        team in accordance with the specified timeline in the recovery plan.




                                                   15
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


    RSF Structure in Action: Integrating Recovery and Mitigation for Coral Reef Protection

    The 2017 hurricane season caused major damage to Puerto Rico’s coral reefs. To repair the
    damage, the Natural and Cultural Resources RSF collaborated with FEMA, the National
    Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and the Puerto Rico Department of Natural
    and Environmental Resources to assess reef damage and initiate restoration efforts. With
    FEMA funding, NOAA led the emergency reattachment of approximately 16,000 corals across
    63 sites in Puerto Rico. 7
    Under the Natural and Cultural Resources RSF, NOAA also provided technical assistance for
    ongoing restoration planning, resulting in FEMA's first-ever natural resource restoration project
    through the Hazard Mitigation Grant Program (HMGP). This $38.6 million project will enhance
    the coral reef system one kilometer offshore of San Juan, utilizing a hybrid gray-green design
    with coral outplanting to reduce flooding and protect around 800 structures in nearby
    communities, including Condado, Ocean Park, and Puntas Las Marías. 8

NATIONAL COORDINATORS
Each of the six Federal RSFs is led by a Coordinating Agency, with a designated National Coordinator,
who is a senior staff member. The National Coordinator manages the Coordinating Agency’s roles
and responsibilities within the RSF while aligning interagency partners efforts. Additionally, the
National Coordinator engages all participating agencies and organizations within the RSF to ensure
successful mission delivery. Key National Coordinator responsibilities include:
   Facilitating collaboration, coordination, and effective communication among all RSF participating
    agencies and organizations to achieve stated goals.
   Exploring opportunities for utilizing applicable funding and programs across the RSF (steady
    state or disaster-specific) to facilitate recovery.
   Training and educating staff, including individuals who may deploy to support recovery activities,
    across the RSF’s participating agencies and organizations to deliver operational support in the
    mission area.
   Informing national disaster recovery and resilience policy and program development.
   Incorporating lessons learned from previous field operations to continuously improve recovery
    strategies.
Post-disaster, National Coordinator responsibilities include:
   Designating the RSF Field Coordinator and other mission support team members.
   Coordinating the involvement of participating agencies and organizations based on mission
    requirements identified by the FDRO, in collaboration with the Field Coordinator and/or as
    requested by SLTTs.
   Ensuring collaboration with regional points of contact of the RSF participating agencies and
    organizations to gain local context, connect with local networks, and ensure long-term continuity.
   Identifying steady state or disaster funding programs available from their agency as well as other
    agencies to support community needs and operations.



7 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, Post-Disaster Coral Reef Assessment and Restoration Set Important

Precedent for Coastal Communities, 2020
8 FEMA, FEMA Allocates Millions to Restore coral Reefs in the Coast of San Juan, 2023.




                                                           16
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


   Establishing and accepting Mission Assignments with FEMA, including Mission Assignment
    extensions, Interagency Reimbursable Work Agreements (IRWAs), 9 or Interagency Agreements
    (IAAs) 10 for a recovery activation when appropriate. Mission Assignments may also be
    established directly with a Participating Agency, organization, or other federal agency based on
    identified disaster recovery needs. 11
   Training and supporting Field Coordinators for the development of mission activities and
    deliverables, such as Recovery Needs Assessments, community engagement, and/or Recovery
    Support Strategy.
   Liaising with leadership to ensure RSF efforts are aligned with the overall recovery strategy.
RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION FIELD COORDINATORS
The RSF’s National Coordinator designates each RSF Field Coordinator to serve as the senior
mission-specific operational lead for each RSF Mission Assignment. Key Field Coordinator
responsibilities include:
   Managing the deployed federal interagency personnel of their agency and other agencies
    activated to support the RSF mission.
   Maintaining accountability of federal and contractor assets deployed in support of the RSF.
   Promoting new and reinforcing existing relationships between federal and SLTT partners.
   Identifying and documenting key community recovery needs and challenges in a Recovery Needs
    Assessment, and managing its preparation, along with the Recovery Support Strategy, for
    submission to FEMA operational leadership and SLTT authorities.
   Liaising with leadership on behalf of the Coordinating Agency and with the other RSF
    participating agencies and organizations.
   Focusing federal resources on the most pertinent recovery needs.
ADVISORS
Participating agencies and organizations can activate field-level advisors who are subject-matter
experts with extensive knowledge of how department or agency resources align with community
recovery needs. Advisors support tasks related to agriculture, disability integration, civil rights
compliance, mitigation, Unified Federal Environmental and Historic Preservation Review resources,
academia, and philanthropy among other topics. They may also represent department and agency
equities such as rural development and water systems. Advisors assist the FCO, FDRC, FDRO, and/or
Field Coordinators develop locally and regionally appropriate recovery strategies. Their unique
skillset and expertise can help leadership and staff identify solutions that meet incident-level needs.




9 U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security Acquisition Manual Subchapter 3017.5 Interagency

Acquisitions, 2021
10 U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Homeland Security Acquisition Manual Subchapter 3017.5 Interagency

Acquisitions, 2021
11 Participating agencies and organizations can provide recovery support through multiple avenues, including their normal

authorities, steady state programs, and existing relationships.



                                                           17
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


4.      State, Local, Tribal Nation, and Territorial Roles and
        Responsibilities
SLTTs play a critical role in disaster
recovery, relying on their own
capacities and authorities to lead
recovery for most disasters. While the
federal government provides
resources, expertise, and additional
support, SLTTs are responsible for
organizing and executing recovery
within their communities. This
includes disaster recovery
practitioners who may also support
recovery work on an as-needed basis.
For example, a school superintendent
may be designated as their
community’s disaster recovery lead for
education and social services.
To effectively manage recovery efforts,
there are several best practices SLTTs
can implement to be better
positioned to recover from a                   Figure 3: Community-Driven Recovery
disaster.                             Community-Driven Recovery depicts local communities at the center of any
                                          disaster recovery. Federal and non-federal partners organize their support
Best practices to consider                                        around community needs.
implementing pre-disaster
include:
    Identify the government entity and position responsible for leading recovery coordination, as well
     as the individuals who will act as liaisons between governmental entities and NGOs. This
     includes the respective SLTT disaster recovery coordinators. Some commonly used positions
     include the Local Disaster Recovery Manager (LDRM), State Disaster Recovery Coordinator
     (SDRC), Territorial Disaster Recovery Coordinator (TDRC), and Tribal Disaster Recovery
     Coordinator (Tribal DRC).
    Identify who else within the government or community at large needs to be involved and
     determine a coordination structure (e.g., key positions, offices). Depending on the scale of the
     impact, these individuals may concurrently support recovery and ongoing emergency response
     efforts.
    Develop, adopt, and maintain pre-disaster recovery and resilience assessments and plans.
    Develop an engagement and communication plan that includes and considers a whole
     community approach as well as neighboring jurisdictions and Tribal Nations.
    Identify and develop strong relationships and networks with SLTT recovery counterparts, as well
     as nonprofit, philanthropic, and business and industry partners, to determine what types of
     assistance may be available post-disaster and document important information. This includes
     priorities, roles, responsibilities, resources, communication channels, and tasks.
    Establish memorandums of understanding (MOU) and mechanisms to ensure adequate
     resources are available post-disaster, including coordination with nonprofit and philanthropic
     partners as well as for-profit and nonprofit disability service providers.



                                                       18
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


   Conduct training and exercises regularly to educate recovery partners and ensure effective
    coordination pre- and post-disaster (e.g., Stafford Act processes and resources for Elected
    Officials).
   Determine data needs and collection mechanisms (e.g., information required to conduct or
    inform damage assessments to include for Stafford Act Declarations or other agency programs).
   Develop identifiable metrics for successful recovery from pre-identified threats, based on
    appropriate Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (THIRA)/Stakeholder
    Preparedness Report (SPR), and other resources that can help jurisdictions understand their
    risks and inform mitigation strategies, such as State Energy Security Plans.
   Develop partnerships and conduct pre-disaster coordination and planning opportunities with
    business and industry leaders to include procurement and mutual disaster exercises.
Post-disaster actions enable communities to establish and refine recovery priorities, goals, and
objectives, identify specific projects in areas of critical importance, and identify opportunities to
improve community resilience against threats and hazards.
Best practices to consider implementing post-disaster recovery include:
   Assign disaster-specific individuals to lead coordination between states, Tribal Nations,
    territories, and/or federal agencies and NGOs. This includes the LDRM, and the SDRC, TDRC, or
    Tribal DRC.
   Initiate and coordinate recovery activities as community lifelines stabilize through SLTT
    coordination structures.
   Conduct initial damage assessments to inform recovery planning and potential federal requests
    for assistance.
   Establish a communications structure to share information internally and externally, ensuring
    that communications are accessible to all communities.
   Maintain communications with business and industry partners about operations and supply
    chain status, as well as restoration challenges and timelines.
   Conduct outreach and listening sessions to understand community needs, being mindful of
    survivors’ suffering, and including means of access and representation from the whole
    community.
   Set resilient recovery priorities and outcomes in partnership with affected communities focusing
    on outcomes that positively impact the whole community.
   Develop a disaster recovery plan that promotes local decision-making and ownership as it
    ultimately becomes the roadmap for all levels of government and nongovernmental partners to
    provide resources and support. Disaster recovery plans should be updated as needed and
    adjusted based on continuing information analysis.
   Develop and maintain an accessible system to manage and monitor progress made toward
    recovery goals and project implementation.
   Engage governmental and nongovernmental partners to identify and determine how to cover
    unmet needs.
   Implement MOUs and other agreements to facilitate effective post-disaster coordination.




                                                    19
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


   Post-disaster Recovery Planning: Turning Losses into Lessons

   In 2017, the Tubbs Fire ravaged Santa Rosa, California. Despite having adopted its hazard
   mitigation plan in 2016, the city quickly recognized the need to update the plan after the fire
   claimed 24 lives and destroyed more than 3,000 homes. Santa Rosa successfully secured
   funding through the FEMA Hazard Mitigation Grant Program (HMGP) and the city’s fire
   department led a citywide effort to develop a community wildfire protection plan as an annex
   to the existing hazard mitigation plan. This annex provided detailed wildfire risk assessments,
   prioritized risk reduction in planning, and offered homeowners guidance to protect their
   properties.

4.1. Local Governments
Local governments are responsible for adopting and implementing recovery strategies because they
directly represent the interests and needs of the affected community. Depending on the type and
severity of a disaster, local governments may receive support from the federal government, states,
Tribal Nations, or territories, as well as neighboring municipalities and regional authorities. Even with
this support, local governments may face and need to plan for capacity constraints when responding
to and recovering from disasters (e.g., insufficient staff, limited recovery and resilience subject-
matter expertise).
In the wake of disasters, local officials and public employees may need to assume disaster recovery-
related roles and responsibilities beyond their regular duties. Recovery is often the responsibility of
many departments, extending beyond emergency management professionals to those involved in
affected sectors (e.g., education or business leaders when schools or local businesses have been
damaged or destroyed). This may require additional community engagement and coordination,
preparing and submitting grant applications, and other functions. It is also important to consider that
many of these individuals may need to manage disaster recovery work while also suffering from and
dealing with personal loss caused by the disaster.
Local governments can build their capacity and resilience before a disaster (e.g., providing trainings
for staff, hardening infrastructure). These actions involve balancing observable physical,
environmental, and societal risks with corresponding mitigation strategies. This includes establishing
local recovery policies and methods to formally coordinate the solicitation and consideration of input
from across the whole community.
4.2.      States and Territories
States and territories play a critical role in coordinating disaster recovery efforts. They may serve as
the conduit for federal support to local communities, Tribal Nations, NGOs, and business and
industry partners. It is critical for states and territories to establish and maintain clear and open lines
of communication with all disaster recovery partners. It is also important to note that management
roles, authorities, and capabilities essential for effective disaster recovery do not reside exclusively
within a state or territory emergency management structure. While emergency managers may often
lead coordination, successful disaster recovery involves all departments and agencies engaging and
committing staff to supporting recovery efforts (e.g., housing or economic recovery).
States or territories may choose to adopt their own disaster recovery framework that parallels the
federal RSF structure. The structure and functions of state or territory RSFs can vary based on
factors such as capacity, staffing, funding, frequency of events, and other considerations. Due to the
variety of state and territorial structures and functions, it is the responsibility of the federal RSFs to
strategically align with the state or territory’s recovery structure to effectively provide recovery
support.




                                                    20
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


   Pre-Disaster Housing Initiative: Seizing the Opportunity to Plan Ahead

   Planning for a disaster housing mission can be an enormous challenge. In 2023, FEMA and
   HUD undertook a first-of-its-kind initiative to bring emergency managers and housing officials
   together to prepare for resilient disaster housing recovery. The pilot program included
   Louisiana, Montana, New Jersey, and Washington as the first cohort. Over seven months, the
   states worked with housing and recovery subject-matter experts to build relationships, address
   challenges, and create housing recovery strategies that leveraged the resources and expertise
   of both FEMA and HUD. By connecting these key players before a disaster, the program
   enabled more effective support for survivors and local communities as they transition from
   recovery into rebuilding.

4.3.        Tribal Nations
As sovereign nations, Tribal Nations take
the lead in preparing for and managing
their disaster recovery efforts. Tribal                                     Working with Tribal Nations
Nations are often the first and                             It is critical for all disaster recovery partners to follow
sometimes only responders to disasters                      the lead of Tribal Nation leaders to understand the
within their communities. 12 While Tribal                   religious and/or cultural beliefs that guide how they
Nations are constantly innovating as                        manage disasters. These important considerations
they prepare for and recover from                           are vital to maintaining positive relationships with
                                                            Tribal Nations and ensuring successful collaboration
disasters, they also rely on the traditional
                                                            for recovery.
ecological knowledge and nature-based
solutions that have effectively promoted                    For example, certain Tribal Nations may not speak
resilient disaster recovery for centuries.                  about or plan for disasters as they believe this will
                                                            bring disaster to their community. To engage in
Tribal communities may include Tribal                       disaster recovery planning, some Tribal Nations have
citizens residing within and beyond the                     created plans for their neighbors, rather than
Tribal Nation’s jurisdictional boundaries,                  themselves. It still requires Tribal Nations to work
as well as descendants of the Tribal                        through the process, while the language they use is
Nation, Tribal Nation employees, and                        focused on planning for their neighbor.
non-Tribal Nation members or non-
natives living within the Tribal Nation.
The federal government has a trust and
treaty responsibility 13 to Tribal Nations, each of which faces unique circumstances and challenges.
The disaster recovery needs of individual Tribal Nations are driven by their distinct and varying
political structures, cultures, religions, and historical contexts, among many other factors. While
Tribal Nations may consider utilizing the federal RSF structure to develop and adopt their own
disaster recovery framework, it is the responsibility of the federal RSFs to align with the Tribal
Nation’s recovery structure to effectively provide recovery support.




12 For information on how Tribal Nations may receive federal disaster recovery support, see Tribal Declarations Interim

Guidance | FEMA.gov
13 The federal Indian trust responsibility is a legal obligation under which the United States “has charged itself with moral

obligations of the highest responsibility and trust” toward Indian Tribes (Seminole Nation v. United States, 316 U.S. 286,
297 [1942]). Over the years, the trust doctrine has been at the center of numerous other Supreme Court cases, thus
making it one of the most important principles in federal Indian law. The federal Indian trust responsibility is also a legally
enforceable fiduciary obligation on the part of the United States to protect Tribal treaty rights, lands, assets, and resources,
as well as a duty to carry out the mandates of federal law with respect to American Indian and Alaska Native Tribes and
Villages.



                                                              21
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


   A Coordinated Recovery Effort: Partnerships in Remote Places

   In western Alaska, coastal erosion, flooding, and permafrost degradation – largely due to
   environmental changes – threaten over 40 Alaska Native Villages reliant on subsistence
   livelihoods. These issues were worsened by Typhoon Merbok in 2022. In the wake of this
   disaster the Community Assistance RSF provided recovery management technical assistance
   to 12 Alaska Native Villages due to the area's extreme remoteness, limited infrastructure, and
   vulnerability. The Community Assistance RSF facilitated recovery coordination among the
   complex governance structures of these ~500-resident communities, including working with
   city and Tribal Councils and Village Corporations, and bringing in various agencies and partners
   for support. Erosion protection was identified as a high priority, leading the Community
   Assistance RSF and the Infrastructure Systems RSF to help communities apply for a pilot
   program with no local cost match, resulting in six applications. Additionally, the Community
   Assistance RSF supported Alaska Native Villages in applying for Bureau of Indian Affairs
   disaster supplemental funding, resulting in nine applications and securing $25 million for
   home repairs and subsistence equipment replacement.

5.     Nongovernmental Resources
Disaster affected communities and survivors may have needs greater than the assistance available
from the federal government and SLTTs. Nongovernmental partners, such as Long-Term Recovery
Groups (LTRG), NGOs, philanthropic organizations, business and industry entities, as well as
academic institutions can often address ongoing or unmet community needs using their resources,
capabilities, and donations. While the availability of these resources may vary by geography and
circumstances, they provide essential support in many forms. Community members and SLTT
officials should actively incorporate these options into their pre- and post-disaster recovery plans.
SLTTs should leverage their existing relationships with nongovernmental partners to enhance
disaster recovery efforts. Partners that collaborate during normal circumstances are often well-
positioned to quickly step in to provide disaster recovery assistance such as funding, human
resources, and strategic guidance. By drawing on these established connections, communities can
recover from disasters more quickly and build resilience against future challenges. This approach
fosters a more durable recovery process by leveraging the strengths and capabilities of diverse
sectors to support community well-being and resilience.
5.1.     Long-Term Recovery Groups
Following a disaster, community-based organizations and partners may choose to form a single
unified group through which members organize their recovery operations. This unified group is often
called an LTRG, whose goal is to match recovery resources to individuals with the highest need
within the community.
LTRGs can include community leaders, local NGOs, Voluntary Organizations Active in Disasters
(VOADs), state and federal government representatives, community-wide and neighborhood leaders,
business and industry partners, disability organizations, faith-based leaders, and other recovery
partners. FEMA Voluntary Agency Liaisons (VALs), are often involved and establish supportive long-
term relationships with members of the LTRG.
By including community-based partners that routinely utilize volunteers in their work, LTRGs are
better equipped to recruit and coordinate volunteers. They can efficiently handle an influx of
inquiries from people eager to donate their time, but who are unsure of how to get involved,
matching them with the appropriate organizations ready to utilize volunteers for recovery efforts. This
is essential as volunteer support is critical to many organizations after a disaster when the need for



                                                  22
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


their services often exceeds their regular capacity.
LTRGs are usually established for a specific incident and are not intended to be permanent. They
may last for a few months or a few years depending on community needs but usually disband once
the affected community has reached established key recovery milestones. The specific functions and
priorities that an LTRG serves may vary by disaster as they are dependent on the unique
characteristics of the community, group leadership, and committee members.

    Impacts of a Community Long-Term Recovery Group: Healing Past Wounds

    LTRGs play a vital role in recovery efforts by empowering communities to identify their needs
    and coordinating assistance. After the Marshall Fire and Windstorm in Boulder, Colorado, the
    “Marshall Restoring Our Community” LTRG built trusted relationships with survivors and
    supporting agencies. The group united resources and centered survivors’ needs, opening the
    Marshall Fire Recovery Center to provide services such as mental health support and
    community connection. The LTRG worked closely with social services agencies and disaster
    case management to address critical unmet needs like food insecurity and mental health
    services. In October 2023, the LTRG organized a Multi-Agency Recovery Center event called
    “Marshall Fire Moving Forward,” bringing together 400 survivors and 35 agencies to help
    identify resource gaps and build relationships. Their smoke and ash task force exemplifies
    their ability to adapt and coordinate resources to meet evolving local recovery goals.

5.2.       Nongovernmental Organizations
NGOs are independent, not-for-profit entities that work for the public good. The capacity of a
nongovernmental organization 14 can range from small community-based nonprofits to national
organizations with extensive experience in disaster response and recovery.
NGOs have access to recovery-related knowledge, skills, and resources that can be used to help
communities pre- and post-disaster. Many NGOs maintain existing relationships with other disaster
recovery partners and may help contribute to SLTT preparedness and planning efforts. During
disaster recovery, NGOs often take the lead on a multitude of needs that SLTT and federal partners
may not have the capacity to address. These critical partners can support recovery through:
    Crisis Counseling (i.e., behavioral health)                   Training and Technical Assistance
    Casework and Case Management                                  Funding Resources and Grants
    Legal Services (i.e., succession deeds, fair                  Cleanup and Debris Removal
     housing, insurance)                                           Mold Remediation
    Disaster Unemployment Assistance                              Distribution of Emergency Supplies
    Emergency Food and Shelter                                    Construction (i.e., major and minor home repairs,
    Transitional Sheltering Assistance                             mitigation efforts, reconstruction)
    Direct Housing                                                Financial and Insurance Literacy
    Mass Care                                                     Long-Term Recovery Coordination
    Disability Services                                           Advocacy
    Volunteer and Donations Management                            Community Development
    Animal Care and Sheltering


14 NGOs include VOADs and other nonprofits, encompassing voluntary, faith- and community-based, business and industry,

philanthropic, minority or disability-focused groups, and whole community partners who help individuals and communities
plan for, respond to, and recover from disasters.



                                                          23
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


NGOs are vital partners in disaster management, bridging gaps and addressing immediate needs
while laying the groundwork for recovery and resilience. Their diverse roles enhance the collective
humanitarian response to disasters. NGOs often originate from or remain in disaster-affected
communities and can continue to mobilize and provide recovery support to individuals and the
community. As such, it is crucial that NGOs receive timely information from and closely coordinate
with their SLTT counterparts.
5.3.      Philanthropy, Business and Industry, and Academia
In addition to LTRG, VOAD, and NGO resources, disaster recovery resources may also be available
from other non-federal partners such as philanthropy, business and industry, and academia.
Engaging philanthropic organizations can unlock grants, donations, and expertise dedicated to
supporting communities in times of need. Business and industry partnerships can bring in resources
through corporate social responsibility initiatives, separate supply chains, and technical expertise,
offering both immediate relief and long-term solutions. Academic institutions can contribute
research, technical assistance, and innovative approaches to recovery and resilience.
PHILANTHROPY
Philanthropic organizations across the nation work to support disaster-affected SLTTs and survivors.
This includes philanthropic partners at all levels, from organizations supporting disaster recovery
nationwide down to local, community-specific aid groups and community foundations. Community
foundations, in particular, can play a vital role by leveraging local knowledge and networks to
address specific recovery needs. They may provide grants to nonprofits, rapidly mobilize donations
and resources, and foster collaboration among recovery partners. These partners may fill recovery
gaps a community has been unable to address or provide disaster survivors with additional financial
aid to cover unmet needs.
Many RSF partners recognize the value of these contributions and have designated philanthropic
liaisons to connect potential philanthropic partners with recovery initiatives for a coordinated and
effective response. This can help communities recover and rebuild more quickly.
BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY
From Fortune 500 corporations to critical infrastructure owners and operators to small businesses
and farms across the nation, business and industry partners in the private sector can play a key role
in disaster recovery as partners in the whole community. These partners contribute significantly to
the overall effectiveness of a community’s resilience and recovery by ensuring the continuity of
essential services and the stability of local economies. They also support recovery at every level of
government by providing essential commodities, labor, and expertise through contract support. Their
engagement and support are critical to the resilience and recovery of disaster-affected areas.
Business and industry own and operate the vast majority of the nation’s critical infrastructure
systems, such as electric power and financial and telecommunications systems, as well as the
commodities, labor, and expertise required to recover from disasters. Accordingly, in order for a
community to effectively recover, government and community leaders must effectively coordinate
and communicate with business and industry.
Additionally, given their critical role, businesses are strongly encouraged to develop pre- and post-
disaster recovery plans to ensure their continuity as well as support for their community’s overall
recovery. For example, businesses in critical infrastructure sectors such as water, power,
telecommunications, and transportation can provide material and technical assistance to restore
critical infrastructure affected by disasters through mutual aid and assistance. Restoring these
services contributes to the immediate safety and well-being of communities and bolsters the
operational capacity of other sectors. Similarly, the healthcare and pharmaceutical industries can




                                                  24
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


ensure the availability of necessary medical supplies and services, while the retail and food
industries can help meet basic consumer needs.
Small businesses and farms are of key importance both in providing jobs and in shaping the
character and culture of a community. Disruptions due to disasters can result in families losing
access to essential services and resources and destabilize local economies. The recovery and
resilience of these businesses are essential to the overall health of the community. Involving
business and industry partners in recovery planning and execution can bring innovative solutions
and resources, enhancing the community’s ability to bounce back from disasters.

   Business Preparedness Resources: Locally Provided at No Cost

   The Small Business Administration (SBA) Small Business Development Center (SBDC) Program
   helps businesses prepare for and recover from disasters. Through this program, small
   businesses can find resources and guidance for their preparedness, continuity planning, and
   disaster recovery. These services are delivered through individual SBDCs, local centers that
   collaborate with federal, state, and local disaster assistance providers within their
   communities. When disaster strikes, businesses can turn to their local SBDC for the help they
   need to recover. Business consultants at SBDCs offer no cost consulting aimed at minimizing
   losses and enhancing the survivability of businesses affected by disasters. These specialists
   can guide businesses through the process of applying for SBA and other federal and state
   disaster loans, offering step-by-step assistance to help them get back on their feet. SBA’s
   network of resource partners, including its SBDCs, provide a wide range of services, including
   continuity planning to prevent business interruptions and financial guidance to help companies
   manage their finances and access emergency funds. These services are provided at no cost,
   ensuring that businesses have the resources they need to navigate through challenging times.
   More information can be found at sba.gov.

ACADEMIA
Academia can play a pivotal role in
community recovery. Institutions of
higher education offer a wide array of           The Role of Think Tanks and Research Labs in
subject-matter expertise and                                   Disaster Recovery
specialized resources that can assist        Think tanks and research laboratories play a crucial
SLTTs with disaster recovery planning,       role in enhancing disaster recovery efforts. These
mitigation, and resilience. Their            organizations contribute through in-depth research,
expertise in fields like urban planning,     data analysis, and policy recommendations that
environmental science, and                   inform recovery strategies and improve outcomes for
engineering can inform effective             affected communities. Through advanced analytical
recovery strategies.                         tools, predictive models, and innovative technologies,
                                             they support evidence-based decision making and
Academic institutions can also               optimize resource allocation. Think tanks also publish
develop and apply new technologies           best practices and convene partners to foster
and innovative solutions to address          collaboration and streamline recovery initiatives.
challenges such as advanced                  Together, these entities drive innovation and provide
mapping techniques, building resilient       valuable expertise, helping communities rebuild
                                             effectively and become more resilient to future
infrastructure, and creating durable,        disasters.
long-term recovery plans. For
example, the nation’s 111 public
land-grant institutions, established to
support agricultural sciences and engineering research, have partnered on a range of disaster
recovery efforts highlighting academia’s contribution to community recovery. Their trusted positions,



                                                  25
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


particularly in health sciences and education, help effectively engage the whole community.
By leveraging these partnerships and resources, communities can ensure a more effective and
enduring rebuilding process after a disaster, leading to resilience and long-term recovery.



   Leaning on Academia for Innovative Solutions

   After Hurricane Michael struck Florida in 2018, many communities needed specialized
   assistance to recover. The Interagency Recovery Coordination group, sensing this need,
   identified an array of experts from the Infrastructure Systems RSF and Environmental
   Protection Agency. This team leveraged multi-disciplinary engineering support from the Florida
   A&M University-Florida State University College of Engineering and the Drexel University College
   of Engineering to design a Dual Use Engineering Center. This initiative exemplified the NDRF’s
   principle of integrating diverse expertise to achieve long-lasting innovative recovery solutions.
   By bringing together a wide range of skills and perspectives, the team also developed a cutting-
   edge facility that not only addressed immediate recovery needs but also provided long-term
   benefits for the community.

6.     Conclusion
The NDRF serves as a guide, outlining the roles and responsibilities of federal, SLTT,
nongovernmental, and private organizations involved in disaster recovery. While it provides a
framework for how the federal government engages in recovery, it also acknowledges that SLTTs
simultaneously lead their own response and recovery efforts. The NDRF emphasizes that recovery is
most successful when it is organized around community-driven and locally defined goals. It promotes
outcomes that support the whole community, recognizing the importance of meeting the needs of all
community members and ensuring long-term success in recovery efforts. During both pre- and post-
disaster recovery, the NDRF provides SLTTs with valuable information to inform and enhance their
own disaster recovery efforts.
More importantly, the NDRF is not prescriptive. Instead, it serves as a flexible framework for SLTTs to
effectively address the dynamic and evolving nature of disaster recovery, ultimately fostering
stronger and more resilient communities. By using the NDRF, SLTTs can better prepare for and
respond to these challenges, ensuring that their communities are more resilient and better equipped
for future disasters. The NDRF stands as a critical resource for disaster recovery, advocating for
community-focused approaches that prioritize resilience and whole community recovery.




                                                  26
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


Appendix A: Recovery Support Functions and
Participating Agencies and Organizations
Appendix A contains RSF Fact Sheets (beginning on the next page) which include high-level
summaries of what assistance the federal RSFs provide.
              Federal
                                                         Coordinating Agency
   Recovery Support Functions
                                                U.S. Department of Homeland Security,
       Community Assistance
                                               Federal Emergency Management Agency
                                                   U.S. Department of Commerce,
             Economic
                                                Economic Development Administration
   Health, Education, and Human           U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
              Services                 Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response

              Housing                    U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development

                                                     U.S. Department of Defense,
      Infrastructure Systems
                                                     U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

  Natural and Cultural Resources                     U.S. Department of the Interior




                                               B-1
  COMMUNITY ASSISTANCE
  RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION
COORDINATING AGENCY: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY,
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY

MISSION
Coordinate assistance and support from across the federal government and nongovernmental partners to help state, local,
Tribal Nation, and territorial governments (SLTTs) effectively plan for and manage their recovery.



                                                  BEFORE A DISASTER

                                                    BUILDING CAPACITY

    • Promote collaborative approaches to disaster recovery and bolster SLTT capacity to develop pre-disaster
      recovery plans.
      Example: Leading FEMA’s participation and support of the Pre-Disaster Housing Initiative (PDHI) to help states
      identify and address pre-existing housing issues to expedite housing recovery.
    • Provide tools and trainings to support pre-disaster recovery planning and management support.

                                              PARTNERSHIP DEVELOPMENT

    • Identify, connect, and coordinate federal, SLTT, and nongovernmental partners and resources.
      Example: Hosting the Colorado United recovery symposium in federal/state partnership to share lessons learned,
      build local partnerships, identify resources and bring together community leaders.
    • Conduct outreach on Community Assistance Recovery Support Function offerings and capabilities.

                                             PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS

    • Support the development of SLTT pre- and post-disaster recovery plans and capacity.
      Example: Issuing pre-disaster recovery planning guides for Tribal Nation, state, and local partners.

                                   TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, TOOLS, AND TRAINING

    • Develop tools and materials for SLTTs to utilize in planning, managing and leading their recovery.
      Example: The Community Recovery Management Toolkit.

                                                   AFTER A DISASTER

                                                    BUILDING CAPACITY

    • Assist SLTTs with identifying management needs and resources.
    • Support SLTTs in accessing resources, trainings, partners and other experts to build their management capacity
      and capability to manage recovery process and resources.
    • Advise and support the development and implementation of strategies to restore community planning and
      management capacity.
    COMMUNITY ASSISTANCE
    RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION
 COORDINATING AGENCY: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY,
 FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY

                                                      AFTER A DISASTER (CONT.)

                                                       PARTNERSHIP DEVELOPMENT

      • Provide connections to peer mentors, advisors, and networks for community recovery advice and guidance from
        experienced leaders.
        Example: Utilizing peer connections to current and prior community leaders to bring lessons and experience from their
        disaster recovery.
      • Promote whole community recovery.
        Example: Providing resources, such as FEMA’s local recovery guides, to inform SLTT leaders and officials.
      • Conduct public engagement and outreach, such as resource fairs, community meetings, conferences, and
        public forums.
        Example: Supporting agricultural and farm recovery centers, hosting community listening sessions, and supporting
        housing and other issue area resource fairs.


                                                      PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS

      • Facilitate community visioning sessions for long-term resilient recovery.
        Example: Assisting communities with developing action-oriented recovery plans, with specific implementation steps
        and project goals.
      • Support outreach and engagement of the whole community in the recovery planning process.
        Example: Facilitating community engagement in coordination with community leaders, and preparing community
        engagement summary reports.

                                           TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, TOOLS, AND TRAINING

      • Provide planning technical assistance, direct support, and/or guidance, and assist SLTTs with identifying
       potential funding and resources for plan implementation.
       Example: Assisting communities with developing long-term recovery plans.
      • Provide technical assistance such as technical advisory support, impact analyses, and Geographic Information
       Systems (GIS) analyses.
      • Host peer-to-peer training for SLTT partners regarding disaster recovery processes, planning, and capacity
       considerations.
       Example: Developing and hosting Just in Time Recovery Management Training series.



                                           PARTICIPATING AGENCIES AND ORGANIZATIONS
American Red Cross | AmeriCorps | Delta Regional Authority | Department of Agriculture | Department of Commerce | Department of Education | Department
of Justice | Department of Health and Human Services | Department of Homeland Security | Department of Housing and Urban Development | Department
of the Interior | Department of Transportation | Environmental Protection Agency | General Services Administration | Small Business Administration |
U.S. Access Board | U.S. Army Corps of Engineers | National Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster
  ECONOMIC
  RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION
COORDINATING AGENCY: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE,
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATION

MISSION
Integrate the expertise of the federal government to help state, local, Tribal Nation, and territorial governments (SLTTs) and
their partners in sustaining and rebuilding businesses, revitalizing employment, and developing economic opportunities that
result in economically resilient communities after large-scale or catastrophic incidents.



                                                 BEFORE A DISASTER

                                                    BUILDING CAPACITY

    • Identify risks that may affect economic assets and infrastructure and develop strategies to strengthen local
      economies, such as programs that encourage economic diversification.

                                              PARTNERSHIP DEVELOPMENT

    • Create opportunities for representatives of local and state economic/workforce development organizations to
      meet federal experts and learn about available recovery resources and assistance programs.
      Example: Collaborating with local businesses and economic development partners, including local chambers of
      commerce and economic development districts, to connect them to Interagency Recovery Coordination teams.
    • Support local communities in developing multi-sector partnerships that can bolster economic development projects.
    • Collaborate with economic development organizations on data tools, dashboards, and guides to help them plan
      and effectively implement recovery and resilience strategies.

                                             PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS

    • Encourage regional economic development districts to develop Comprehensive Economic Development
      Strategies (CEDS) that strengthen resilience to risks and hazards, including aligning the CEDS with FEMA-
      approved hazard mitigation plans.
      Example: Publishing the CEDS and Hazard Mitigation Plan Alignment Guide.
    • Encourage businesses to mitigate risk and create recovery strategies that ensure continuity of operations and
      prevent workforce and payroll disruptions.
      Example: Providing technical assistance and step-by-step support for small business disaster preparedness and
      recovery planning through the Small Business Administration (SBA) local Small Business Development Centers and
      the online Ascent platform.
    ECONOMIC
    RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION
 COORDINATING AGENCY: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE,
 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATION

                                                         AFTER A DISASTER

                                                           BUILDING CAPACITY

     • Help identify resources to fund recovery, rebuilding, and resilience efforts, which may include support for
       disaster recovery coordinators and project funding.
        Example: Providing SBA “boots on the ground” to deliver disaster lending programs to homeowners, renters,
        nonprofits, and small businesses in the aftermath of a disaster.
     • Help disaster-affected places take advantage of new economic opportunities, build a workforce for the future,
       and promote rebuilding efforts that add value to the local economy.
        Example: Administering the Department of Labor Dislocated Worker Program to support workers who have lost
        jobs due to disaster and engaging state vocational rehabilitation programs to assist individuals with disabilities
        in gaining or regaining employment.
     • Provide financial and technical support utilizing SBA resources to help businesses stabilize in the immediate
       aftermath of a disaster, build back stronger, and support a foundation for long term economic and community
       recovery.
        Example: Leveraging district offices, Small Business Development Centers, and disaster loans and grants to repair
        and rebuild; providing mitigation options to build back stronger; and making small business government contracts
        available for disaster response and recovery efforts.
     • Provide grants, technical guidance, and loans to support small business development in new and emerging
       sectors of local and regional economies.

                                        TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, TOOLS, AND TRAINING

     • Provide technical assistance and economic development data analysis to local and regional leadership.
        Example: Coordinating activities with FEMA and SLTTs to deliver early economic stabilization during recovery efforts
        following Hurricane Helene; providing pre- and post-disaster economic analysis of impacted communities; connecting
        local businesses and economic development partners to provide federal technical assistance and potential funding.
     • Implement workforce development initiatives that provide economically displaced survivors with vocational
       training for current and emerging employment opportunities, as well as short-term employment opportunities for
       displaced workers.
     • Conduct research studies investigating workforce capacity, supply chain, and infrastructure issues that may
       hinder recovery, and identify ways to overcome these barriers to encourage economic diversification and growth.
        Example: Conducting Workforce and Laborshed Assessment Studies, such as the study developed in the aftermath
        of Hurricane Maria.




                                        PARTICIPATING AGENCIES AND ORGANIZATIONS
AmeriCorps | Department of Agriculture | Department of Energy | Department of Health and Human Services | Department of Housing and Urban
Development | Department of the Interior | Department of Labor | Department of Homeland Security | Department of the Treasury | Department of
Transportation | Environmental Protection Agency | Federal Emergency Management Agency | Small Business Administration
  HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND HUMAN SERVICES
  RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION
COORDINATING AGENCY: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES,
ADMINISTRATION FOR STRATEGIC PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE

MISSION
Assist locally led recovery efforts to restore public health, health care, human services, education, and behavioral health
networks to promote the resilience, health, and well-being of affected individuals and communities.



                                                 BEFORE A DISASTER

                                                    BUILDING CAPACITY

    • Develop tools and materials and promote resources to increase the capacity of health, education, and human
      services providers and agencies.
      Example: Providing Train the Trainer engagements related to clinical and subclinical topics.


                                              PARTNERSHIP DEVELOPMENT

    • Identify, connect, and coordinate with Health, Education, and Human Services partners at federal, state, local,
      Tribal Nation, and territorial governments (SLTTs), as well as non-governmental organizations, including state
      education agencies and the Association of State and Territorial Health Officials.

                                            PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS

    • Promote continued learning and expansion of scientific knowledge to inform recovery from disasters and public
      health emergencies.
      Example: Offering training at Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) Disaster
      Technical Assistance Centers, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and National Institute of Health
      Academies.

                                   TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, TOOLS, AND TRAINING

    • Provide comprehensive emergency management training to community leaders, local officials, state education
      agencies, and institutions of higher education on both pre- and post-disaster interventions to equip them for
      effective disaster recovery.
      Example: Training on promoting behavioral health outcomes through techniques like Psychological First Aid and
      Skills for Psychological Recovery.
    • Develop and distribute materials to build resilience and support preparedness planning at Technical Assistance
      Centers.
      Example: Distributing Readiness and Emergency Management for Schools (REMS) Technical Assistance,
      Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response Technical Resources Assistance Center and Information
      Exchange, and SAMHSA Disaster Technical Assistance Center.
 HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND HUMAN SERVICES
 RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION
COORDINATING AGENCY: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES,
ADMINISTRATION FOR STRATEGIC PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE

                                               AFTER A DISASTER

                                                BUILDING CAPACITY

  • Support the development of strategies to restore community healthcare capacity and help affected healthcare
    facilities strengthen emergency preparedness and readiness plans.
  • Assist SLTTs with identifying specific federal resources, navigating the complexities of available funding, and
    identifying appropriate pathways to help address key health, education, or human services challenges.
   Example: Providing REMS Technical Assistance and the Community Assessment for Public Health Emergency
   Response.
  • Advise on relevant human services programs waivers and flexibilities such as children, families, older adults,
    and individuals with access and functional needs, enabling those programs to support community recovery more
    directly (including childcare, domestic violence services, and aging and disability networks).
   Example: Advising partners on childcare licensure and subsidy grants as well as means-tested social
   servicesprograms (Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for
   Women,Infants, and Children) and workforce participation programs.
  • Advise affected K-12 schools and institutions of higher education on how to restore a safe environment
    conducive tolearning, including the U.S. Department of Education’s Project School Emergency Response to
    Violence grant andother applicable grants and regulatory flexibilities.
   Example: Directing partners to resources and guidance found at the U.S. Department of Education Natural Disaster
   Resources website.

                                           PARTNERSHIP DEVELOPMENT

  • Address cross cutting recovery issues for health, education, and human services related to the needs of
    children, youth, and families; integrate older adults and people with access and functional needs; plan for future
    disaster risks; and focus on rural and financially constrained communities.
   Example: Conducting community level behavioral health, environmental health assessments that include specific
   attention to youth and older adults, involvement of people with disabilities, and holistic restoration of health,
   education, and human services systems.

                                         PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS

  • Assist SLTTs in developing and incorporating plans for the transition from post-disaster recovery operations
    back to steady-state operations.
    HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND HUMAN SERVICES
    RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION
 COORDINATING AGENCY: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES,
 ADMINISTRATION FOR STRATEGIC PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE

                                                        AFTER A DISASTER (CONT.)

                                            TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, TOOLS, AND TRAINING

      • Perform needs assessments, including rapid community needs assessments such as the CDC’s Community
        Assessment for Public Health Emergency Response, and develop courses of action to support SLTT recovery
        strategies, focusing on specialized technical assistance, scientific subject matter expertise, peer-to-peer
        support, and programmatic technical assistance.
      • Facilitate discussions between state educational youth and State Coordinators for the Education of Children and
        Youth Experiencing Homelessness on best practices and lessons learned to support homeless and displaced
        students.
      • Conduct after action reviews for state education agencies about their disaster recovery efforts to capture best
        practices, lessons learned, and recommendations for future disasters.
      • Deliver training and assistance to assess and mitigate post-disaster environmental health hazards such as mold,
        lead, asbestos, industrial chemicals, or airborne particulate matter.
         Example: Deploying mold experts to train and assist SLTT partners with mold related disaster environments.




                                            PARTICIPATING AGENCIES AND ORGANIZATIONS
Administration for Children and Families | Administration for Community Living | Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality | Agency for Toxic Substances
and Disease Registry | American Red Cross | AmeriCorps | Centers for Disease Control and Prevention | Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services |
Commissioned Corps of the U.S. Public Health Service | Department of Agriculture | Department of Education | Department of Veteran Affairs | Environmental
Protection Agency | Food and Drug Administration | Health Resources and Services Administration | HHS Office of the Secretary | Indian Health Service |
National Institutes of Health | National Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster | Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
   HOUSING
   RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION
COORDINATING AGENCY: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT

MISSION
Provide housing development expertise while engaging in and facilitating collaboration among federal, state, local, and territorial
partners involved in housing recovery. Support communities in developing a comprehensive recovery plan and implementation
process. Assist in assessing impacts, determining key issues, analyzing damage data, and identifying resources, tools, and
technical assistance to support the communities’ rebuilding.



                                                   BEFORE A DISASTER

                                              PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS

      • Support local planning, preparedness, education, training, and outreach efforts to enhance capabilities for
        long-term recovery.
        Example: Establishing the Pre-Disaster Housing Initiative and identifying federal, state, and local resources.

                                     TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, TOOLS, AND TRAINING

     • Provide training, tools, and resources on housing development and rebuilding (including resiliency and
       mitigation efforts) programs available to state, local, Tribal Nation, and territorial government (SLTT) partners,
       as well as guidance on how to access these resources.
       Example: Offer training sessions such as HUD Programs 101 and An Overview of Community Development Block
       Grant - Disaster Recovery. Also provide technical assistance to existing CDBG grantees on how to utilize existing
       CDBG funds to fill funding gaps.


                                                     AFTER A DISASTER

                                                      BUILDING CAPACITY

     • Assist communities in identifying and coordinating resources that promote rebuilding efforts focused
       on resilience and affordable housing, including housing for individuals with access and functional needs
       (AFN).
     • Assist communities in identifying and coordinating resources that support resilient rebuilding efforts and meet
       the needs of the whole community.
       Example: Delivering information and resources efficiently to affected communities through the HUD CDBG-DR
       website and Disaster Recovery Resource events.

                                                PARTNERSHIP DEVELOPMENT

     • Lead and facilitate problem-solving among federal agencies and community partners to identify permanent
       housing solutions that address an impacted community’s housing challenges.
       Example: Convening other Recovery Support Functions to engage local community partners in discussions about
       rebuilding considerations with a focus on the community economic, health, and educational needs.
    HOUSING
    RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION
 COORDINATING AGENCY: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT


                                                      AFTER A DISASTER (CONT.)

                                                      PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS

       • Develop a data-driven Housing Impact Assessment to identify the post-disaster effects on housing for renters,
         homeowners, and other community assets. This assessment provides critical insights to inform potential
         recovery considerations and support SLTT recovery plans.
       • Develop a data-driven Housing Impact Assessment that identifies the impacts of a disaster on renters,
         homeowners and any potential populations that may face additional rehousing barriers within the community.
         This assessment provides critical insights and information to aid SLTTs in their recovery planning.
          Example: Collaborating with colleges and universities on student housing and damage data and providing
          comparisons between pre-disaster housing market data and impacts based on Federal Emergency Management
          Agency-verified losses.

                                           TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, TOOLS, AND TRAINING

       • Provide training on housing programs available to SLTT partners and how to access the resources.
          Example: Providing resources for navigating funding sources, how to use Public Housing Agency funding
          effectively, how to access grant funding, and resources for understanding and accessing CDBG-DR funds, and the
          Rapid Unsheltered Survior Housing Program.




                                           PARTICIPATING AGENCIES AND ORGANIZATIONS
American Red Cross | AmeriCorps | Consumer Financial Protection Bureau | Department of Agriculture | Department of Commerce | Department of Energy
| Department of Health and Human Services | Department of Justice | Department of Veterans Affairs | Environmental Protection Agency | Federal Housing
Finance Agency | Federal Emergency Management Agency | National Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster | Small Business Administration
  INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEMS
  RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION
COORDINATING AGENCY: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE,
U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS

MISSION
Provide support to state, local, Tribal Nation, and territorial governments (SLTTs) undertaking the rehabilitation and
reconstruction of affected infrastructure systems through coordinated delivery of federal resources, while supporting long-
term infrastructure resilience that highlights the use of new, accessible, and permanent infrastructure system options.



                                                BEFORE A DISASTER

                                                   BUILDING CAPACITY

    • Address repetitive flooding problems through floodplain management studies that develop hydraulic models,
      flood inundation maps, and potential flooding solutions to help affected communities.
      Example: Managing U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE) programs to reduce flood risk including Continuing
      Authorities Program (CAP) Section 205 Flood Risk Reduction Projects, Planning Assistance to States (PAS) studies,
      Floodplain Management Services (FPMS) projects, and Silver Jackets projects.

                                             PARTNERSHIP DEVELOPMENT

    • Conduct Resilience Improvement Plan webinars that highlight benefits and necessary steps for highway and
      roadway resilience improvements.
      Example: Providing roadway protection through CAP Section 205 Flood Risk Reduction Projects and CAP Section 14
      Emergency Bank Stabilization.

                                           PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS

    • Plan federal support for disaster recovery, ranging from catastrophic incidents to regional disaster
      recovery challenges.
      Example: Supporting emergency management planning through PL-84-99 authorities, managing Hurricane
      Evacuation Studies for most states, and supporting planning through Silver Jackets activities, PAS studies, and
      FPMS projects.

                                   TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, TOOLS, AND TRAINING

    • Provide SLTTs with hazard mitigation technical assistance.
      Example: Assisting through PAS, Silver Jackets, and FPMS projects.
    • Deliver evacuation modeling technical assistance that addresses specific disaster types.
      Example: Conducting hurricane evacuation studies for coastal states, and modelling evacuations in collaboration
      with the Institute for Water Resources.
    INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEMS
    RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION
 COORDINATING AGENCY: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE,
 U.S. ARMY CORPS OF ENGINEERS

                                                              AFTER A DISASTER

                                                      PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS

      • Promote resiliency strategies that consider and respect community concerns.
        Example: Providing technical assistance through programs like Silver Jackets, FPMS, PAS, and USACE Centers of
        Expertise to ensure resilience measures align with community values and traditions.

                                           TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, TOOLS, AND TRAINING

      • Provide technical assistance to develop recovery strategies, such as a Wildfire Watershed Recovery Strategy.
        Example: Providing CAP Section 205 Flood Risk Reduction Projects, CAP Section 206 Aquatic Resource Restoration,
        PAS studies, FPMS projects, Silver Jackets projects, and watershed studies under Section 729 of the Water
        Resources Development Act of 1986.
      • Assist SLTTs with conducting detailed analysis, developing response strategies, and identifying resource needs.
        Example: Providing technical assistance through programs like Silver Jackets, FPMS, PAS, and USACE Centers of
        Expertise.




                                            PARTICIPATING AGENCIES AND ORGANIZATIONS
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency | Delta Regional Authority | Department of Agriculture | Department of Commerce | Department of Defense
| Department of Energy | Department of Homeland Security | Department of Housing and Urban Development | Department of the Interior | Department of
Transportation | Department of the Treasury | Environmental Protection Agency | Federal Communications Commission | Federal Emergency Management
Agency | General Services Administration | Nuclear Regulatory Commission | Tennessee Valley Authority | U.S. Fire Administration
   NATURAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
   RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION
COORDINATING AGENCY: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

MISSION
Assist state, local, Tribal Nation, and territorial governments (SLTTs) in the protection, preservation, and recovery of natural
and cultural resources after disaster. Natural resources are land, fish, wildlife, biota, air, and water. Cultural resources are
tangible entities or cultural practices that represent the history, art, and traditions of our nation.



                                                  BEFORE A DISASTER

                                                     BUILDING CAPACITY

    • Support the establishment of traditional trades apprenticeship programs to address the shortage of skilled
      artisans and professionals trained to protect, conserve, and restore cultural resources.
      Example: Coordinating with nonprofit organizations to augment staff and provide conservation support, as provided
      through the National Park Service for the San Juan National Historic Site alongside the American Conservation
      Experience.
    • Support the creation of targeted guidance and tools for SLTTs involved in the protection of natural and cultural
      resources.
      Example: Creating historic preservation guides for states and Tribal Nations on working with the federal government
      before and after disasters.

                                             PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS

    • In collaboration with SLTT partners, identify gaps and inconsistencies among relevant regulations, policies,
      program requirements, and processes used in disaster recovery that affect natural and cultural resources.
      Upon identification, offer recommendations to Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and other
      federal agencies.
      Example: Identifying a lack of Tribal Nation engagement and the need for additional consultation with partners not
      immediately identified after the disaster, and in another instance, the identification of invasive species concerns
      within redevelopment plans.

                                                   AFTER A DISASTER

                                               PARTNERSHIP DEVELOPMENT

    • Provide public outreach, studies, plans, and financial assistance to help communities with rebuilding and
      reimagining local recreational opportunities.
      Example: Supporting development activities for Recovery Master Plans, as provided for the Blue River Park Wildfire
      Recovery Master Plan by the National Park Service Rivers, Trails, and Conservation Assistance Program and funded
      by FEMA.
    NATURAL AND CULTURAL RESOURCES
    RECOVERY SUPPORT FUNCTION
 COORDINATING AGENCY: U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR


                                                       AFTER A DISASTER (CONT.)

                                                         PARTNERSHIP DEVELOPMENT

      • Facilitate meetings with Tribal government officials and intergovernmental partners to identify unmet needs and
        introduce steady-state federal and nonprofit resources that can be leveraged to address recovery challenges.
        Example: Establishing working relationships through Memorandums of Understanding with Tribal Nation leadership
        and federal agencies, in anticipation of future response and recovery needs.
      • Communicate the importance of natural and cultural resource recovery at meetings, webinars, and conferences.
        Example: Providing information sessions highlighting the work of the Natural and Cultural Resources Recovery
        Support Function and the ways it has assisted the preservation of collections, art, archives, buildings, and other
        cultural assets.


                                                       PLANNING AND PREPAREDNESS

      • Promote SLTT consideration of natural and cultural resources as part of recovery planning, priorities, and goals.
        Example: Incorporating actions in Recovery Support Strategies to promote the protection, rehabilitation, and restoration
        of natural and cultural resources.
      • Integrate planning elements that consider long-term environmental effects to natural resources, including open
        spaces, recreational areas, and ecologically sensitive resources.
        Example: Working with local universities through the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration National Sea
        Grant College program to facilitate research on nature-based solutions to mitigate coastal erosion. Nature-based
        solutions involve intentionally using natural and nature-based features, like beaches, dunes, islands, marshes and
        mangroves, and coral and oyster reefs to absorb and protect shorelines during storm events.

                                            TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, TOOLS, AND TRAINING

      • Promote sharing and coordination of natural and cultural resource impact data among SLTTs.
        Example: Providing access to tools and informational products through the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) for storm
        events, the USGS Streamgage Network, USGS Flood Event Viewer, and other data and mapping resources for disaster
        events.
      • Assist SLTT partners with identifying federal, nonprofit, and philanthropic partners to leverage SLTT investments
        in recovery.
        Example: Providing workshops for funding and technical assistance with federal, state, tribal, and non-profit partners.




                                            PARTICIPATING AGENCIES AND ORGANIZATIONS
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation | AmeriCorps | Council on Environmental Quality | Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency | Department
of Agriculture | Department of Commerce | Department of Education | Environmental Protection Agency | Federal Emergency Management Agency |
General Services Administration | Heritage Emergency National Task Force | U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


Appendix B: Acronyms
Table 1: Acronyms

 Acronym       Definition

 AFN           Access and Functional Needs

 ASPR          Administration for Strategic Preparedness and Response

 CDBG-DR       Community Development Block Grant Disaster Recovery

 CAP           Continuing Authorities Program

 CDC           Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

 CEDS          Comprehensive Economic Development Strategies

 DHS           U.S. Department of Homeland Security

 DOC           U.S. Department of Commerce

 DOI           U.S. Department of the Interior

 EDA           Economic Development Administration

 EPA           Environmental Protection Agency

 FCO           Federal Coordinating Officer

 FDRC          Federal Disaster Recovery Coordinator

 FDRO          Federal Disaster Recovery Officer

 FEMA          Federal Emergency Management Agency

 FIOP          Federal Interagency Operational Plan

 FPMS          Floodplain Management Services

 GIS           Geographic Information System

 HHS           U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

 HMGP          Hazard Mitigation Grant Program

 HUD           U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development

 IAA           Interagency Agreements

 IRC           Interagency Recovery Coordination

 IRWA          Interagency Reimbursable Work Agreements

 JFO           Joint Field Office

 LDRM          Local Disaster Recovery Manager



                                                   B-15
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


 Acronym       Definition

 LTRG          Long-Term Recovery Group

 MOU           Memorandum of Understanding

 NDRF          National Disaster Recovery Framework

 NGO           Nongovernmental Organization

 NOAA          National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

 NPG           National Preparedness Goal

 NRF           National Response Framework

 PAS           Planning Assistance to States

 PBIS          Positive Behavioral Interventions & Supports

 PDHI          Pre-Disaster Housing Initiative

 REMS          Readiness and Emergency Management for Schools

 RSF           Recovery Support Function

 SAMHSA        Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

 SBA           Small Business Administration

 SBDC          Small Business Development Center

 SDRC          State Disaster Recovery Coordinator

 SLTT          State, Local, Tribal Nation, and Territorial governments

 SPR           State Preparedness Report

 TDRC          Territory Disaster Recovery Coordinator

 Tribal DRC    Tribal Disaster Recovery Coordinator

 THIRA         Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment

 USACE         U.S. Army Corps of Engineers

 USGS          U.S. Geological Survey

 VAL           Volunteer Agency Liaison

 VOAD          Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster




                                                  B-16
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


Appendix C: Glossary
Access and Functional Needs (AFN) – Persons who may have additional needs before, during, and
after an incident in functional areas, including but not limited to maintaining independence,
communication, transportation, supervision, and medical care. Individuals in need of additional
assistance may include those who have disabilities, live in institutionalized settings, are seniors, are
children, are from various cultural backgrounds, have limited English proficiency or are non-English
speaking, or lack access to reliable transportation.
Accessibility – The design, construction, development, and maintenance of facilities, information and
communication technology, programs, and services so that all people, including people with
disabilities, can fully and independently use them. Accessibility includes the provision of
accommodations and modifications to ensure equal access to employment and participation in
activities for people with disabilities, the reduction or elimination of physical and attitudinal barriers
to fair opportunities, a commitment to ensuring that people with disabilities can independently
access every outward-facing and internal activity or electronic space, and the pursuit of best
practices such as universal design.
Advisor – High-level subject-matter specialists assigned to support a recovery mission with extensive
knowledge of how their department or agency’s programs operate. Their expertise is brought in to
supplement the Recovery Support Function (RSF) Field Coordinators as needed. Advisors can
support the Federal Disaster Recovery Officer (FDRO) and Field Coordinators in developing an
approach to support a recovery mission unique to the local communities and/or region. Advisors also
help Recovery’s leadership and staff understand their agencies’ authorities and senior leadership
functions at the incident level.
Community Foundations – Grantmaking public charities that focus on improving the lives of people
in a specific geographic area. They bring together financial resources from individuals, families, and
businesses to support effective nonprofits in their communities.
Community Lifelines – Services that are essential to human health and safety or economic security
and enable the continuous operation of critical government and business functions.
Disability – Under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, a physical or mental impairment that substantially
limits one or more major life activities. People with disabilities give the disability inclusion mission its
primary focus, with certain access and functional needs (AFN) as an extension of that focus.
Disaster Any catastrophic incident that occurs in any part of the United States, which causes damage
of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant the provision of major disaster assistance by the
federal government to supplement the efforts and available resources of state, local, Tribal Nation,
and territorial government (SLTT) governments and disaster relief organizations in alleviating the
damage, loss, hardship, or suffering caused thereby. Catastrophic incidents can include any natural
catastrophe (including any hurricane, tornado, storm, high water, wind-driven water, tidal wave,
tsunami, earthquake, volcanic eruption, landslide, mudslide, snowstorm, or drought), as well as
technological accidents and human-caused events, or, regardless of cause, any fire, flood, or
explosion.
Federal Coordinating Officer (FCO) – The FCO is appointed by the FEMA Administrator on behalf of
the president to coordinate federal assistance following a declared disaster or emergency. The FCO
establishes the Joint Field Office (JFO) and works in partnership with the state, local, Tribal Nation,
and territorial government (SLTT) partners to determine state and local disaster assistance
requirements. For all Stafford Act-declared incidents, the FCO reports to the Regional Administrator
for the region in which the incident occurs. The FCO establishes an organization to best partner with
SLTT partners to achieve recovery outcomes and is responsible for the overall management of the


                                                    C-1
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


federal response to the incident.
Federal Disaster Recovery Coordinator (FDRC) – In large-scale disasters and catastrophic incidents
where a federal role may be necessary, the FDRC has the role of incorporating recovery and
mitigation considerations into the early decision-making processes. The FDRC monitors the impacts
and results of such decisions and evaluates the need for additional assistance and adjustments
where necessary and feasible throughout the disaster recovery. The FDRC is responsible for
facilitating disaster recovery coordination and collaboration between the Federal, Tribal Nation, and
state and local governments, business and industry, and voluntary, faith-based and community
organizations. The FDRC partners with and supports the Local Disaster Recovery Manager (LDRM)
and the State, Territorial, and/or Tribal Disaster Recovery Coordinator (SDRC, TDRC, and/or Tribal
DRC) to facilitate disaster recovery in the affected State or Tribal area.
Federal Disaster Recovery Officer (FDRO) – The FDRO is appointed by the Federal Coordinator Officer
(FCO) when an enhanced level of Interagency Recovery Coordination (IRC) is needed. When
appointed, the FDRO serves as the primary advisor to the FCO or Federal Disaster Recovery
Coordinator (FDRC) on all recovery issues.
Hazard – A source or cause of harm or difficulty.
Interagency Agreement (IAA) – A written agreement between federal agencies (or Components within
a federal agency), which is part of an inter- or intra-agency transaction, for supplies and services to
be provided by a servicing agency in support of a requesting agency. An IAA is required for assisted
acquisitions and Interagency Reimbursable Work Agreements (IRWAs). Specific formats of IAAs are
negotiated between agencies, also known as Trading Partners.
Interagency Reimbursable Work Agreement (IRWA) – An agreement between federal agencies where
one agency obtains supplies or services from another federal agency and that agency provides the
supplies and services using its own resources (e.g., employees, contracts, inventory). IRWAs are
executed under the authority of the DHS Chief Financial Officer (CFO). For DHS policy on IRWAs see
Department of Homeland Security Acquisition Manual Chapter 3, Section 3.7, Intergovernmental
Actions, Transactions, and Reporting of the DHS CFO Financial Management Policy Manual.
Examples of IRWAs are reimbursement for salaries of temporarily detailed employees and
Reimbursable Work Authorizations for building renovations requested through the General Services
Administration such as those entered under the authority of 40 U.S.C. 592(b)(2).
Joint Field Office (JFO) – The unified command center of the disaster. FEMA, state or Tribal
Administration staff, and other federal agencies are primarily located in the JFO. It is also the
location of the Federal Coordinating Officer (FCO). Unlike the Disaster Recovery Center, it is not a
physical location for directly servicing disaster survivors. The JFO is a management office and
provides services remotely. The JFO’s physical location varies depending on the disaster. It is often in
the state capital or located near or adjacent to disaster-affected areas. The JFOs are dependent on
the size and scope of the disaster, as well as on available amenities such as electricity, water, and
lodging.
Local Disaster Recovery Manager (LDRM) – Serves as the central manager to organize, coordinate,
and advance recovery for the jurisdiction, facilitating an effective and efficient local recovery. This
position may be appointed for disaster recovery, or permanently staffed to coordinate recovery
activities through pre-disaster recovery planning and post-disaster recovery plan, partnership
engagement, operational coordination, and resource identification. LDRMs may serve as the
jurisdiction’s primary point of contact with both government and nongovernment agencies and
collaborate across partners to coordinate sustained financial support for recovery.
Long-Term Recovery Group (LTRG) - LTRGs are independent of FEMA or any other federal agency and



                                                    C-2
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


consist of a coalition of organizations ranging from the national to the neighborhood level. Their role
is to help meet the remaining needs of survivors after they have maximized state and federal funds
available to them. LTRGs typically include federal partners, voluntary agencies, and grassroots
organizations. These partnerships require close coordination to address community needs, distribute
resources and to help restore vital support systems – health, social, economic, and environmental
systems, among others.
Mission Assignment - A work order issued by FEMA to another Federal agency in anticipation of, or in
response to, a presidential declaration of an emergency or major disaster, authorized by the Stafford
Act. Mission assignments allow for deployment, employment, and assistance from the full range of
federal resources to support disaster needs.
Mitigation – Capabilities necessary to reduce loss of life and property by lessening the impact of
disasters. Mitigation capabilities include but are not limited to community-wide risk reduction
projects, efforts to improve the resilience of critical infrastructure and key resource lifelines, risk
reduction for specific vulnerabilities from natural hazards or acts of terrorism, and initiatives to
reduce future risks after a disaster has occurred.
National Coordinator – Each Recovery Support Function (RSF) Coordinating Agency designates a
senior staff member to serve as the RSF National Coordinator. The RSF National Coordinator
provides significant engagement and management for the RSF and encourages ongoing
communication and coordination between the RSF agencies to ensure successful mission delivery.
Nongovernmental Organization – NGOs include Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster (VOAD)
and other nonprofits, encompassing voluntary, faith- and community-based, business and industry,
philanthropic, minority or disability-focused groups, and whole community partners who help
individuals and communities plan for, respond to, and recover from disasters.
Planning – The deliberate process of determining how (the ways) to coordinate and use a partner’s
capabilities (the means) in time and space to achieve objectives (the ends) while addressing the
associated risks.
Preparedness – Actions that involve a combination of planning, resources, training, exercising, and
organizing to build, sustain, and improve operational capabilities. Preparedness is the process of
identifying the personnel, training, and equipment needed for a wide range of potential incidents and
developing jurisdiction-specific plans for delivering capabilities when needed for an incident.
Prevention – Capabilities necessary to avoid, prevent, or stop a threatened or actual act of terrorism.
Prevention capabilities include, but are not limited to, information sharing and warning, domestic
counterterrorism, and preventing the acquisition or use of weapons of mass destruction. For
purposes of the prevention framework called for in Presidential Policy Directive 8, the term
“prevention” refers to preventing imminent threats.
Protection - Actions to protect citizens, residents, visitors, and assets against the greatest threats
and hazards in a manner that allows American interests, aspirations, and way of life to thrive.
Recovery –The timely restoration, strengthening and revitalization of infrastructure, housing, and a
sustainable economy, as well as the health, social, cultural, historic, and environmental fabric of
communities affected by an incident.
Recovery Needs Assessment – A systematic evaluation to identify and prioritize the needs of a
community following a disaster, including damage assessment, resource gaps, and immediate and
long-term recovery requirements.
Recovery Support Function (RSF) Coordinating Agency – The main Coordinating Agency responsible
for managing the RSF and its participating agencies and organizations. Each RSF Coordinating



                                                    C-3
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


Agency designates a senior-level principal to serve as the RSF National Coordinator, provides
significant engagement and management for the RSF, and encourages ongoing communication and
coordination between the Coordinating Agency and participating agencies and organizations and
between state or other federal RSFs.
Recovery Support Function (RSF) Field Coordinator – For each RSF activated, an RSF Field
Coordinator is designated to serve as the federal point person for coordination at the field level. Each
RSF Field Coordinator has specific subject-matter expertise and is mission assigned to the incident
in coordination with the National Coordinator, Federal Disaster Recovery Coordinator (FDRC), Federal
Disaster Recovery Officer (FDRO), and other RSFs involved in the recovery operation.
Recovery Support Function (RSF) Participating Agency/Organization – Each RSF is comprised of
multiple federal agencies that have a role to play in that RSF’s mission, known as participating
agencies and organizations. The RSF National Coordinator will work with their RSF participating
agencies and organizations as needed to address the specific needs of a community following an
incident. Participating agencies and organizations may not be necessary for every incident.
Recovery Support Strategy – A comprehensive report developed by Interagency Recovery
Coordination (IRC) to align federal resources, such as funding and technical assistance, with the
recovery needs and priorities identified by SLTT partners. Serving as a strategic roadmap, this
document fosters a holistic understanding of recovery support activities and promotes a coordinated
approach to delivering federal and SLTT recovery assistance.
Resilience – The ability to prepare for threats and hazards, adapt to changing conditions, and
withstand and recover rapidly from adverse conditions and disruptions.
Response – Capabilities necessary to save lives, protect property and the environment, and meet
basic human needs after an incident has occurred.
Restoration – Returning a physical structure, essential government or commercial services, or a
societal condition back to a former or normal state of use through repairs, rebuilding, or re-
establishment.
Risk – The potential for an unwanted outcome resulting from an incident, event, or occurrence, as
determined by its likelihood and the associated consequences. Continuity plans and programs
mitigate risk from threats and hazards to the performance of essential functions and associated
critical infrastructure.
State Disaster Recovery Coordinator (SDRC) – This position may be appointed for disaster recovery,
or permanently staffed to organize, coordinate, and advance the recovery at the state level. The
SDRC works closely with local officials, particularly Local Disaster Recovery Managers (LDRMs), to
help communicate local recovery priorities and resources to federal officials. The SDRC establishes
or leads a state-wide structure for managing the recovery. The SDRC is the link between local
recovery operations and the resources available at the state and federal levels. The SDRC is
responsible for facilitating communication between federal and local efforts while also coordinating
with other state agencies.
Steady State – A state where operations and procedures are normal and ongoing. Communities are
considered to be at a steady state and undergo steady state activities prior to disasters and after
recovery is complete.
Territorial Disaster Recovery Coordinator (TDRC) – The role tasked to organize, coordinate, and
advance the recovery at the territorial level. The TDRC works closely with local officials to help
communicate local recovery priorities and resources to federal officials. The TDRC establishes or
leads a territory-wide structure for managing the recovery and serves as the link between local
recovery operations and the resources available at the state and federal levels. The TDRC is


                                                  C-4
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


responsible for facilitating communication between federal and local efforts while also coordinating
with other territorial agencies.
Threat – Include capabilities, intentions, and attack methods of adversaries used to exploit
circumstances or occurrences with the intent to cause harm.
Tribal Disaster Recovery Coordinator (Tribal DRC) –The Tribal DRC works closely with federal and
sometimes state and local officials to communicate Tribal recovery priorities. The role can be staffed
to organize, coordinate, and advance the recovery at the Tribal level. The Tribal DRC establishes or
leads a Tribal structure for managing recovery. The Tribal DRC has responsibilities that are similar to
a Local Disaster Recovery Manager (LDRM) and State Disaster Recovery Coordinator (SDRC). The
Tribal DRC’s responsibilities may overlap those of an LDRM, if an LDRM is not designated for a
particular district or locality.
Voluntary Agency Liaison (VAL) – FEMA Voluntary Agency Liaisons (VALs) establish, foster, and
maintain relationships among government, voluntary, faith, and community-based, private sector,
and philanthropic partners. Through these relationships, the VALs support the delivery of services
and empower and equip communities to address disaster-caused unmet needs.
Voluntary Organizations Active in Disasters (VOADs) – A coalition of nonprofit organizations that
collaborate to provide assistance and support during all phases of disaster response and recovery.
VOADs operate at national, state, and local levels to coordinate efforts, maximize resources, and
ensure effective service delivery to affected communities.
Whole Community – A focus on enabling the participation in national preparedness activities of a
wider range of players from the private and nonprofit sectors, including nongovernmental
organizations and the public, in conjunction with the participation of all levels of government to
foster better coordination and working relationships. Used interchangeably with “all-of-Nation.”




                                                  C-5
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


Appendix D: Pre-disaster Recovery Planning and Post-
disaster Recovery Planning
This appendix includes examples of pre- and post-disaster recovery planning activities, as well as
examples of how to use data to measure progress.
Table 2: Pre-disaster Recovery Planning

 Planning Activities        Examples

 Organizational              Establish clear leadership, coordination, and decision-making throughout all levels of
 Framework                    government.
                             Identify a Local Disaster Recovery Manager, or the State, Territory, or Tribal Disaster
                              Recovery Coordinator as appropriate.

 Identify Existing           Identify hazards and assess risks and vulnerabilities to include place-based resilience
 Capability and               and mitigation issues. 15
 Capacity                    Identify limitations in recovery capacity.
                             Evaluate the likely conditions and needs after a disaster.

 Assess Gaps and             Develop initial situational awareness.
 Requirements                Identify goals and priorities for the communities.
                             Assess gaps and requirements (e.g., policies, resources, training, operations, systems,
                              data) to meet those goals.
                             Integrate with other appropriate community planning (e.g., accessibility design, capital
                              improvement planning).
 Identify Roles and          Identify how the community will work together after a disaster to develop their plan for
 Responsibilities             recovery.
                             Identify sectors of the community to participate in pre- and post-disaster recovery
                              planning and coordination.
                             Prepare pre-disaster Memorandum of Understanding to establish early partnerships, and
                              expectations with community faith-based organizations, nonprofit groups, and business
                              and industry partners.
 Partnership                 Develop a communication plan that includes and considers indigenous languages.
 Engagement                  Identify and engage the public, community leaders, faith-based organizations, nonprofit
                              organizations, and business and industry throughout the process.
                             Ensure whole community participation including private, nonprofit, and public
                              engagement.

 Capacity Building           Test and evaluate pre-disaster recovery plans through seminars, workshops, and
                              exercises.
                             Build partnerships between neighborhoods and local government agencies that form the
                              basis for pre-and post-multi hazard assessments and support for mitigation actions.
                             Develop and implement recovery training and education as a tool for building recovery
                              capacity and making it available to all other partners.
 Concept of                  Establish the operational framework that is followed immediately after a disaster occurs.
 Operations                  Establish maintenance procedures for updating pre- and post-disaster recovery plans.

 Continuous                    Identify priority recovery and redevelopment activities.
 Improvement                   Set recovery goals and objectives.
                               Measure progress against those goals and objectives.
                               Evaluate performance and revise pre-disaster recovery plans accordingly.




15 Includes wild/rural/urban interfaces, floodplain management, coastal zones, seismic areas, historic and cultural

properties, districts, landscapes, and traditional cultural properties.

                                                           D-1
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


Table 3: Post-disaster Recovery Planning

Planning Activities        Examples

Organizational           Identify an individual or group as well as supporting structures required to lead the
Framework                 process.
                         Coordinate with all community leaders to ensure participation and validity of the process.
                         Identify outside resources, financial and technical, that provide support to the overall
                          recovery effort.
Needs Assessment         Leverage existing recovery plans and mitigation plans as foundational documents.
                         Assess the need created by the disaster to determine where recovery issues are present
                          (e.g., community, economy, housing, health, education, social, infrastructure, natural,
                          cultural).
                         Determine areas of focus for building future resilience through mitigation and adaptation
                          opportunities and the impact these areas have on recovery.
                         Identify areas that strengthen and revitalize the community, and areas of opportunity in
                          recovery planning.
Partnership              Solicit public participation in the development and confirmation of the vision and goals.
Engagement                Establish an accessible process for exchanging information between the public and
                          leadership.
                         Develop a communications map to ensure all sectors of the community are engaged in
                          the process, to include using non-traditional communications outlets to reach as much of
                          the community as possible.
                         Ensure effective communications for all participants, including individuals with
                          disabilities and individuals with limited English proficiency.
                         Emphasize transparent and open communication by providing drafts to partners and
                          community members, with a recognition that plans will need be iterative.
Develop and Document     Document the vision, goals, projects, and programs.
the Recovery Vision and  Develop   projects and programs – to include schedules and milestones to meet the
Goals                     recovery   vision and goals created by the community.
                         Identify key leaders responsible for undertaking next steps or moving recovery strategies
                          forward and determine the implementation plan and priorities for recovery projects.
                         Use existing public and private resources and new funding streams to creatively package
                          resources. For example, projects can be phased for flexible application of funding.
                         Evaluate projects and programs to determine their impact on recovery, feasibility, public
                          support, effective use of resources and other criteria as determined by the community.
Continuous               Revise plans as needed to meet changing recovery needs and priorities.
Improvement              Continue    to update and engage the broader partner population on next steps.
                         Monitor progress and convey achievements to all partners.




                                                   D-2
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


Table 4: Strategies for Measuring Progress Through Data

Strategies for        Examples
Measuring Progress

Technology and         Identify and access data to inform pre-disaster recovery planning from appropriate
Systems                 federal, state, local, and nongovernmental sources, such as those managed by the
                        National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, U.S. Census Bureau, and/or state
                        emergency management agencies.
                       Identify community engagement tools to solicit feedback from community and recovery
                        partners, such as SurveyMonkey, to conduct needs assessments and measure
                        satisfaction with recovery efforts.
                       Identify and establish systems that track pre-disaster baseline conditions, including
                        Geographic Information System (GIS) tools like Environmental Systems Research
                        Institute's Aeronautical Reconnaissance Coverage GIS and/or Quantum GIS.
                       Leverage technology and systems innovations to achieve goals that result in greater
                        information sharing, accountability, and transparency.
Key Indicators         Ensure full community participation in developing metrics in coordination with partners.
                       Establish indicators to recovery priorities and resource needs and set realistic
                        expectations and milestones for community members, partners, and participating
                        agencies and organizations.
Continuous             Ensure continuous improvement by evaluating the effectiveness of recovery activities
Improvement             and associated metrics.
                       Encourage government agencies and private organizations that provide assistance to
                        have a system of tracking their coordination and assistance efforts, ensuring
                        accountability, and enabling prompt adjustments to meet ongoing and changing needs.




                                                D-3
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


Appendix E: Digital Resource Links
GENERAL RESOURCE LINKS:
   Building Private Public Partnerships Guide:
    https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_building-private-public-
    partnerships.pdf
   ClimRR Portal: https://climrr.anl.gov/
   Community Lifelines Implementation Toolkit: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-
    managers/practitioners/lifelines-toolkit
   Community Recovery Management Toolkit: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-
    managers/national-preparedness/frameworks/community-recovery-management-toolkit
   Department of Homeland Security Acquisition Manual: https://www.dhs.gov/homeland-security-
    acquisition-manual
   Developing and Maintaining Emergency Operations Plans: Comprehensive Preparedness Guide
    101 (CPG 101): https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_cpg-101-v3-
    developing-maintaining-eops.pdf
   Disaster Financial Management Guide: https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-
    07/disaster-financial-management-guide.pdf
   Disaster Resource Identification Fact Sheet:
    https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_disaster_resource_identification_fa
    ct-sheet.pdf
   Effective Coordination of Recovery Resources for State, Tribal, Territorial, and Local Incidents:
    https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-07/fema_effective-coordination-recovery-
    resources-guide_020515.pdf
   Engaging Faith-based and Community Organizations:
    https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_engaging-faith-based-and-
    community-organizations-guide_2024.pdf
   FEMA Case Study Library: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/practitioners/case-study-
    library
   FEMA Emergency Management Institute (EMI): https://training.fema.gov/emi.aspx
   FEMA Post-disaster Building Safety Evaluation Guidance:
    https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-07/fema_p-2055_post-
    disaster_buildingsafety_evaluation_2019.pdf
   FEMA Grants: https://www.fema.gov/grants
   FEMA Hazard Mitigation Planning: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/risk-
    management/hazard-mitigation-planning
   FEMA Individual Assistance Program Policy, Guidance, and Fact Sheets:
    https://www.fema.gov/assistance/individual/policy-guidance-and-fact-sheets
   FEMA Public Assistance Program Policy, Guidance, and Fact Sheets:
    https://www.fema.gov/assistance/public/policy-guidance-fact-sheets
   FEMA Recovery and Resilience Resource Library: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-
    managers/practitioners/recovery-resilience-resource-library


                                                  E-1
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


   FEMA Risk Management: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/risk-management
   Fire Management Assistance Grant Program and Policy Guide:
    https://www.fema.gov/assistance/public/library
   Homeland Security Information Network (HSIN): https://www.dhs.gov/homeland-security-
    information-network-hsin
   How a Disaster Gets Declared: https://www.fema.gov/disaster/how-declared
   Information Sharing Guide for Private-Public Partnerships:
    https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_information-sharing_guide.pdf
   National Building Code Adoption Tracking Portal: National Building Code Adoption Tracking Portal
   National Incident Management System: https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-
    07/fema_nims_doctrine-2017.pdf
   National Incident Management System resources: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-
    managers/nims
   National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Digital Coast:
    https://coast.noaa.gov/digitalcoast
   New Recipients of Disaster Grants Guide: https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-
    04/new-recipients-of-disaster-grants-guide_2019.pdf
   Non-Stafford Act Recovery Guide: Developing and Coordinating Resources, FEMA Region V:
    https://www.hsdl.org/?abstract&did=734289
   Planning Considerations: Disaster Housing: https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-
    07/planning-considerations-disaster-housing.pdf
   Pre-Disaster Housing Planning Guide:
    https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_pdhi-guide.pdf
   Ready.gov: https://www.ready.gov/
   Recovery Resource Roadmap: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-
    managers/practitioners/roadmap-resource-library-form
   Restoration and Recovery Guide for Private-Public Partnerships:
    https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_restoration-and-recovery_guide.pdf
   Threat and Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment (THIRA) and Stakeholder Preparedness
    Review (SPR) Guide: CPG 201: https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-07/threat-
    hazard-identification-risk-assessment-stakeholder-preparedness-review-guide.pdf
   Unified Federal Environmental and Historic Preservation Review Resources:
    https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/practitioners/environmental-historic/review
   U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Administration for Strategic Preparedness and
    Response: https://aspr.hhs.gov/Pages/Home.aspx
   U.S. Department of Transportation National Response and Recovery Program:
    https://www.transportation.gov/emergency
FEDERAL RESOURCE LINKS:
   Building Codes Adoption Playbook:
    https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_building-codes-adoption-playbook-
    for-authorities-having-jurisdiction.pdf

                                                E-2
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


   Community Assistance RSF Overview: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-
    preparedness/frameworks/recovery/recovery-support-functions/community-assistance-rsf
   Economic Recovery Support Function Overview: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-
    managers/national-preparedness/frameworks/recovery/recovery-support-functions/economic-
    rsf
   Federal Interagency Operational Plans: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-
    preparedness/frameworks/federal-interagency-operational-plans
   FEMA Operational Planning Manual: https://emilms.fema.gov/is_2002/media/142.pdf
   FEMA Planning Guides: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-
    preparedness/plan
   Health and Social Services RSF Overview: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-
    preparedness/frameworks/recovery/recovery-support-functions/health-social-services-rsf
   Housing RSF Overview: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-
    preparedness/frameworks/recovery/recovery-support-functions/housing-rsf
   Infrastructure RSF Overview: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-
    preparedness/frameworks/recovery/recovery-support-functions/infrastructure-systems-rsf
   Long-Term Recovery Guide, National Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster (VOAD):
    https://www.nvoad.org/wp-content/uploads/National-VOAD-LTR-Guide-2023.pdf
   National Disaster Recovery Framework Resources: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-
    managers/national-preparedness/frameworks/recovery
   National Mitigation Framework: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-
    preparedness/frameworks/mitigation
   National Preparedness Goal: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-
    preparedness/goal
   National Preparedness System: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-
    preparedness/system
   National Prevention Framework: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-
    preparedness/frameworks
   National Protection Framework: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-
    preparedness/frameworks
   National Response Framework: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-
    preparedness/frameworks/response
   Natural & Cultural Resources RSF Overview: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-
    managers/national-preparedness/frameworks/recovery/recovery-support-functions/natural-
    cultural-resources-rsf
   Presidential Policy Directive-8: https://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/presidential-policy-directive-
    8-national-preparedness.pdf
   Small Business Administration Ascent Learning Journey Disaster and Economic Recovery:
    https://www.sba.gov/
   Small Business Administration Business Resilience Guide:
    https://www.sba.gov/document/support-business-resilience-guide



                                                  E-3
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


   Small Business Development Centers: https://www.sba.gov/local-assistance/resource-
    partners/small-business-development-centers-sbdc
   United Federal Environment and Historic Preservation Review Resources:
    https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/practitioners/environmental-historic/review
   U.S. Department of Education Natural Disaster Resources: https://www.ed.gov/disasterrelief
   FEMA Planning Guidance: https://www.fema.gov/emergency-managers/national-
    preparedness/plan
STATE AND TERRITORY RESOURCE LINKS:
   FEMA Assistance for Governments and Private Non-Profits After a Disaster:
    https://www.fema.gov/assistance/public
   Pre-Disaster Recovery Guide for State Governments:
    https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-06/pre-
    disaster_recovery_planning_guide_state_governments.pdf
   Request For Presidential Disaster Declaration: https://www.fema.gov/disaster/request-for-
    presidential-disaster-declaration
TRIBAL NATION RESOURCE LINKS:
   FEMA Assistance for Tribal Governments: https://www.fema.gov/fact-sheet/fema-assistance-
    tribal-governments
   FEMA Assistance for Governments and Private Non-Profits After a Disaster:
    https://www.fema.gov/assistance/public
   FEMA Tribal Affairs Resources: https://www.fema.gov/about/organization/tribes
   FEMA Tribal Funding, Mitigation, and Planning Resources:
    https://www.fema.gov/about/organization/tribes/funding-mitigation-planning-
    resources#mitigation
   Pre-Disaster Recovery Guide for Tribal Governments:
    https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-07/pre-disaster-recovery-planning-guide-for-
    tribal-government.pdf
   Request For Presidential Disaster Declaration: https://www.fema.gov/disaster/request-for-
    presidential-disaster-declaration
   Tribal Declarations Pilot Guidance: https://www.fema.gov/disaster/tribal-declarations
   U.S. Department of Health and Human Services American Indian & Alaskan Native Disaster
    Preparedness Resource: https://aspr.hhs.gov/behavioral-health/Pages/tribal-
    preparedness.aspx
LOCAL GOVERNMENT RESOURCE LINKS:
   FEMA Assistance for Governments and Private Non-Profits After a Disaster:
    https://www.fema.gov/assistance/public
   Local Elected and Appointed Officials Guide: Roles and Resources in Emergency Management:
    https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/documents/fema_local-elected-officials-
    guide_2022.pdf




                                                E-4
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


   Pre-Disaster Recovery Guide for Local Governments:
    https://www.fema.gov/sites/default/files/2020-06/pre-
    disaster_recovery_planning_guide_local_governments.pdf




                                             E-5
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


Appendix F: National Preparedness Goal Core
Capabilities
The table below outlines the Recovery Core Capabilities found in the National Preparedness Goal
(NPG).
Table 5: NPG Recovery Core Capabilities

 Core
                  Description
 Capability

                  Conduct a systematic process engaging the whole community as appropriate in the
 Planning         development of executable strategic, operational, and/or tactical-level approaches to meet
                  defined objectives.

                  Deliver coordinated, prompt, reliable, and actionable information to the whole community
 Public
                  through the use of clear, consistent, accessible, and culturally and linguistically appropriate
 Information
                  methods to effectively relay information regarding any threat or hazard and, as appropriate,
 and Warning
                  the actions being taken, and the assistance being made available.

 Operational      Establish and maintain a unified and coordinated operational structure and process that
 Coordination     appropriately integrates all critical partners and supports the execution of core capabilities.

                  Return economic and business activities (including food and agriculture) to a healthy state
 Economic
                  and develop new business and employment opportunities that result in an economically
 Recovery
                  viable community.

 Health and       Restore and improve health and social services capabilities and networks to promote the
 Social           resilience, independence, health (including behavioral health), and well-being of the whole
 Services         community.

                  Implement housing solutions that effectively support the needs of the whole community and
 Housing
                  contribute to its sustainability and resilience.

 Infrastructure   Stabilize critical infrastructure functions, minimize health and safety threats, and efficiently
 Systems          restore and revitalize systems and services to support a viable, resilient community.

                  Protect natural and cultural resources and historic properties through appropriate planning,
 Natural and      mitigation, response, and recovery actions to preserve, conserve, rehabilitate, and restore
 Cultural         them consistent with post-disaster community priorities and best practices and in
 Resources        compliance with applicable environmental and historic preservation laws and executive
                  orders.




                                                      F-1
National Disaster Recovery Framework – Third Edition – Amended


Appendix G: Document Updates and Maintenance
This third edition of the NDRF reflects the insights and lessons learned from real-world incidents and
the implementation of the National Preparedness System. It emphasizes conducting preparedness
activities with resilience in mind - not just preparing for threats and hazards but also adapting to
changing conditions and ensuring an ability to withstand and recover rapidly from adverse conditions
and disruptions. Major updates within the Third Edition include:
   Streamlining wherever possible with an emphasis on plain language.
   Recognizing that recovery is not time-bound and must be community-driven and executed toward
    shared goals.
   Simplifying the RSF agency naming conventions from three tiers to two: coordinating agencies
    and participating agencies and organizations.
   Updating the names of two RSFs: Community Assistance RSF, formerly Community Planning and
    Capacity Building RSF, and Health, Education, and Human Services RSF, formerly Health and
    Social Services RSF.
The NDRF will be regularly reviewed to evaluate its consistency with existing and new policies,
evolving conditions, and the experience gained from its use. The NDRF will be reviewed to
accomplish the following:
   Assess and update information on the core capabilities in support of preparedness goals and
    objectives.
   Ensure that the NDRF adequately reflects the organization of responsible entities.
   Ensure that the NDRF is consistent with the other four mission areas.
   Update processes based on changes in the national threat/hazard environment.
   Incorporate lessons learned and effective practices from day-to-day operations, exercises, and
    actual disasters and alerts.
   Reflect progress in the Nation’s recovery mission and the need to execute new laws, executive
    orders, and presidential directives, as well as strategic changes to national priorities and
    guidance, critical tasks, and/or national capabilities.
In reviewing the NDRF, the federal government will consider effective practices (i.e., continuity
planning), lessons learned from exercises and operations, and pertinent new processes and
technologies. Lastly, the NDRF is not intended as a detailed operational guide for recovery partners.
It is a framework for how the nation mobilizes resources for disaster recovery. Specific operational
doctrine and plans will be developed separately.




                                                 G-1
