An inside look at who's watching you.
what they know, and why it matters
We are being watched. We see online ads from
websites we’ve visited, long after we’ve moved
on to other interests. Retailers track the sig¬
nals from the smartphones in our pockets as
we walk through the shopping mall. And the
federal government, we recently learned, has
been conducting a massive data-gathering
surveillance operation across the Internet and
on our phone lines.
   In Dragnet Nation, award-winning investiga¬
tive journalist Julia Angwin reports from the
front lines of America’s surveillance economy,
offering a revelatory and unsettling look at how
the government, private companies, and even
criminals use technology to indiscriminately
sweep up vast amounts of our personal data.
   In a world where we can be watched in our
own homes, where we can no longer keep se¬
crets, and where we can be impersonated,
financially manipulated, or even placed in a
police lineup, Angwin argues that the greatest
long-term danger is that we start to internal¬
ize the surveillance and censor our words and
thoughts, until we lose our freedom. Appalled
 at such a prospect, Angwin conducts a series
 of experiments to try to protect herself, rang¬
 ing from quitting Google to carrying a “burner”
 phone, showing how difficult it is for an aver¬
 age citizen to resist the dragnets’ reach.
    Her book is a cautionary tale for all of us,
 with profound implications for our values, our
 society, and our very selves.
Also by Julia Angwin


Stealing MySpace:

The Battle to Control the Most Popular Website in America




                      3 1223 10715 3604
DRAGNET
 IIAtlET
 KA1I0I
A OUEST FOR FSIVACr, SEC1RITV.
AMD FREEDOM III A WORLD OF
HELEITLESS SURVEILLANCE




TIMES BOOKS   HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY   NEW YORK
Times Books
Henry Holt and Company, LLC
Publishers since 1866
175 Fifth Avenue
New York, New York 10010
www.henryholt.com


Henry Holt8 is a registered trademark of Henry Holt and Company, LLC.


Copyright © 2014 by Julia Angwin
All rights reserved.
Distributed in Canada by Raincoast Book Distribution Limited


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Angwin, Julia.
     Dragnet nation : a quest for privacy, security, and freedom in a world of relentless
surveillance / Julia Angwin. — First edition,
          pages cm
     Includes bibliographical references and index.
     ISBN 978-0-8050-9807-5 (hardcover)—ISBN 978-0-8050-9808-2 (electronic)
 1. Privacy, Right of.       2. Electronic surveillance.   3. National security—Moral and
ethical aspects.       4. Information technology—Moral and ethical aspects.     5. Civil
rights.    I. Title.
     JC596.A54 2014
     323.44'8—dc23                                                            2013042041


Henry Holt books are available for special promotions and premiums.
For details contact: Director, Special Markets.


First Edition 2014
Designed by Meryl Sussman Levavi


Printed in the United States of America
10     987654321
For my children
 CONTENTS
 1.    Hacked           1

 2.    A Short History of Tracking

 3.    State of Surveillance             37

4.     Freedom of Association                 51

5.    Threat Models               65

6.    The Audit             80

7.    The First Line of Defense                96

8.    Leaving Google               112

9.    Introducing Ida              127

10.   Pocket Litter              140

11.   Opting Out             153

12.   The Hall of Mirrors               167

13.   Lonely Codes               183

14.   Fighting Fear              199

15.   An Unfairness Doctrine                  210


      Notes       225

      Acknowledgments                  275

      Index       277
DRAGNET
*
W    ho is watching you?
         This was once a question asked only by kings, presidents, and
     public figures trying to dodge the paparazzi and criminals trying
to evade the law. The rest of us had few occasions to worry about being
tracked.
    But today the anxious question—“who’s watching?”—is relevant to
everyone regardless of his or her fame or criminal persuasion. Any of us
can be watched at almost any time, whether it is by a Google Street View
car taking a picture of our house, or an advertiser following us as we
browse the Web, or the National Security Agency logging our phone calls.
    Dragnets that scoop up information indiscriminately about everyone
in their path used to be rare; police had to set up roadblocks, or retailers
had to install and monitor video cameras. But technology has enabled a
new era of supercharged dragnets that can gather vast amounts of per¬
sonal data with little human effort. These dragnets are extending into
ever more private corners of the world.
   Consider the relationship of Sharon Gill and Bilal Ahmed, close friends
who met on a private online social network called PatientLikeMe.com.
   Sharon and Bilal couldn’t be more different. Sharon is a forty-two-
year-old single mother who lives in a small town in southern Arkansas.
She ekes out a living trolling for treasures at yard sales and selling them
 [2]      DRAGNET NATION


at a flea market. Bilal Ahmed, thirty-six years old, is a single, Rutgers-
educated man who lives in a penthouse in Sydney, Australia. He runs a
chain of convenience stores.
       Although they have never met in person, they became close friends
on a password-protected online forum for patients struggling with men¬
tal health issues. Sharon was trying to wean herself from antidepressant
medications. Bilal had just lost his mother and was suffering from anxiety
and depression.
       From their far corners of the world, they were able to cheer each other
up in their darkest hours. Sharon turned to Bilal because she felt she
couldn’t confide in her closest relatives and neighbors. “I live in a small
town,” Sharon told me. “I don’t want to be judged on this mental illness.”
       But in 2010, Sharon and Bilal were horrified to discover they were
being watched on their private social network.
       It started with a break-in. On May 7, 2010, PatientsLikeMe noticed
unusual activity on the “mood” forum where Sharon and Bilal hung out.
A new member of the site, using sophisticated software, was attempting
to “scrape,” or copy, every single message off PatientsLikeMe’s private
online “Mood” and “Multiple Sclerosis” forums.
       PatientsLikeMe managed to block and identify the intruder: it was
the Nielsen Company, the New York media-research firm. Nielsen moni¬
tors online “buzz” for its clients, including major drug makers. On May
18, PatientsLikeMe sent a cease-and-desist letter to Nielsen and notified
its members of the break-in. (Nielsen later said it would no longer break
into private forums. “It’s something that we decided is not acceptable,”
said Dave Hudson, the head of the Nielsen unit involved.)
       But there was a twist. PatientsLikeMe used the opportunity to inform
members of the fine print they may not have noticed when they signed
up. The website was also selling data about its members to pharmaceuti¬
cal and other companies.
   The news was a double betrayal for Sharon and Bilal. Not only had an
intruder been monitoring them, but so was the very place that they
considered to be a safe space. It was as if someone filmed an Alcoholics
Anonymous meeting and AA was mad because that film competed with
its own business of videotaping meetings and selling the tapes. “I felt
totally violated,” Bilal said.
   Even worse, none of it was necessarily illegal. Nielsen was operating
                                                                    HACKED   [3]

 in a gray area of the law even as it violated the terms of service at Patients-
 LikeMe, but those terms are not always legally enforceable. And it was
 entirely legal for PatientsLikeMe to disclose to its members in its fine
 print that it would sweep up all their information and sell it.
     This is the tragic flaw of “privacy” in the digital age. Privacy is often
 defined as freedom from unauthorized intrusion. But many of the things
 that feel like privacy violations are “authorized” in some fine print some¬
 where.
     And yet, in many ways, we have not yet fully consented to these autho¬
 rized intrusions. Even if it is legal for companies to scoop up information
 about people’s mental health, is it socially acceptable?
     Eavesdropping on Sharon and Bilal’s conversations might be socially
 acceptable if they were drug dealers under court-approved surveillance.
But is sweeping up their conversations as part of a huge dragnet to mon¬
itor online “buzz” socially acceptable?
    Dragnets that indiscriminately sweep up personal data fall squarely
into the gray area between what is legal and what is socially acceptable.



We are living in a Dragnet Nation—a world of indiscriminate tracking
where institutions are stockpiling data about individuals at an unprece¬
dented pace. The rise of indiscriminate tracking is powered by the same
forces that have brought us the technology we love so much—powerful
computing on our desktops, laptops, tablets, and smartphones.
    Before computers were commonplace, it was expensive and difficult
to track individuals. Governments kept records only of occasions, such
as birth, marriage, property ownership, and death. Companies kept rec¬
ords when a customer bought something and filled out a warranty card or
joined a loyalty club. But technology has made it cheap and easy for insti¬
tutions of all kinds to keep records about almost every moment of our
lives.
    Consider just a few facts that have enabled the transformation. Com¬
puter processing power has doubled roughly every two years since the
1970s, enabling computers that were once the size of entire rooms to fit
into a pants pocket. And recently, the cost to store data has plummeted
from $18.95 for one gigabyte in 2005 to $1.68 in 2012. It is expected to
cost under a dollar in a few years.
 [4]     DRAGNET NATION

       The combination of massive computing power, smaller and smaller
 devices, and cheap storage has enabled a huge increase in indiscriminate
 tracking of personal data. The trackers are not all intruders, like Nielsen.
 The trackers also include many of the institutions that are supposed to be
 on our side, such as the government and the companies with which we
 do business.
       Of course, the largest of the dragnets appear to be those operated by
 the U.S. government. In addition to its scooping up vast amounts of for¬
 eign communications, the National Security Agency is also scooping up
Americans’ phone calling records and Internet traffic, according to doc¬
 uments revealed in 2013 by the former NSA contractor Edward Snowden.
       But the NSA is not alone (although it may be the most effective) in
operating dragnets. Governments around the world—from Afghanistan
to Zimbabwe—are snapping up surveillance technology, ranging from
“massive intercept” equipment to tools that let them remotely hack into
people’s phones and computers. Even local and state governments in the
United States are snapping up surveillance technology ranging from drones
to automated license plate readers that allow them to keep tabs on citizens’
movements in ways never before possible. Local police are increasingly
tracking people using signals emitted by their cell phones.
       Meanwhile, commercial dragnets are blossoming. AT&T and Veri¬
zon are selling information about the location of their cell phone cus¬
tomers, albeit without identifying them by name. Mall owners have started
using technology to track shoppers based on the signals emitted by the
cell phones in their pockets. Retailers such as Whole Foods have used
digital signs that are actually facial recognition scanners. Some car dealer¬
ships are using a service from Dataium that lets them know which cars
you have browsed online, if you have given them your e-mail address,
before you arrive on the dealership lot.
   Online, hundreds of advertisers and data brokers are watching as you
browse the Web. Looking up “blood sugar” could tag you as a possible
diabetic by companies that profile people based on their medical condi¬
tion and then provide drug companies and insurers access to that infor¬
mation. Searching for a bra could trigger an instant bidding war among
lingerie advertisers at one of the many online auction houses.
   And new tracking technologies are just around the corner: compa¬
nies are building facial recognition technology into phones and cameras,
                                                                 HACKED   [5]

technology to monitor your location is being embedded into vehicles,
wireless “smart” meters that gauge the power usage of your home are
being developed, and Google has developed Glass, tiny cameras embed¬
ded in eyeglasses that allow people to take photos and videos without
lifting a finger.



Skeptics say: What’s wrong with all of our data being collected by unseen
watchers? Who is being harmed?
   Admittedly, it can be difficult to demonstrate personal harm from a
data breach. If Sharon or Bilal is denied a job or insurance, they may never
know which piece of data caused the denial. People placed on the no-fly
list are never informed about the data that contributed to the decision.
   But, on a larger scale, the answer is simple: troves of personal data
can and will be abused.
   Consider one of the oldest and supposedly innocuous dragnets of all:
the U.S. Census. The confidentiality of personal information collected by
the census is protected by law, and yet census data have been repeatedly
abused. During World War I, it was used to locate draft violators. During
World War II, the Census Bureau provided the names and addresses of
Japanese-American residents to the U.S. Secret Service. The information
was used to round up Japanese residents and place them in internment
camps. It was not until 2000 that the Census Bureau issued a formal apol¬
ogy for its behavior. And in 2002 and 2003, the Census Bureau provided
statistical information about Arab-Americans to the Department of
Homeland Security. After bad publicity, it revised its policies to require
that top officials approve requests from other agencies for sensitive infor¬
mation such as race, ethnicity, religion, political affiliation, and sexual
orientation.
   The United States is not alone in abusing population statistics. Aus¬
tralia used population registration data to force the migration of aborigi¬
nal people at the turn of the twentieth century. In South Africa, the census
was a key instrument of the state’s “apartheid” system of racial segrega¬
tion. During the Rwandan genocide of 1994, Tutsi victims were targeted
with the help of ID cards that indicated their ethnicity. During the
Holocaust, France, Poland, the Netherlands, Norway, and Germany used
population data to locate Jews for extermination.
 [B]      DRAGNET NATION

       Personal data are often abused for political reasons. One of the most
 infamous cases was a program called COINTELPRO run by the Federal
 Bureau of Investigation in the late 1960s. The FBI’s director, J. Edgar Hoover,
 set up the secret program to spy on “subversives” and then used the infor¬
 mation to try to discredit and demoralize them. The FBI went as far as to
 send Martin Luther King Jr. a tape recording from surveillance of his hotel
 room that was meant to cause King to get separated from his wife—along
 with a note that King interpreted as a threat to release the recording unless
 King committed suicide.
       Criminal hackers have also found that using personal data is the best
 way to breach an institution’s defenses. Consider how Chinese hackers
penetrated the sophisticated computer security pioneer RSA. The hack¬
ers trolled social media websites to obtain information about individual
employees. They then sent those employees an e-mail titled “2011 Recruit¬
ment Plan.” The e-mail looked legitimate enough that one employee
retrieved it from the junk mail folder and opened it. That file installed
spyware on the individual’s machine, and from there the attackers gained
remote control of multiple computers in the organization.
       In short, they hacked people, not institutions.
       Hacking people is not just for criminals. Marketers are following us
around the Web in the hopes that they can obtain information that will
let them hack us into buying their products. The NSA is scooping up
all of our phone calls to establish patterns that it believes will let authori¬
ties “hack” a terrorist cell.
    Here are some of the ways you may be already being hacked:


    • You can always be found.
    • You can be watched in your own home—or in the bathroom.
   • You can no longer keep a secret.
   • You can be impersonated.
   • You can be trapped in a “hall of mirrors.”
   • You can be financially manipulated.
   • You can be placed in a police lineup.


   This is not a comprehensive list. Rather, it is a snapshot in time of
real-life events that are happening right now. In the future, we will likely
read this list and laugh at all the things I failed to envision.
                                                                  HACKED   [7]

YOU CAN ALWAYS BE FOUND.


Your name, address, and other identifying details—even the location of
your cell phone at any given time—are all stored in various databases
that you cannot view or control. Stalkers and rogue employees have con¬
sistently found ways to abuse these databases.
   In 1999, a deranged man named Liam Youens paid an online data
broker called Docusearch to find the social security number, employ¬
ment information, and home address of a woman he was obsessed with,
Amy Boyer. A few days later, Youens drove to Boyer’s workplace and fatally
shot her as she left work. He then shot and killed himself.
   Boyer’s family sued the data broker, but the New Hampshire Supreme
Court held that while the data broker had a duty to “exercise reasonable
care” when selling personal data, it was also true that because informa¬
tion such as a work address “is readily observable by members of the
public, the address cannot be private.”
   Boyer’s parents got very little: in 2004, they settled with Docusearch
for $85,000, having grown weary of years of legal battles. Docusearch is
still in business and its website still advertises services including “reverse
phone number search,” “license plate # search,” “find SSN by name,” and
“hidden bank account search.”
   Since then, the price of buying people’s addresses has fallen from the
nearly $200 that Youens paid to as low as 95 cents for a full report on an
individual. Cyber-stalking cases have become so common that they rarely
make news.
   Consider just one example. In 2010, a Sacramento sheriff’s deputy,
Chu Vue, was convicted of murder after his brothers shot to death Steve
Lo, who was having an affair with Vue’s wife. During the trial it came
out that Vue had searched law enforcement databases for Lo’s name, had
asked a colleague to look up Lo’s license plate, and had searched for Lo’s
address using an online phone lookup service. Vue was sentenced to life
without parole.
   Even the most innocent data—such as airline travel records—can be
abused. In 2007, a Commerce Department employee, Benjamin Robin¬
son, was indicted for unlawfully accessing, more than 163 times, the
government database that contains international airline travel reserva¬
tion records. After a breakup with a woman, he accessed her files, as well
 [8]     DRAGNET NATION

 as those of her young son and husband. He left a message on her answer¬
 ing machine stating that he was going to check the files “to see if there is
 anything you lied about.” He suggested that he might be able to get her
 deported. In 2009, Robinson pleaded guilty to unlawfully obtaining infor¬
 mation from a protected computer, and he was sentenced to three years’
 probation.
       And the day is not far off when real-time tracking will become rou¬
 tine. The United States already embeds radio-frequency identification
 (RFID) chips that can transmit data over a short range of about ten feet
 in passports, and schools and employers are starting to embed the chips
 in ID cards. In 2013, a federal judge in Texas denied a student’s challenge
to her school’s requirement that she wear an RFID-enabled ID card. Some
employers have even flirted with the idea of implanting the chips under
their employees’ skin, which prompted California to outlaw the practice
in 2008.
       Cell phone tracking has already become routine for police depart¬
ments. In 2011, my colleague at the Wall Street Journal Scott Thurm and
I submitted open records requests to the twenty largest state and local
police departments in the United States. Eight agencies produced at least
summary statistics suggesting that state and local agencies track thou¬
sands of cell phones in real time each year. It is as routine as “looking for
fingerprint evidence or DNA evidence,” said Gregg Rossman, a prosecu¬
tor in Broward County, Florida.
   Inevitably, phone companies have started selling cell phone location
data to a wider audience than just police. In 2013, Verizon said it would
sell a new product called Precision Market Insights that would let busi¬
nesses track cell phone users in particular locations.
   One of Verizon’s first customers is the Phoenix Suns basketball team,
which wants to know where its fans live. Scott Horowitz, a team vice
president, said: This is the information that everyone has wanted that
hasn’t been available until now.”


YOU CAN BE WATCHED IN YOUR OWN HOME—OR IN THE BATHROOM.

In 2009, fifteen-year-old high school student Blake Robbins was confronted
by an assistant principal who claimed she had evidence that he was
engaging in “improper behavior in his home.” It turned out that his
                                                                 HACKED   [9]

school—Harriton High School, in an affluent suburban Philadelphia
school district—had installed spying software on the Apple MacBook
laptops that it issued to the school’s twenty-three hundred students. The
school’s technicians had activated software on some of the laptops that
could snap photos using the webcam, as well as take screen shots of the
students’ computers. Blake’s webcam captured him holding pill-shaped
objects. Blake and his family said they were Mike and Ike candies. The
assistant principal believed they were drugs.
   Blake’s family sued the district for violating their son’s privacy. The
school said the software had been installed to allow technicians to locate
the computers in case of theft. However, the school did not notify stu¬
dents of the software’s existence, nor did it set up guidelines for when the
technical staff could operate the cameras.
   An internal investigation revealed that the cameras had been activated
on more than forty laptops and captured more than sixty-five thousand
images. Some students were photographed thousands of times, includ¬
ing when they were partially undressed and sleeping. A former student,
Joshua Levin, said he was “shocked, humiliated, and severely emotionally
distressed” when he viewed some of the eight thousand photos and screen
shots captured by the camera on his laptop. Levin, Robbins, and one other
student sued the school and won monetary settlements. The school board
banned the school’s use of cameras to surveil students.
   We’re used to the idea that surveillance cameras are everywhere. It is
estimated that there are more than four thousand surveillance cameras
installed in lower Manhattan. London is famous for its more than five
hundred thousand security cameras.
   But as the cameras are getting smaller, they are traveling into our
homes and intimate spaces, upending our definitions of public and pri¬
vate. Drones equipped with cameras have become cheap enough that they
are becoming a nuisance. In May 2013, a Seattle woman complained on a
local blog. A stranger had “set an aerial drone into flight over my yard and
beside my house_I initially mistook its noisy buzzing for a weed-whacker
on this warm spring day.” Her husband approached the man flying the
drone, who declared that it was legal for him to fly it and that the drone
was equipped with cameras. “We are extremely concerned, as he could
very easily be a criminal who plans to break into our house or a peeping-
tom,” she said.
 [ID]      DRAGNET NATION

        With all this cool technology, the bad guys are of course setting up
 their own camera dragnets. In 2013, the journalist Nate Anderson described
 a robust hacker community that trades tips and techniques for installing
 spyware on women’s webcams. “They operate quite openly online, sharing
 the best techniques,” he wrote. “Calling most of these guys ‘hackers’ does
 a real disservice to hackers everywhere; only minimal technical skill is
 now required.”
    In 2011, a Santa Ana man named Luis Mijangos was convicted of com¬
 puter hacking and wiretapping after he was found to have installed mali¬
 cious software that allowed him to control the webcams of more than one
 hundred computers. In one case, he gained control of a teenage girl’s web¬
 cam and obtained naked photographs of her. He used the images to extort
 further nude images from his victims. During the sentencing, the judge
said, “This was nothing short of a sustained effort to terrorize victims.”
Mijangos was sentenced to six years in prison.
    And widespread camera dragnets are right around the corner. The
arrival of wearable computers equipped with cameras, such as Google
Glass, means that everything is fair game for filming. The New York Times
columnist Nick Bilton was shocked when he attended a Google confer¬
ence and saw attendees wearing their Google Glass cameras while using
the urinals.
   But Google Glass enthusiasts say that wearing cameras on their heads
changes their life. “I will never live a day of my life from now on without
it (or a competitor), wrote the blogger Robert Scoble after trying out the
glasses for two weeks. “It freaks some people out,” he conceded, but he
said, “It’s new, that will go away once they are in the market.”


YOU CAN NO LONGER KEEP A SECRET.


Bobbi Duncan, a twenty-two-year-old lesbian student at the University
of Texas, Austin, tried to keep her sexual orientation secret from her fam¬
ily. But Facebook inadvertently outed her when the president of the Queer
Chorus on campus added her to the choir s Facebook discussion group.
Bobbi didn t know that a friend could add her to a group without her
approval and that Facebook would then send a note to her entire list of
friends—including her father—announcing that she’d joined.
   Two days after receiving the notification that Bobbi had joined the
                                                                HACKED   [II]

Queer Chorus, her father wrote on his Facebook page: “To all you queers.
Go back to your holes and wait for GOD. Hell awaits you pervert. Good
luck singing there.”
   When informed about the case, Facebook spokesman Andrew Noyes
said that the “unfortunate experience reminds us that we must continue
our work to empower and educate users about our robust privacy con¬
trols.” His position seemed to put the blame on the victim for incorrectly
flipping Facebook’s dials and levers. But there was no dial or lever on
Facebook that Bobbi could have set to prevent her being joined to the group
without her permission.
   “I blame Facebook,” Bobbi said. “It shouldn’t be somebody else’s choice
what people see of me.”
   As more personal data are swept up into various databases, it has
become harder for any secrets to be kept—even by professional secret
keepers. The most notable example is CIA director David Petraeus, who
resigned after an unrelated FBI investigation uncovered e-mails that indi¬
cated he was conducting an extramarital affair. In 2012, former CIA
analyst John Kiriakou was indicted for passing classified information to
journalists, based in part on e-mail evidence. He pleaded guilty and was
sentenced to thirty months in prison.
   Even minor secrets are difficult to keep. People who download porn
movies on their computers have been targeted by so-called copyright
trolls who file mass lawsuits that allow them to obtain information about
the identities of people who have downloaded copyrighted porn movies
from file-sharing networks, with the intent of embarrassing the defen¬
dants into paying a quick settlement.
   In July 2012, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit sanctioned
one such plaintiff, an attorney for an adult movie producer, who had
sued 670 downloaders based on their computer addresses and sought to
obtain their identities without court approval. The court described the
attorney’s “violations as an attempt to repeat his strategy of suing anony¬
mous Internet users for allegedly downloading pornography illegally,
using the powers of the court to find their identity, then shaming or
intimidating them into settling for thousands of dollars.”
   In May 2013, a California judge went even further, declaring that the
copyright trolls had used a “nexus of antiquated copyright laws, paralyzing
social stigma and unaffordable defense costs” to “plunder the citizenry.”
 [12]   DRAGNET NATION

 YOU CAN BE IMPERSONATED.

 Jaleesa Suell was taken away from her mother and placed in foster care
 when she was eight years old. She was placed in seven different foster
 homes before leaving the foster care system. When she turned twenty-
 one and was nearing graduation from George Washington University, she
 applied for a credit card. That’s when she found out that a family member
 had stolen her identity, opened up a credit card in her name, and defaulted
 on the payments.
    Without access to credit, Jaleesa couldn’t get a car and worried she
 wouldn’t be able to get an apartment after graduation. “I often find myself
 worried about if I was going to have a place to live the next day or have
 food, and I’ve worked so hard to ensure that that won’t happen after, you
 know, I emancipated,” she told participants in a workshop on identity
 theft in 2011. “But now I find myself in that exact situation, just for the
simple fact that, like, I don’t have a line of credit.”
    Sadly, foster children like Jaleesa are among the most common vic¬
tims of the crime known as identity theft. I prefer to call the crime “imper¬
sonation,” because no one can really steal your identity. Jaleesa is still
herself. Someone has simply impersonated her for financial gain.
    In response to the rising problem of impersonation among foster chil¬
dren, President Barack Obama signed a law in 2011 that contained a pro¬
vision requiring the credit-reporting companies to provide foster children
with a free credit report annually after they turn sixteen years old for as
long as they remain in the system.
    But the underlying problem of impersonation continues to rise. Com¬
plaints of identity theft increased by nearly one-third in 2012—up to 369
million from 279 million a year earlier—after remaining fairly steady
for the previous five years, according to statistics compiled by the Federal
Trade Commission.
   Credit card fraud used to be the most common complaint, according
to Steve Toporoff, the FTC attorney who coordinates the agency’s iden¬
tity protection program. These days, he said, tax fraud is the top com¬
plaint. “We also see new forms of fraud, such as medical fraud, in which
people use identity information to obtain health treatment,” he said. It’s
harder for people to catch tax and medical fraud, as they do not have
access to their files as easily as they do with credit reports.
                                                                 HACKED   [13]

    In 2013, two Florida women were convicted of defrauding the gov¬
ernment in a scheme in which they submitted nearly two thousand fraud¬
ulent tax returns to the IRS seeking $11 million in refunds. The Department
of the Treasury paid out nearly $3.5 million. One of the women, Alci
Bonannee, filed many of the fraudulent returns using personal informa¬
tion purchased from a hospital nurse. The hospital, Baptist Health South
Florida, stated that 834 patient records had been accessed. An IRS agent,
Tony Gonzalez, told a local TV station that “the bad guys that are able to
get these social security numbers are buying them from employees that
work at these hospitals and these medical centers which are sold up to
$150 each.”
   Identity information is not only being stolen, it is also being lost all
the time, for reasons ranging from carelessness to hacking. Public reports
of data breaches have been steadily on the rise since 2009, and jumped by
a dramatic 43 percent in 2012, according to the Open Security Founda¬
tion’s DataLossDB website.
   And companies are rarely penalized for losing customer data. A test
case is playing out as a result of the repeated hacks of the Wyndham
hotel chain. In 2008, hackers broke into the computer network of the
Wyndham hotel in Phoenix. Through that network, the hackers gained
access to the credit card accounts of more than five hundred thousand
customers at all forty-one Wyndham hotels and transferred the infor¬
mation to Russia. The hackers allegedly racked up more than $10.6 mil¬
lion in fraudulent charges.
   But even after that breach, Wyndham failed to secure its computer
network. The following year, it was hacked twice, losing another fifty thou¬
sand and sixty-nine thousand customer credit cards, respectively. In 2012,
the Federal Trade Commission sued Wyndham, alleging that its failure to
secure its network was deceptive and unfair to customers.
   Wyndham fought back. It claimed the FTC was unfairly penalizing
the company for being the victim of a crime. It called the FTC’s case “the
Internet equivalent of punishing the local furniture store because it was
robbed and its files raided.” The FTC responded in a legal filing that “a
more accurate analogy would be that Wyndham was a local furniture
store that left copies of its customers’ credit and debit card information
lying on the counter, failed to lock the doors of the store at night, and was
shocked to find in the morning that someone had stolen the information.”
 [14]   DRAGNET NATION

 YOU CAN BE TRAPPED IN A “HALL OF MIRRORS.”

 Companies that monitor people’s Web-surfing behavior say their actions
 are innocuous: they only want to show ads for shoes to people who have
 recently looked at shoes, or to show political news to people who prefer
 political news. I call this type of mass customization a “hall of mirrors.”
    Sometimes the hall of mirrors is helpful. I don’t particularly mind
 seeing an ad that reminds me to purchase a product I was just looking at.
 But the hall of mirrors can also veer into disturbing territory.
    Consider this: searching for a traditionally black-sounding name such
as “Trevon Jones” is 25 percent more likely to generate ads suggesting an
arrest record—such as “Trevon Jones Arrested?”—than a search for a tra¬
ditionally white-sounding name like “Kristen Sparrow,” according to a
January 2013 study by Harvard professor Latanya Sweeney. Sweeney found
this advertising disparity even for names in which people with the white¬
sounding name did have a criminal record and people with the black¬
sounding name did not have a criminal record.
    Data about people’s Web-surfing behavior is also increasingly used
to provide so-called customized content. For instance, Google uses
information from past searches and browsing habits to provide different
search results to different people—even when they conduct identical search
requests. Sometimes those extrapolations can be useful, such as when
Google suggests a restaurant near where you live instead of across the
country. But sometimes they are intrusive.
   In the months leading up to the November 2012 presidential election,
Google took its guesses into the political realm in a controversial way.
Searchers who looked up Barack Obama saw news about the president
threaded into their future searches on other topics. Searchers who looked
up Mitt Romney did not see news about the Republican presidential can¬
didate included in subsequent searches.
   Google said that the disparity was simply the result of the mathemat¬
ical formula it was using to predict users’ queries. Google’s technologists
viewed their effort as helping us figure out the answer to our needs before
we know we have those needs. But it is worth noting that if a newspaper
did the same thing—inserted Obama news into articles about toothpaste
for certain readers—it would be roundly called out as biased and intrusive.
Similarly, a newspaper would be called out if it placed only gay ads in the
                                                                 HACKED   [15]

papers of subscribers it deemed to be gay, or diabetes treatment ads in
the papers of subscribers it guessed had the disease.
    Does technology immunize Google from something that would not
otherwise be socially acceptable? Or is Martin Abrams, a leading privacy
expert, right to call this type of behavior restrictive “boxing,” where “my
vision of what is possible is limited by the box” in which I am placed?


YOU CAN BE FINANCIALLY MANIPULATED.

As companies gather more digital data about potential customers, they
have the ability to use that information to charge different prices to dif¬
ferent users or steer different users to different offers.
    Ryan Calo, a law professor at the University of Washington, calls this
the “mass production of bias,” in which companies use personal data to
exploit people’s vulnerability. For example, companies can chip away at
consumers’ willpower until they finally give in to making a purchase. Or
a computer algorithm can set prices for each individual at exactly the price
that is the most he or she is willing to pay for a given product or service.
    The credit card companies have started using some of these techniques.
In 2010, my colleagues at the Wall Street Journal and I discovered that
Capital One was showing different credit cards (with different rates) to dif¬
ferent website visitors, based on its guesses about their income and geo¬
graphic location. The result was that when Thomas Burney, a Colorado
building contractor, visited Capital One’s website, he was greeted with
offers for a card for people with excellent credit, the “Capital One Platinum
Prestige.” By comparison, when Carrie Isaac, a young mother from Colo¬
rado Springs, visited the website, she was shown a card described as being
for people with “average” credit.
   The reason was buried in the computer code. Contained in the 3,748
lines of code that passed between Thomas’s computer and Capital One’s
website were the credit card company’s guesses about his income level
(“upper-mid”), education (“college graduate”), and his town (“avon”). Cap¬
ital One had assessed Carrie as having only “midscale” income with “some
college” education. A Capital One spokeswoman told us, “Like every mar¬
keter, online and off-line, we’re making an educated guess about what we
think consumers will like and they are free to choose another product of
their liking.”
 [16]     DRAGNET NATION

        By 2012, when my team again tested for market manipulation, the
 techniques had become more widespread and increasingly sophisticated.
We found that credit card companies were still offering different cards to
 different users. Discover was showing a prominent offer for the “it” card
to computers connecting from cities including Denver, Kansas City, and
Dallas, but not to people connecting from Scranton, Pennsylvania; Kings¬
port, Tennessee; and Los Angeles.
    But we also found that websites were varying prices based on their
guesses about where users were located. In our tests, Lowes was selling a
refrigerator for $449 to users in Chicago, Los Angeles, and Ashburn, Vir¬
ginia. But it cost $499 in seven other test cities. Similarly, a 250-foot spool
of electrical wiring was displayed at six different prices on Home Depot’s
website depending on the user’s location: $70.80 in Ashtabula, Ohio;
$72.45 in Erie, Pennsylvania; $75.98 in Olean, New York; and $77.87 in
Monticello, New York. Both Lowe’s and Home Depot said the variations
were an attempt to match online prices to the closest store.
    We found the most comprehensive price differences on the website of
the office supply giant Staples, which appears to use data about visitors
to guess where they live. It then displays different prices to different users
based on its estimate of their geographic location. The end result: when
Trude Frizzell logged on to Staples.com from her work computer in Berg-
heim, Texas, she saw a Swingline stapler listed for sale for $14.29. Just a
few miles away, in Bourne, Kim Wamble saw the same stapler listed on the
same website for $15.79. The difference was not due to shipping costs,
which are calculated after purchasing the item. Rather, the prices seem to
reflect how far Staples believes the user lives from a competitor’s store.
Staples confirmed that it varies prices by a number of factors but declined
to be specific.
    It’s not illegal to charge different prices to different users, as long it is
not based on race or other sensitive information that could constitute
redlining. But offering price variations to different users can result in
unfair results that are unintended. Our tests of the Staples website showed
that areas with higher average income were more likely to receive dis¬
counted prices than lower-income areas. “I think it’s very discriminatory,”
said Kim.
   The worst types of financial manipulation exploit the poor, the old, or
the uneducated. Consider the so-called sucker lists that data brokers com-
                                                                   HACKED   [17]

pile of people who are old, in financial distress, or vulnerable in some
other way to certain types of marketing pitches. Sucker lists are often
sold to unscrupulous marketers who pitch fraudulent products.
    In October 2012, the Federal Trade Commission fined one of the
nation’s largest data brokers, Equifax, and its customers a total of $1.6
million for abusing personal data by selling lists of people who were late
in paying their most recent mortgage bills to fraudulent marketers. The
lists were marketed with names like “Save Me From Foreclosure” and
“Debt Regret.” One of the buyers was a particularly seedy Southern
California boiler room operation that allegedly bilked more than $2.3
million from at least fifteen hundred home owners who paid fees ranging
from $1,000 to $5,000 for loan modifications that almost never material¬
ized. Many of those home owners eventually lost their homes.
   When I asked an official at the Direct Marketing Association whether
there are any lists its members won’t sell, such as “seniors with Alzheim¬
er’s who like sweepstakes,” she sent me the organization’s ethical guide¬
lines, which prohibit the sale of lists that are “disparaging.” Otherwise, it’s
fair game, apparently.


YOU CAN BE PLACED IN A POLICE LINEUP.

On April 5, 2011, John Gass picked up his mail in Needham, Massa¬
chusetts, and was surprised to find a letter stating that his driver’s
license had been revoked. “I was just blindsided,” John said.
   John is a municipal worker—he repairs boilers for the town of Need¬
ham. Without a driver’s license, he could not do his job. He called the
Massachusetts Registry of Motor Vehicles and was instructed to appear at
a hearing and bring documentation of his identity. They wouldn’t tell
him why his license was revoked.
   When John showed up for his hearing, he learned that the RMV
had begun using facial recognition software to search for identity
fraud. The software compared license photos to identify people who
might have applied for multiple licenses under different aliases. The
software had flagged him and another man, Edward Perry of Rehoboth,
Massachusetts, as having similar photos and had required them to
prove their identities.
   John was a victim of what I call the “police lineup”—dragnets that allow
 [18]      DRAGNET NATION

 the police to treat everyone as a suspect. This overturns our traditional
view that our legal system treats us as “innocent until proven guilty.”
        The most obvious example of this is airport body scanners. The scan¬
ners conduct the most intrusive of searches—allowing the viewer to peer
beneath a person’s clothes—without any suspicion that the person being
scanned is a criminal. In fact, the burden is on the individual being scanned
to “prove” his or her innocence, by passing through the scanner without
displaying any suspicious items. These dragnets can be Kafkaesque. Con¬
sider the no-fly list. People placed on the list are not told how they got on
the list, nor can they argue against the decision.
    John Gass luckily was given a chance to plead his case. But it was
an absurd case. He was presented with a photo of himself from thirteen
years ago.
    “It doesn’t look like you,” the officer said.
    “Of course it doesn’t,” John said. “It’s thirteen years later. I was a hun¬
dred pounds lighter.”
    John presented his passport and his birth certificate, and his license
was reinstated. But the officers wouldn’t give him any paperwork to
prove that it was reinstated. He wanted a piece of paper to show his
boss that he was okay to drive again. “It was kind of like a bad dream,”
John said.
    Angry at his treatment and his lost income, John filed a lawsuit against
the RMV, claiming that he had been denied his constitutionally protected
right to due process. The RMV argued that he had been given a window of
opportunity to dispute the revocation because the letter had been mailed
on March 24 and the license wasn’t revoked until April 1. John didn’t pick
up his mail until April 5.
    The Suffolk County Superior Court granted the RMV’s motion to dis¬
miss. Gass appealed, but the appellate court also ruled against him.
Although Gass’s pique at having to defend his identity is understandable,
it does not follow that his case raises larger legal questions that appellate
courts must resolve at this time,” the court stated.
   John felt betrayed by the whole process. He now is very careful around
state police because he worries that he won’t be treated fairly. “There are
no checks and balances, he said. It is only natural humans are going to
make mistakes. But there is absolutely no oversight.
   “I do think we are trading our liberties for security,” he said.
                                                                  HACKED   [19]


                                      +
These stories illustrate a simple truth: information is power. Anyone who
holds a vast amount of information about us has power over us.
    At first, the information age promised to empower individuals with
access to previously hidden information. We could comparison shop
across the world for the best price, for the best bit of knowledge, for people
who shared our views.
    But now the balance of power is shifting and large institutions—both
governments and corporations—are gaining the upper hand in the infor¬
mation wars, by tracking vast quantities of information about mundane
aspects of our lives.
   Now we are learning that people who hold our data can subject us to
embarrassment, or drain our pocketbooks, or accuse us of criminal behav¬
ior. This knowledge could, in turn, create a culture of fear.
   Consider Sharon and Bilal. Once they learned they were being moni¬
tored on PatientsTikeMe, Sharon and Bilal retreated from the Internet.
   Bilal deleted his posts from the forum. He took down the drug dosage
history that he had uploaded onto the site and stored it in an Excel file on
his computer. Sharon stopped using the Internet altogether and doesn’t
allow her son to use it without supervision.
   They started talking on the phone, but they missed the online connec¬
tions they had forged on PatientsLikeMe. “I haven’t found a replacement,”
Sharon said. Bilal agreed: “The people on PTM really know how it feels.”
   But neither of them could tolerate the fear of surveillance. Sharon
said she just couldn’t live with the uncertainty of “not knowing if every
keystroke I’m making is going to some other company,” she said. Bilal
added, “I just feel that the trust was broken.”
   Sharon and Bilal’s experience is a reminder that for all its technologi¬
cal pyrotechnics, the glory of the digital age has always been profoundly
human. Technology allows us to find people who share our inner thoughts,
to realize we’re not alone. But technology also allows others to spy on us,
causing us to pull back from digital intimacy.
   When people ask me why I care about privacy, I always return to the
simple thought that I want there to be safe, private spaces in the world for
Sharon and Bilal, for myself, for my children, for everybody. I want there
to be room in the digital world for letters sealed with hot wax. Must we
[20]   DRAGNET NATION

always be writing postcards that can—and will—be read by anyone along
the way?
   Do we want to live in a world where we are always at risk of being
hacked? A world where we can always be found, we can’t keep secrets, we
can be watched even in our own homes, we can be impersonated, we can
be trapped in a hall of mirrors, we can be financially manipulated and put
in a police lineup? This book is my attempt to answer that question in
two parts.
   In the opening chapters, I explore why indiscriminate surveillance
matters. To do that, I examine the legal and technical origins of our Drag¬
net Nation, the uses and abuses of surveillance, and its impact on indi¬
viduals and society.
   In the chapters that follow, I examine whether there is any hope of
building an alternative world, where we can enjoy the fruits of technology
without fear of being hacked. I test various strategies for evading drag¬
nets, ranging from using a burner phone to establishing fake identities.
   I hope that my exploration will help the conversation about privacy
evolve beyond the simple anxiety of “Who’s watching me?” into a more
nuanced discussion of “Why does it matter?” and, ultimately, to a pro¬
ductive conversation about what we can do about it.
A SHORT HISTORY
OF TRACKING

S even weeks after the terrorist attacks that killed thousands of people
    and demolished the World Trade Center in New York, one of the
    nation’s top code breakers walked out of the premier spy agency in
the United States for the last time.
    It was October 31, 2001. Lower Manhattan was still smoldering. Let¬
ters containing anthrax had been sent to members of Congress and media
outlets across the nation. Bomb scares were reported seemingly every day.
A jittery nation was at war with an unseen enemy.
    But Bill Binney, a code breaker who had risen to the level equivalent
to a general within the National Security Agency, wasn’t joining the fight.
He was retiring after more than thirty years at the agency. As he reached
the bottom of the steps at the agency headquarters in Fort Meade, Mary¬
land, he said, “Free at last. Free at last.”
    Binney had spent years trying to modernize the spy agency’s surveil¬
lance methods so that it could monitor Internet communications that
bounce all over the world, while still respecting the privacy of U.S. citi¬
zens’ communications. But his efforts had been thwarted at every turn.
    Now, his colleagues were telling him that the agency was collecting the
communications of U.S. citizens without any privacy protections. He
wanted no part of it.
    As he left the Fort Meade compound, Binney was fleeing what he
 [U]     DRAGNET NATION

viewed as the scene of a crime. “I could not stay after the NS A began
purposefully violating the Constitution,” he later declared in court testi¬
mony against his former employer.
    We have since learned, of course, that Binney was right. After the
9/11 terrorist attacks, the U.S. government established sweeping, possibly
illegal dragnets that captured the phone call and e-mail traffic of nearly
every American.



In my quest to understand the history and origins of mass surveillance, I
kept returning to the year 2001. Not only was it the year of the devastat¬
ing terrorist attacks on the United States, but it was also the year that the
technology industry was left reeling from the bursting of the dot-com
bubble. These two seemingly unrelated events each set in motion a chain
of events that created the legal and technical underpinnings of today’s
dragnets. For the U.S. government, the terrorist attacks showed that its
traditional methods of intelligence gathering weren’t working. And for
Silicon Valley, the crash showed that it needed to find a new way to make
money.
   Both arrived at the same answer to their disparate problems: collect¬
ing and analyzing vast quantities of personal data.
   Of course, each had a different purpose. The government was seeking
to find and extract terrorists who might be hiding within the population.
The tech industry was seeking to lure advertisers with robust dossiers
about individuals. But, inevitably, the two became intertwined as the U.S.
government used its power to dip into the tech industry’s profiles.
   Together, the government and the tech industry hatched our Dragnet
Nation. This is the story of how it all began.



In the eighteenth century, the British were having a hard time control¬
ling their American colonies. The Americans were rebelling against Brit¬
ish attempts to block trade between the colonies and other European
countries and against British demands that they pay taxes without receiv¬
ing representation in Parliament.
   To combat the smuggling epidemic, the British instituted a new type
of surveillance technique: general search warrants, known as writs of
                                                A SHORT HISTORY OF TRACKING   [23]

assistance, which allowed British officers to conduct what basically
amounted to suspicionless house-to-house searches.
   Americans were outraged that British officers could storm into any
house at any time, even during a wedding or funeral. “It appears to me
the worst instrument of arbitrary power,” the lawyer James Otis Jr. argued
in a famous speech in Boston in 1761.
   Outrage over the general warrants helped prompt the American Rev¬
olution. And outrage over the general warrants are the underpinning of
the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which states: “The right
of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects,
against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no
Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affir¬
mation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the per¬
sons or things to be seized.”
   The Fourth Amendment is a bedrock principle for law enforcement
officers in the United States. However, technology has enabled the exploi¬
tation of loopholes in the interpretation of the Fourth Amendment. Some
of the most important loopholes are:


   • Public space. The Fourth Amendment protects only “persons, houses,
papers and effects.” The Supreme Court has interpreted this language to
mean that individuals have no reasonable expectation of privacy in pub¬
lic. However, technology has reduced the protective confines of private
space by enabling surveillance of computer use in one’s own home and
drones that fly over backyards.
   • Third-Party Doctrine. The Supreme Court has established the
“Third-Party Doctrine,” which states that individuals do not have a rea¬
sonable expectation of privacy in information they give to third parties—
such as their bank or their phone company. As a result, even sensitive
information that is stored with third parties, such as e-mail, can often be
obtained without a search warrant.
   • Metadata. Metadata is data about data—for example, the envelope
containing a letter can be considered metadata; the data is the letter itself.
The court has traditionally set lower legal standards for searches of meta¬
data than for searches of data. For instance, the post office can take a
photograph of the envelope of your letter without a warrant, but it cannot
open the letter without a warrant. In the digital era, metadata can reveal
 [24]   DRAGNET NATION

 a lot, such as all the phone numbers you call, the people you e-mail, and
 your location.
    • Border searches. Courts have largely supported a “border search
 exception” to the Fourth Amendment, which allows government to con¬
 duct searches at the border without obtaining a search warrant. In today’s
electronic age, that means that agents can—and often do—download the
entire contents of an individual’s phone or computer at the border. U.S.
Customs and Border Patrol says that it conducts about fifteen electronic
media searches per day. In March 2013 the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
Ninth Circuit in California set a new limit on device searches at the bor¬
der, ruling in United States v. Cotterman that reasonable suspicion of
criminal activity was required for a forensic search of a device—such as
using software to analyze encrypted or deleted data, as opposed to per¬
forming a more cursory look at documents, photos, or other files.


    In the digital age, these loopholes have become large enough to allow
for the type of suspicionless searches that outraged the Founding Fathers.



U.S. presidents have long been cautious about overstepping the bounds
of the Fourth Amendment.
   In 1981, when President Ronald Reagan authorized limited domestic
spying in order to seek Soviet infiltrators, he ordered the intelligence agen¬
cies to use “the least intrusive collection techniques feasible within the
United States or directed against United States persons abroad.” Over the
years, Reagan’s directive has been interpreted to mean that domestic spy¬
ing should be done cautiously, and only in cases where there is reason to
suspect a crime.
   But after 9/11, the requirement to establish some kind of suspicion
before engaging in domestic spying was, for all intents and purposes,
tossed aside. Documents revealed by the former NS A contractor Edward
Snowden paint a devastating portrait of how a single decision made in
the days after the attack opened the floodgates for vast domestic drag¬
nets. According to a leaked draft of a 2009 inspector general’s report, the
NSA’s domestic spying began on September 14, 2001, three days after the
attacks, when the agency’s director, Michael Hayden, approved warrant¬
less interception of any U.S. phone call to or from specific terrorist-
                                               A SHORT HISTORY OF TRACKING   [25]

identified phone numbers in Afghanistan. On September 26, Hayden
expanded the order to cover all phone numbers in Afghanistan.
    But soon Hayden wanted more data. He believed there was an ‘Wer-
national gap” between what the NS A was collecting overseas and what
the FBI was looking at domestically. No one was monitoring communi¬
cations to the United States that originated abroad. So Hayden worked
with Vice President Dick Cheney, who asked his legal counsel to help
draft a legal memo that would aid the NS A in filling the international
gap. On October 4, President George W. Bush issued a memorandum
titled, “Authorization for specified electronic surveillance activities dur¬
ing a limited period to detect and prevent acts of terrorism within the
United States.” The memo allowed Hayden to continue to target com¬
munications between Afghanistan and the United States without seeking
approval from the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court, which nor¬
mally oversees electronic surveillance that involves U.S. residents. The
program was authorized for thirty days.
    At the time, it seemed like an understandable emergency measure. In
an era when terrorists could mask their Internet traffic by bouncing it all
over the world, it was sometimes difficult to sort out U.S. from foreign
communications. The order gave the NSA a temporary reprieve from sort¬
ing out U.S. communications during a time of crisis.
    However, Hayden’s narrowly crafted, short-term program eventually
metastasized into a full-blown domestic spying effort. The thirty-day
order was perpetually renewed and expanded. Within a year, it expanded
beyond just U.S.-Afghanistan communications. The NSA used the presi¬
dential order to justify obtaining e-mail and phone communications from
thousands of targets at a time. It also began obtaining bulk long-distance
and international calling records, to conduct “chaining,” that is, finding a
person who called a person who called a suspected terrorist. And the NSA
began collecting Internet traffic (who you e-mailed and Web pages you
visit) from sources where a “preponderance of communications was from
foreign sources” and there was a “high probability” of collecting terrorist
traffic.
    To collect all this data, the NSA sought cooperation from Internet
and phone companies. The report states that seven companies (who are
not named) were approached. Three declined to participate.
    In 2005, the New York Times broke the story of the warrantless
[26]   DRAGNET NAIION

wiretapping program, describing it as a major shift in intelligence¬
gathering practices. The broad sweep of the program became clear a few
months later when a retired AT&T technician, Mark Klein, went public
with the news that the NSA had installed equipment in a secret room in
AT&T’s San Francisco office that could tap all the communications that
flowed through that portion of the Internet. “This is the infrastructure
for an Orwellian police state. It must be shut down!” Klein said in a public
statement.
   Then in May 2006, USA Today published an article stating that AT&T,
Verizon, and BellSouth began providing the NSA with the phone call
records of their customers soon after 9/11. “It’s the largest database ever
assembled in the world,” said an unnamed official quoted in the article.
   Under pressure, President Bush briefly shut down parts of the pro¬
gram. But in 2008, he signed into law amendments to the Foreign Intel¬
ligence Surveillance Act, which reinstated and legalized the wiretapping
program and immunized the telecommunications providers against law¬
suits for their previous participation in a possibly illegal program.
   The FISA amendments established a new class of search warrants that
allowed the government to intercept communications without obtaining
the name of a target—essentially continuing the broad sweeps that it had
conducted under warrantless wiretapping. But this time, a judge had to
approve the algorithm being used to target suspects. The PRISM pro¬
gram, disclosed by Snowden, described the Internet companies that were
complying with the algorithmic warrants. Yahoo! apparently fought to
declare one of the warrants unconstitutional in a secret court hearing,
but it lost and was forced to comply with the warrant under a threat of
civil contempt.
   Amazingly, it turns out that the warrantless wiretapping was one of
the more restrained NSA programs, since it captured only U.S.-to-foreign
communications. Far more sweeping were the vast amounts of phone
and Internet traffic that the NSA began collecting within the United States.
Because it was just “metadata,” the NSA argued that sweeping up domestic
phone calling records and Internet traffic was not violating Americans’
privacy.
   Snowden revealed a secret court order requiring Verizon to turn over
daily calling records to the NSA. Soon after, Senator Dianne Feinstein of
California confirmed that the NSA had been collecting domestic and
                                                 A SHORT HISTORY OF TRACKING   [2?]

international calling records from all the major telecommunications
companies for seven years.
   Snowden also revealed a 2007 memo written by Kenneth Wainstein,
a Justice Department attorney, in which he pushed for the NS A to be
granted legal authority to collect more Internet traffic within the United
States. “Through the use of computer algorithms, NSA creates a chain of
contacts linking communicants,” Wainstein wrote. “NSAs present prac¬
tice is to ‘stop’ when a chain hits a telephone number or address believed
to be used by a United States person.” He then asked the attorney general
for permission to conduct “contact chaining” of U.S. residents.
   Apparently, his wish was briefly granted. The Obama administration
said that the Internet traffic-monitoring program ended in 2011 and was
not restarted. But it remains likely that the NSA is still monitoring domes¬
tic Internet traffic under another guise.
   Regardless, Snowden’s revelations confirmed what many had long sus¬
pected: the creation of a tiny thirty-day dragnet covering U.S.-Afghanistan
communications had mushroomed into a massive domestic dragnet.

                                      +
After 9/11, a massive rush of counterterrorism spending fueled dragnet
surveillance at the state and local levels as well. Federal intelligence agency
budgets ballooned to $75 billion in 2013, up from about $27 billion prior
to the attacks. And some of that trickled down to the states in the form of
grants.
   Consider just the activities of the Department of Homeland Security.
Since 9/11, the department has doled out more than $7 billion for grants
to help “high-threat, high-density urban areas” to prevent and respond to
terrorism. More than $50 million of DHS’s grants were doled out to state
law enforcement agencies to purchase automated license plate readers
that allow them to keep tabs on citizens’ movements in ways never before
possible. The department also helped fund the creation of “fusion cen¬
ters” in nearly every state that were tasked with crunching data from
different agencies—and often from commercial data brokers—to look for
clues that could prevent future acts of terrorism. And local police increas¬
ingly began tracking people using signals emitted by their cell phones.
   At the same time, suspicionless investigations became more common.
In 2008, the attorney general issued new guidelines that allowed the FBI
[28]      DRAGNET NATION

to launch investigations without “any particular factual predication.”
Under the new rules, the FBI was charged with “obtaining information
on individuals, groups, or organizations of possible investigative interest,
either because they may be involved in criminal or national security-
threatening activities or because they may be targeted for attack or vic¬
timization by such activities.”
   And in 2012, the Justice Department authorized the National Counter¬
terrorism Center to copy entire government databases of information
about U.S. citizens—flight records, lists of casino employees, the names
of Americans hosting foreign-exchange students—and examine the files
for suspicious behavior.
   Previously, the agency had been barred from storing information about
U.S. residents unless the person was a terrorism suspect or was related to
an investigation.
   Suspicionless dragnets had become the new normal.



The terrorist attacks of 2001 also ushered in an era of dragnets in Silicon
Valley.
   Until the late 1990s, the consumer software industry was a retail busi¬
ness. Software was sold in shrink-wrapped boxes on store shelves. Of
course, companies also bought industrial-grade software wholesale. But the
popular market—consisting mostly of games and office productivity
tools—was a retail business.
   The Internet blew up the software business entirely.
   The first real piece of Internet software was the Web browser Netscape
Navigator, introduced in 1994. The prospect of the first truly mass-market
software propelled Netscape to a stratospheric initial public offering. Its
stock price shot up in its first day of trading, closing the day at four times
its initial offering price. Netscape’s cofounder Marc Andreessen, only
twenty-four years old, suddenly found himself worth $171 million. The
following year, Andreessen was pictured on the cover of Time magazine,
barefoot and wearing a crown, next to the caption “The Golden Geeks.”
   But the profits never came. Microsoft began including a free Web
browser, Internet Explorer, along with its Windows 95 operating system.
As a result, Netscape was never able to charge for its software.
   In 1998, the Department of Justice and attorneys general from twenty
                                                 A SHORT HISTORY OF TRACKING   [29]

states and the District of Columbia sued Microsoft, alleging that it was
acting as a monopoly in bundling Internet Explorer with Windows 95.
But by the time Microsoft signed a consent decree in 2002, the damage
was done. In 1998, Internet Explorer surpassed Netscape in market share,
and by 2008 Netscape’s software was officially abandoned.
   The first truly mass-market software had been built. But it hadn’t made
any money. The lesson was clear: the retail software market was dead. But
technology requires software. How was it going to be financed?
   At first it seemed that advertising might be the answer. In the late
1990s, Silicon Valley was awash in dot-com businesses, many of them
based on the premise that advertising would support their efforts. But the
bubble burst in 2000. Yahoo!, whose revenue came mostly from online
advertising, saw its market capitalization plummet from $113.9 billion in
early 2000 to just $7.9 billion a year later.
   The conventional wisdom was that online advertising had failed. “Two
years ago, nearly all advertisers were saying, ‘I have to be on the Internet,’ ”
Pat McGrath, CEO of the Arnold McGrath ad agency, said in November
2001. “Today, they are stepping back and saying, ‘Does the Internet make
sense as one of the ways to promote this brand?”’ McGrath’s assessment
was echoed across the industry. Wendy Taylor, the editor of Ziff Davis
Smart Business, was the most succinct. “Online advertising is dead,” she
declared.
   An industry with the best tools to measure the size of its audience in
the history of advertising was accused of having no metrics to prove the
effectiveness of its product. Internet companies began to search for even
better measuring sticks. A great tracking technology called cookies could
track Web users from site to site. But it wasn’t clear if it was legal.
   In 2000, a federal class action suit was brought against the online
advertising company Doubleclick, alleging that its installation of cookies
on the computers of website visitors was violating laws that limit wiretap¬
ping, hacking, and electronic surveillance. A year later, Judge Naomi Reice
Buchwald, in the Southern District of New York, ruled that Doubleclick’s
actions were not illegal because websites authorized Doubleclick to install
cookies on their visitors’ computers. “We find that the DoubleClick-
affiliated Web sites are ‘parties to the communication[s]’ from plaintiffs
and have given sufficient consent to Doubleclick to intercept them,”
she wrote. Her ruling amounted to a free pass for corporate Internet
 [30]   DRAGNET NATION

surveillance: when a person visits a website, the website is free to invite
others to secretly wiretap the visitor.
    Finally, Silicon Valley had a business model: tracking.



Of course, private companies have long collected data about their cus¬
tomers and employees. But buying and selling personal data didn’t become
an industry until the rise of modern computing.
    In 1971, Vinod Gupta’s boss asked him to get a list of every mobile-
home dealer in the country. Gupta, a recent immigrant from India who
had completed an MBA at the University of Nebraska, sat down with a
bunch of yellow page directories and began creating his own list. He soon
realized there must be a better way to create a marketing list. In 1972, he
founded a company, American Business Information, which used the
yellow page listings to build custom lists for marketers to use. The com¬
pany, now known as Infogroup, soon branched out to include data from
the white pages and began buying data from professional associations
and scooping up any kind of public data available—from driver’s license
records to voter registration cards to court records.
    “lust about every list is available,” Gupta later said. “If you want left-
handed golfers or left-handed fishermen or fly fishermen or dog owners,
all those lists are available.”
    Across the country, in Conway, Arkansas, another company was
tackling the same problem. In 1969, Charles Ward, a local businessman
who was active in the Democratic Party, set up a small company called
Demographics Inc. to help local candidates run direct mail campaigns.
His company helped Dale Bumpers in his run for governor of Arkansas,
and Lloyd Bentsen in his unsuccessful presidential bid, before eventually
expanding beyond politics. In 1989, the company changed its name to
Acxiom.
   Acxiom soared in the 1990s, as businesses needed companies with com¬
puter expertise to manage their customer data. Between 1993 and 1998,
Acxiom’s revenue quadrupled to $402 million from $91 million. “The data
has always been there,” Donald Hinman, an executive at Acxiom, told the
Washington Post in 1998. “It’s just that now, with the technology, you can
access it.”
                                                A SHORT HISTORY OF TRACKING   [31]

   The new data troves fueled new businesses. The credit card compa¬
nies Capital One and Discover found ways to slice and dice the popula¬
tion into profitable segments that they could target by direct mail.
Selling data became a lucrative business for governments at all levels.
The state of Florida alone makes about $62 million a year selling driver’s
license data. The U.S. Postal Service generates $9.5 million in revenue a
year allowing companies like Acxiom to access its National Change of
Address database.
   In the 2000s, as the Internet became pervasive, marketers became
interested in “fresher” data about where people were browsing online.
The Doubleclick legal decision had spawned an entire industry devoted
to following Web users’ every click online. In 2007, all the Internet
giants jumped into the online tracking business. AOL bought the behav¬
ioral targeting firm TACODA for $275 million, Google paid $3.1 billion
for Doubleclick, and Microsoft paid $6 billion for the online ad company
aQuantive. All those companies were in the business of building profiles
of Web users.
   The big data brokers reacted quickly. Acxiom, along with others, began
working to merge its files with Web-browsing records, allowing advertis¬
ers to target online ads as precisely as they targeted their mail. At the same
time, Acxiom started selling its data to companies such as Facebook that
wanted to enhance their own tracking.
   Online tracking also fueled a new industry: data trading. On exchanges
similar to the stock market, advertisers bought and sold customer pro¬
files in millisecond trades. It works like this: When you look at a digital
camera on eBay, the Web page is embedded with code from a data exchange
such as BlueKai. Once BlueKai is alerted that you are on the page, it
instantly auctions off your “cookie” to advertisers who want to reach cam¬
era buyers. The highest bidder wins the right to show you a digital camera
advertisement on subsequent pages that you visit. That’s often why online
ads appear to follow you around.
   Due in large part to tracking, online advertising is growing fast.
Industry revenues rose to $36.6 billion in 2012, up from just $7.3 billion in
2003. Tracking is so crucial to the industry that in 2013 Randall Rothen-
berg, the president of the Interactive Advertising Bureau, said that if the
industry lost its ability to track people, “billions of dollars in Internet
[32]      DRAGNET NATION

advertising and hundreds of thousands of jobs dependent on it would
disappear.”
   Meglena Kuneva, a member of the European Commission, summed
it up best in 2009 when she said: “Personal data is the new oil of the
Internet and the new currency of the digital world.”



If you were to build a taxonomy of trackers it would look something like
this:

GOVERNMENT

       • Incidental collectors. Agencies that collect data in their normal
course of business, such as state motor vehicle registries and the IRS, but
are not directly in the data business.
       • Investigators. Agencies that collect data about suspects as part of
law enforcement investigations, such as the FBI and local police.
       • Data analysts. A new class of agencies that scoop up and analyze
data from government agencies and commercial data brokers, such as
state fusion centers and the National Counterterrorism Center.
       • Espionage. Agencies such as the NSA that are supposed to focus
on foreign spying, but have turned their attention to domestic spying as
well.

COMMERCIAL

       • Incidental collectors. This is basically all businesses that collect
personal information in the course of regular business, ranging from the
local dry cleaner to banks and telecommunications providers.
       • The “Freestylers.” These are mostly software companies, such as
Google and Facebook, which provide free services and make money
from their customers’ data—usually by selling access to the data to
marketers.
       • Marketers. The rise of Internet tracking as a basis for digital adver¬
tising business has put marketers primarily in the data business.
       • Data brokers. These are companies that buy from incidental gov¬
ernment and commercial collectors, analyze the data, and resell it. Some,
like Acxiom, sell primarily to businesses. Others, such as Intelius, sell
primarily to individuals.
                                                A SHORT HISTORY OF TRACKING   [33]

   • Data exchanges. Marketers and data brokers increasingly trade infor¬
mation on real-time trading desks that mimic stock exchanges.

INDIVIDUALS

   • Democratized dragnets. Technology has become cheap enough
that everyone can do their own tracking, with items such as dashboard
cameras, build-it-yourself drones, and Google Glass eyeglasses that con¬
tain tiny cameras that can take photos and videos.


   The trackers are deeply intertwined. Government data are the lifeblood
for commercial data brokers. And government dragnets rely on obtaining
information from the private sector.
   Consider just one example: voting. To register to vote, citizens must
fill out a government form that usually requires their name, address, and,
in all but one state, birth date. But few voters realize that those lists are
often sold to commercial data brokers. A 2011 study found that a state¬
wide voter list sold for as little as $30 in California and as high as $6,050
in Georgia.
   Commercial data brokers combine the voting information with other
data to create rich profiles of individuals. For instance, the data broker
Aristotle Inc. markets its ability to identify 190 million voters by more
than “500 consumer data points” such as their credit rating and size of
their mortgage.
   And guess who buys Aristotle’s enriched data? Politicians, who are
sometimes using government money. Aristotle crows that “every U.S.
President—Democrat and Republican—from Reagan through Obama,
has used Aristotle products and/or services.” In fact, an intrepid 2012 the¬
sis by a Harvard undergraduate, Melissa Oppenheim, found that fifty-one
members of the U.S. House of Representatives bought data from Aristotle
using some of their congressional allowances, allowing them to identify
their constituents by the age of their children, whether they subscribe to
religious magazines, or if they have a hunting license. And thus, the data
come full circle in what Oppenheim calls the “Dark Data Cycle.” The
government requires citizens to create data and then sells it to commer¬
cial entities, which launder the data and sell it back to the government.
   The dark data cycle occurs with nearly every type of data. State auto
vehicle records are swept into LexisNexis reports, which are enhanced
[34]   DRAGNET NATION

with other data and sold to the Department of Homeland Security. Fore¬
closure records are compiled in state courts and then collected by data
brokers such as CoreLogic, which sells packages of real estate data to cli¬
ents including the government.
   An even darker data cycle occurs in the secret Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Court, where the government can demand that private indus¬
try hand over data about their customers. In those circumstances, giant
companies such as Google, Yahoo!, AT&T, Verizon, and Microsoft have
been forced to hand over customer data to the NS A.
   The reality is that corporate and government dragnets are inextrica¬
bly linked; neither can exist without the other.



Bill Binney suffered for speaking out against the NSA’s dragnets.
   While at the NSA, Binney had developed what he believed was a drag¬
net that respected and protected individual privacy. Called ThinThread, it
was a clever program that intercepted tons of Internet and phone data,
encrypted it, and analyzed it for patterns. It would be decrypted only if a
specific threat was found and a court had approved a search warrant to
decrypt the data.
   But he couldn’t get the program deployed. After several years of inter¬
nal battles, during which Binney and his colleagues took their case directly
to congressional leaders, the NSA’s top leaders declined to support Thin¬
Thread. One reason: in the pre-9/11 era, the NSA’s lawyers worried that
ThinThread would violate Americans’ privacy because it might collect
domestic communications, even though they were encrypted. Another
reason: NSA director Michael Hayden had thrown his support behind a
much more expensive program called Trailblazer, built by private con¬
tractors, which also aimed to analyze the NSA’s oceans of data but didn’t
use encryption. Trailblazer eventually was abandoned after massive cost
overruns and technical failures.
   In 2002, Binney’s colleague Kirk Wiebe, who had worked on Thin¬
Thread, contacted the Department of Defense’s inspector general to report
what he believed was “waste, fraud and abuse” at the NSA. The inspector
general’s report, issued in 2005, was heavily redacted, but the few unre¬
dacted parts seemed to vindicate ThinThread.
   In 2006, the Baltimore Sun published an article about the battles over
                                              A SHORT HISTORY OF TRACKING   [35]

ThinThread. “NSA Rejected System That Sifted Phone Data Legally,” the
headline stated.
   On July 26, 2007, the FBI raided Binney’s home in suburban Mary¬
land.
   Binney was in the shower. “The guy came in and pointed a gun at me,”
he recalled. “I just said, ‘Do you suppose I could put some clothes on?’”
   Wiebe, who had retired from the NSA the same day as Binney in 2001,
was also raided on this day. Neither Binney nor Wiebe was ever charged
with a crime.
   On November 28, 2007, the FBI raided the home of another Thin¬
Thread supporter, Thomas Drake, an NSA executive who had collabo¬
rated anonymously on the inspector general’s investigation. Agents seized
Drake’s papers, computers, and hard drives and alleged that they found
classified documents in the basement. Two and a half years later, Drake
was indicted and charged with violating the Espionage Act because of
his “willful retention” of classified documents.
   Drake was financially devastated by the prosecution. He was five and
a half years from retirement at the NSA. He lost his pension, which would
have been $60,000 a year. He took out a second mortgage on his house
and withdrew most of his 401(k) retirement plan to pay for his expenses.
He was unemployable in the intelligence community, so he started work¬
ing at an Apple retail store. After spending $82,000 on legal fees, he was
declared indigent by the court and was represented by a public defender.
   In 2011, after a wave of publicity about Drake’s plight, the govern¬
ment dropped all ten felony counts against Drake, as a condition for Drake
pleading guilty to a misdemeanor of “exceeding the authorized use of a
government computer.” During the sentencing, the U.S. District Court
judge Richard D. Bennett called the government’s two-and-a-half-year
delay between the search and indictment “unconscionable.” “It was one of
the most fundamental things in the Bill of Rights that this country was
not to be exposed to people knocking on the door with government
authority and coming into their homes,” he wrote. “And when it happens,
it should be resolved pretty quickly.”
   Judge Bennett didn’t overtly accuse the government of using its power
to harass a whistle-blower. But he gave Drake the lightest sentence
possible—one year probation, during which he was required to do
twenty hours of community service a month and no fine. He closed the
[36]   DRAGNET NATION

sentencing hearing by addressing Drake: “I wish you the best of luck in
the rest of your life.”
   Prior to Drake’s prosecution, Binney, Drake, and Wiebe had tried to
reform the agency from within. But as Drake’s trial approached, they
went public. And after Drake’s exoneration, they became full-time critics
of the NSA, giving scathing interviews to media outlets and warning of
the power of an unchecked agency that has information on everyone.
   When I first met Binney, the first thing he said to me was that the
amount of data being assembled by the NSA was “orders of magni¬
tude” more than the world’s most repressive secret police regimes, the
Gestapo, the Stasi, and the KGB.
   “It’s a real danger when a government assembles that much informa¬
tion about a citizen,” he told me. “Gathering that much information gives
them power over everybody.”
3
STATE OF SURVEILLANCE


S urveillance is not, in and of itself, a terrible activity.
       Parents surveil their children in order to make sure they don’t hurt
    themselves. Police officers surveil the population to catch criminals.
Companies surveil their employees to catch thieves and cheaters. Journal¬
ists surveil powerful institutions to expose abuses.
    But the modern era of dragnets marks a new type of surveillance:
suspicionless, computerized, impersonal, and vast in scope. Some people
believe this surveillance will keep society safer. Others believe it will usher
in a police state.
    To understand the worst-case scenario, I visited the world’s best-kept
archives of pre-electronic surveillance—the Stasi archive in Berlin. I
wanted to see how the files kept by the Stasi, the East German secret
police during the Communist era, compared with the information
collected by today’s commercial and governmental surveillance
operations.
    The Stasi was the largest secret police operation—on a per capita
basis—in the history of the world. Famously repressive, it kept files on 4
million East Germans—or about one-quarter of a total population of nearly
16.7 million. The Stasi didn’t have the advantage of today’s technology—
it had to steam open mail and listen to phone calls manually—but it had
an extensive network of informants. In 1989, roughly one in fifty East
[38]      ORAGNEI NATION

Germans between the ages of eighteen and eighty worked for the Stasi in
some capacity.
   As the East German regime was collapsing in November 1989, the
Stasi began shredding the files they had kept on citizens. Outraged that
the evidence of the regime’s oppression was being destroyed, residents
stormed the Stasi headquarters to halt the destruction of files. As a result,
today’s citizens can request to see files kept about them, and researchers
have access to some files, with the names of the people who were moni¬
tored removed.
       On a trip to Berlin in 2011,1 stopped by the Stasi archive—formally
known as the Federal Commissioner Preserving the Records of the State
Security Service of the former German Democratic Republic—which is
incongruously located in a cheerful, glass-paned office building in the
heart of the city.
   The Stasi records administrator assigned to my request, Gunter Bor-
mann, was immediately enthusiastic about my idea of comparing Stasi
and modern surveillance. As I filled out the paperwork to obtain a set of
Stasi records, he asked me what a typical Western data gatherer knows
about me. So I asked if I could use his computer to show him a bit of what
is known about me online.
   I logged on to my Gmail account and navigated to the settings, where
Google allowed me to view my previous Web searches, including books I
had researched and photos I had viewed. It also listed the ninety-three
people that I’d e-mailed or instant-messaged using Gmail.
   Standing over me, Bormann was impressed. Social network mapping,
he told me, “was very difficult for the Stasi.” He sat down at his conference
table and started drawing a few circles with connecting lines. “They tried
to do social network mapping,” he said, but even with all their informants
they had a hard time building robust maps.
   Inspired, I clicked on to my Linkedln page—where I had installed
a special plug-in that allows me to see a visualization of my social
network. It was a beautiful map with nearly two hundred points
strung together with colored lines. My New York work colleagues
were all clustered in one corner in yellow, other media colleagues were
clumped in a blue corner, and my connections from my time in
California are on the other side of the map in a sea of orange and
gray dots.
                                                    STATE OF SURVEILLANCE   [39]

    Bormann was even more impressed. “The Stasi would have loved
this.”

                                      |

Three months later, a packet of documents arrived at my desk in New
York. Inside were more than a hundred pages containing two files in Ger¬
man. After a bit of searching, I found some Stasi experts to help me trans¬
late and interpret the files.
   The surprising thing was how crude the surveillance was. “Their main
surveillance technology was mail, telephone, and informants,” said Gary
Bruce, an associate professor of history at the University of Waterloo and
the author of The Firm: The Inside Story of the Stasi.
   The first file revealed a low-level surveillance operation called an im-
forgang aimed at recruiting an unnamed target to become an informant.
(The names of the targets were redacted; the names of the Stasi agents
and informants were not.) In this case, the Stasi watched a rather boring
high school student who lived with his mother and sister in a run-of-the-
mill apartment. The Stasi obtained a report on him from the principal of
his school and from a club where he was a member.
   The Stasi didn’t have much on him—I’ve seen Facebook profiles
with far more information—but they still tried to recruit him as an
informant. He turned them down, citing some nonspecific health rea¬
sons. He was lucky that he was young and boring. Most people who were
asked to be informants felt that they couldn’t say no to the Stasi when
presented with evidence of a minor infraction—such as watching West
German television.
   The second file documented a surveillance operation known as an
OPK, for Operative Personenkontrolle, of a man who was writing opposi¬
tional poetry. It was a medium-size operation: the Stasi deployed three
informants against him but did not steam open his mail or listen to his
phone calls.
   Stasi officers received bonuses when they launched OPKs, and an even
more generous bonus if OPK was fruitful—in producing either an arrest
or a new informant. Ultimately, however, the OPK of the poet was fruit¬
less because the regime collapsed before the Stasi could do anything about
him.
   Six months later another, smaller packet arrived. This one contained
[40]      DRAGNET NATION

about fifteen pages documenting specific Stasi surveillance tactics that I
had requested.
   In one file, Stasi agents recorded the movements of a forty-year-old
man for two days—September 28 and 29, 1979. They watched him as he
dropped off his laundry, loaded up his car with rolls of wallpaper, and
drove a child in a car “obeying the speed limit,” stopping for gas and deliv¬
ering the wallpaper to an apartment building. The Stasi continued to
follow the car as a woman drove the child back to Berlin.
       “The targets were extremely circumspect...” the Stasi officer, Lieu¬
tenant Colonel Fritsch, wrote. “Presumably... [they had been] tipped
off... that observations were being conducted in the vicinity.”
       The agent appears to have started following the target at 4:15 p.m. on
a Friday evening. At 9:38 p.m., the target went into his apartment and
turned out the lights. The agent stayed all night and handed over surveil¬
lance to another agent at 7:00 a.m. Saturday. That agent appears to have
followed the target until 10:00 p.m. From today’s perspective, this seems
like a lot of work for very little information.
       The second file was simply a hand-drawn social network. On a single
page of paper, agents had drawn forty-six connections, linking a target to
various people (an “aunt,” “Operational Case Jentzsch,” presumably Bernd
Jentzsch, an East German poet who defected to the West in 1976), places
(“church”), and meetings (“by post, by phone, meeting in Hungary”).
       This was an impressive document. It had only one-quarter of the
data compared to my two-hundred-plus contacts on my Linkedln profile,
but they were likely more relevant to the investigation than my far-flung
network.
       The Stasi would likely have conducted surveillance of everybody on
the map, who were known as “secondary individuals,” according to Gary
Bruce. “You didn’t have to do anything particularly oppositional to end
up with a Stasi file,” he said.
       The problem was that a Stasi file—no matter how large—could affect
whether a person got demoted or promoted, how long they would have to
wait to get a car or an apartment, or whether their application to visit
relatives in the West would be approved. As a result, even though the
Stasi had files on only a quarter of the population, fear of becoming a
target was pervasive.
       In a 1990 survey, right after the fall of the Communist regime, 72.6
                                                     STATE OF SURVEILLANCE   [41]

percent of former East German citizens described the Communist expe¬
rience as complete surveillance.” In 1992, when asked to consider the
statement, “One felt spied upon. You couldn’t trust anyone,” 43 percent
described it as “True, that’s exactly how it was.”
   In a study of psychological effects of Stasi surveillance, Babett Bauer
interviewed about thirty individuals who had had direct encounters with
the secret police. She found that their fear of another Stasi encounter had
prompted them either to become model citizens or to withdraw from
society. Bauer concluded that people who encountered the Stasi internal¬
ized repression into “the body’s wrinkles and the brain’s mechanisms.”

                                       +
The power of observation to be repressive was the foundational idea of
the “Panopticon”—a prison design proposed by leremy Bentham in 1787.
His idea was that a perfect prison would allow prisoners to believe they
were being watched at all times but allow the watchers to remain unseen.
He designed a circular prison with a guard tower in the middle, but it
was never built during his lifetime.
   In 1975, the French philosopher Michel Foucault popularized Ben-
tham’s idea, describing the Panopticon as a “marvelous” instrument of
power. “The more numerous those anonymous and temporary observers
are, the greater the risk for the inmate of being surprised and the greater
his anxious awareness of being observed,” he wrote in his book Disci¬
pline and Punish.
   Now that we live in a world of extensive surveillance, it would
make sense that Foucault’s “anxious awareness” would be our collective
mental state. But it seems Foucault was only partially correct. As Babett
Bauer discovered in her interviews with East Germans, people cope with
surveillance as much by changing their behavior as through increased
anxiety.
   In 2011, Finnish researchers installed extensive monitoring equipment—
video cameras; microphones; and computer, smartphone, and TV moni¬
toring devices—in ten households for a year, to determine the long-term
effect of ubiquitous surveillance. They found that the subjects of the
study—who had obviously volunteered—“gradually became accustomed
to surveillance” over the course of the study. However, the responses
varied. One participant dropped out after six months, stating that the
[42]     DRAGNET NATION

surveillance had curtailed his or her computer usage and affected his or
her relationships. (The researchers did not reveal genders or identifying
details of the subjects.)
   Although the subjects knew that the data from the surveillance was
not being disclosed to anyone except the researchers, and that they
could turn off the system at any time, they still found the monitoring
to be a source of “annoyance, concern, anxiety and even rage,                the
researchers wrote. Ihe most hated monitors were the computer monitor¬
ing and the video cameras (which two participants admitted to turning
off regularly).
    Most participants changed their routines, particularly to be more cau¬
tious about where they undressed (cameras were not placed in the bed¬
rooms or bathrooms) and where they held sensitive conversations.
       “Two subjects started to spend more time in the bedroom, which was
not covered by the microphones. Two others said that they would go to a
cafe to discuss personal matters,” the authors wrote. One subject men¬
tioned avoiding inviting many people home.”
       The lead author of the paper, a computer science researcher named
Antti Oulasvirta, said that although people’s overt concerns about pri¬
vacy plateaued after three months, they all adjusted their behavior to adapt
to the situation. But their adaptations were easily disturbed. “The required
changes made the home fragile,” he said. “Any unpredicted social event
would bring the new practices to the fore and question them, and at times
prevent them from taking place.”



Another way to cope with ubiquitous surveillance is painted by the sci¬
ence fiction author David Brin, in his prescient 1998 book The Trans¬
parent Society: Will Technology Force Us to Choose Between Privacy and
Freedom?
       The book opens with a “tale of two cities.” Both cities have surveillance
cameras installed on “every lamppost, every rooftop and street sign.”
In the first city, all the images are piped into the central police station. In
the second city, every citizen can access any camera through a wristwatch
television.
       Both cities are crime-free. But the first city is a police state, while the
second city enjoys some freedom: “A late-evening stroller checks to make
                                                    STATE DF SURVEILLANCE   [43]

sure no one lurks beyond the corner.... An anxious parent scans the
area to find which way her child wandered off.... A shoplifter is taken
into custody gingerly. .. because the arresting officer knows that the
entire process is being scrutinized.”
   Brin argues, convincingly, that the proliferation of cameras—and other
surveillance technology—is the inevitable result of the progress of technol¬
ogy. To him, the important question is: Who controls the cameras? As he
sees it, mutual surveillance—the citizens and the state watching each
other—can transform ubiquitous surveillance from oppression to mutual
accountability. And there is some evidence to support this view.
   During the Cold War, mutual surveillance played an important part
in preventing the United States and the Soviet Union from dropping
nuclear bombs on each other.
   After the Soviet Union launched Sputnik in 1957, America was con¬
sumed by a fear of the Soviet Union’s capabilities and their implications.
In 1958, Senator John F. Kennedy claimed that the United States was fall¬
ing behind the Soviets and predicted that “by 1960 the United States will
have lost... its superiority in nuclear striking power.”
   It wasn’t until the United States successfully launched photorecon¬
naissance spy satellites that it was able to measure the missile gap. The
images captured by the satellite showed that the true missile gap ran the
other way: in 1961, the Soviets had just four intercontinental ballistic
missiles, compared to America’s stockpile of 170.
   However, the United States still failed to notice the Soviet missile
buildup in Cuba during the summer of 1962, an intelligence failure that
brought the United States and the Soviet Union to the brink of a nuclear
war. As a result, building better spy satellites became an important part
of the Cold War race.
   In 1972, the United States and the Soviet Union codified their spying
in the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, when each side agreed to use “national
technical means” to verify the other’s compliance with the treaty. Six
years later, President Jimmy Carter acknowledged the importance of the
spy satellites in a speech at the Kennedy Space Center. “Photoreconnais¬
sance satellites have become an important stabilizing factor in world
affairs in the monitoring of arms control agreements,” he said.
   Indeed, overt surveillance can be effective at changing human behav¬
ior. Studies have repeatedly shown that the simple suggestion of being
[H]     DRAGNET NAHM

watched can encourage people to behave more cooperatively—even if
there is no actual surveillance being conducted.
   The belief that another person is present triggers a state of “psycho¬
logical arousal,” even if that “person” is not real, according to Ryan Calo
of the University of Washington. In one study, people who stared at a
photo of a bug-eyed robot donated 30 percent more money into a com¬
munal pool in a computer game than those who felt they weren’t being
watched.
   In 2011, researchers at Newcastle University in Britain hung posters
of staring human eyes at eye level in random locations in the campus
cafeteria for thirty-two days. They found that people were twice as likely
to clean up after themselves when they finished eating, compared to the
locations where posters of flowers or other benign images were displayed.
The following year, a similar group of researchers at the university posted
signs near the bicycle racks around campus that said, “Cycle Thieves: We
Are Watching You,” with text printed over a photograph of human eyes.
Bicycle thefts decreased by 62 percent in the locations with the new post¬
ers, but they increased in those locations without posters (by 65 percent),
suggesting that the thieves had moved their activities to “safer” locations.
“The effectiveness of this extremely cheap and simple intervention sug¬
gests that there can be considerable crime-reduction benefits to engaging
the psychology of surveillance, even in the absence of surveillance itself,”
the researchers wrote.
      Surveillance theater—the pretense of surveillance, conducted by
humanlike eyes or robots—does appear to cause people to treat each other
better. But the jury is still out about whether surveillance conducted by
cameras deters crime.
      A 2008 analysis by the California Research Bureau of forty-four stud¬
ies of closed-circuit television surveillance found that 43 percent of the
studies showed no effect on crime, while 41 percent showed statistically
significant crime reduction.
      In 2011, the Urban Institute analyzed camera surveillance systems in
Baltimore, Chicago, and Washington, D.C., and found similarly con¬
flicted results. In Baltimore, the authors found that a network of five hun¬
dred cameras that was monitored around the clock by a team of trained
retired police officers contributed to a 35 percent drop in incidents of
overall crime per month in one neighborhood. But cameras in other
                                                     STATE DF SURVEILLANCE   [45]

neighborhoods proved less successful. Similarly, in Chicago, which has
installed a multimillion-dollar surveillance program with more than
eight thousand cameras, the Urban Institute found that the cameras
contributed to a 12 percent drop in crime in Humboldt Park but pro¬
vided no statistically significant decline in crime in West Garfield Park.
And in Washington, D.C., the Urban Institute found that surveillance
cameras had no statistically significant impact on crime.
   One reason for the conflicting results: many factors can contribute to
a drop in crime, and it’s difficult to isolate camera surveillance from other
factors, such as increased police patrols or improved lighting.
   In 2004, Leon Hempel and Eric Topfer, writing from the Center for
Technology and Society in Berlin, analyzed studies of closed-circuit
television (CCTV) use in Europe and found that many of the studies
lacked control groups to compare crime trends in the areas where cam¬
eras were installed to crime trends in the wider areas without cameras,
and lacked analysis of the displacement of crime from the target areas to
other areas.
   The few studies that have used control groups show little support for
the theory that cameras can prevent crime. Another Urban Institute study
from 2011 analyzing the impact of surveillance cameras on crime in park¬
ing lots—and using a randomized controlled trial method—showed that
the cameras made no real difference. The study compared a year’s worth of
car-related crime in twenty-five parking lots near Metro stations in Wash¬
ington, D.C., that had installed motion-activated cameras with identical
crimes in twenty-five similar “control” parking lots with no cameras
installed. Although these were digital still cameras, researchers posted
signs that gave the impression of constant camera surveillance of the
parking lot. The study found that “the cameras had no discernable impact
on crime.”
   And some evidence even suggests that simple streetlights may be as
good at deterring crime as surveillance cameras. In 2004, the criminolo¬
gists Brandon Welsh and David Farrington analyzed thirty-two studies
conducted in the United States, Canada, and Britain to determine whether
CCTV deterred crime more effectively than simple streetlights. Their
conclusion: streetlights and CCTV were equally effective in deterring
property crime—and neither one was very good at deterring violent
crime. They theorized that cameras and streetlights both “act as a catalyst
[45]   DRAGNET NATION

to stimulate crime reduction through a change in perceptions, attitudes
and behavior of residents and potential offenders.”
   The authors of the Urban Institute study speculated that cameras
are effective only when they are actively monitored by law enforcement
agents, who act quickly upon the information obtained by the cameras.
           .

“The technology is only as good as the manner in which it is employed,”
they wrote.
   In other words, surveillance cameras work to influence human behav¬
ior only when people are convinced that a human being is on the other
side of the camera watching them.



It is also not clear that surveillance conducted by computer data analysis
helps catch terrorists before they strike.
   After all, several terrorist plots have slipped through the surveillance
dragnets. Since 9/11 there has been a series of attempted terrorist attacks.
The most notable include:


   • The Shoe Bomber. In 2001, Richard Colvin Reid tried and failed to
detonate a bomb in his shoe while on a flight from Paris to Miami.
   • The LAX Shooter. In 2002, Hesham Mohamed Hadayet, an Egyp¬
tian, opened fire at the El A1 ticket counter in Los Angeles International
Airport, killing two and wounding several others.
   • The Fort Hood Shooter. In 2009, U.S. Army major Nidal Malik
Hasan entered a deployment center at Fort Hood in Texas, jumped on a
desk, shouted “Allahu Akbar,” and opened fire with two pistols. He killed
thirteen people and injured forty-three others.
   • The Underwear Bomber. On Christmas Day 2009, Umar Farouk
Abdulmutallab attempted to detonate explosives sewn into his under¬
garments aboard a flight to Detroit from Amsterdam. His device did not
explode, but simply ignited—injuring Abdulmutallab and two other pas¬
sengers.
   • The Times Square Bomber. In 2010, Faisal Shahzad, who had
trained with terrorists in Pakistan, tried but failed to detonate a car
bomb in New York’s Times Square.
   • The Boston Marathon Bombers. In 2013, Tamerlan and Dzhokhar
Tsarnaev allegedly deposited homemade bombs near the finish line of
                                                     STATE OF SURVEILLANCE   [47]

the Boston Marathon. The explosions injured hundreds of people and
killed three, including an eight-year-old boy.


   Surveillance advocates point out that these statistics don’t take into
account the attacks that were prevented—many of which remain secret.
However, for the first time, we do have some evidence of deterred
attacks.
   In the wake of the Snowden leaks, General Keith Alexander, the direc¬
tor of the NS A, disclosed that the agency’s controversial phone and Inter¬
net dragnets had “contributed to our understanding, and, in many cases,
helped enable the disruption of terrorist plots” in fifty-four cases.
   He didn’t specify the exact cases—although he did say most of them
were foreign—but he did highlight the case of Najibullah Zazi. In 2009,
Zazi was arrested just days before he and friends were allegedly planning
to carry out a suicide bombing in the New York City subway.
   According to Alexander, Zazi was swept up in a dragnet called “Oper¬
ation High-Rise.” The NSA found e-mails from Zazi among e-mails
between the United States and Pakistan that it was monitoring under the
PRISM dragnet that sweeps up the U.S. end of international e-mails.
   Within those communications, the NSA also found a telephone num¬
ber. It then used the Patriot Act dragnet of all telephone calls placed in
the United States to locate other numbers that were connected to the first
number. “We found Zazi was talking to a guy in New York who had con¬
nections to other terrorist elements,” Alexander said.
    Once the FBI was alerted, its agents used traditional law enforce¬
ment techniques. They followed Zazi as he drove to New York City from
his home in Colorado. When he arrived, the FBI asked the Port Author¬
ity to stop Zazi at a checkpoint on the George Washington Bridge, but
nothing was found in his car. Zazi was allowed to drive away, but he was
spooked by the surveillance. A few days later, he flew back to Denver with¬
out carrying out his plot.
   Zazi was arrested in Colorado and later pleaded guilty to charges
including conspiracy to use weapons of mass destruction and providing
material support to al-Qaeda. He has not yet been sentenced.
    But it is not clear that the government needed dragnets to catch Zazi.
If Zazi was e-mailing with terrorists under surveillance, a search war¬
rant would have sufficed to capture his communications. Similarly, once
 [4B]   DRAGNET NATION

his phone number was identified, a judge would most likely have approved
pulling the calling records for that phone.
    When closely questioned by the Senate about whether the dragnets
were “critical” to catching Zazi, General Alexander hedged. He said phone
records were not critical and didn’t answer whether the e-mail dragnets
were critical to catching Zazi. And even President Obama was lukewarm
when describing the use of NSA dragnets in catching Zazi. “We might have
caught him some other way,” he said in a television interview with Charlie
Rose. “But at the margins, we are increasing our chances of preventing a
catastrophe like that through these programs.”
    Is mass surveillance worth it when its fiercest advocates can only say
that it “contributed to our understanding” of cases “at the margins”?

                                     -|J|-


Dragnets are also a double-edged sword. If intelligence agencies pick up
a lead but don’t pursue it, they are often blamed in the event of an attack.
That’s what happened in the cases of the underwear bomber, the Fort
Hood shooter, and the Boston Marathon bombers. The perpetrators had
all been flagged as terrorist threats at some time prior to their attacks.
    In their book Enemies Within: Inside the NYPD’s Secret Spying Unit
and Bin Laden’s Final Plot Against America, the journalists Matt Apuzzo
and Adam Goldman chronicle how the New York Police Department’s
indiscriminate surveillance of Muslims in New York City failed to catch
Najibullah Zazi and his friends, as they dreamed up their terrorism plot
in Queens. The NYPD’s “rakers” had surveilled Zazi’s neighborhood res¬
taurants, his mosque, and even the travel agency where he bought his
airline tickets to Pakistan. “After years of raking, the NYPD knew where
New York s Muslims were,” Apuzzo and Goldman wrote. “But they still
didn’t know where the terrorists were.”
   The father of Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab, the underwear bomber,
had warned the American embassy in Nigeria of his son’s radical views
and that his son had disappeared and might have traveled to Yemen. A
White House investigation found that “several agencies” had obtained
information about Abdulmutallab prior to the attempted attack but had
not placed him on a watch list.
   An FBI field office had been monitoring Fort Hood shooter Nidal
Malik Hasan’s communications with radical Islamic cleric Anwar al-
                                                     STATE OF SURVEILLANCE   [49]

Awlaki but hadn’t taken further action before he opened fire at Fort
Hood. And the future Boston Marathon bomber Tamerlan Tsarnaev had
been in the National Counterterrorism Center’s database for at least a
year prior to his attack.
   Some research suggests that collecting vast amounts of data simply
can’t predict rare events like terrorism. A 2006 paper by Jeff Jotias, an
IBM research scientist, and Jim Harper, the director of information pol¬
icy at the Cato Institute, concluded that terrorism events aren’t common
enough to lend themselves to large-scale computer data mining.
   After all, Zazi was buying nail-polish remover to build an acetone
explosive, Abdulmutallab was sewing explosives into his underwear, and
Hasan was sending fan mail to al-Awlaki. Each event had its own distinct
patterns. By comparison, data mining for patterns works well in pursu¬
ing credit card and insurance fraud, where fraud is more common.
Credit card companies develop “red flags”—such as transactions in for¬
eign countries, that can alert them to a possible fraud. “Unlike consum¬
ers’ shopping habits and financial fraud, terrorism does not occur with
enough frequency to enable the creation of valid predictive models,” Jonas
and Harper conclude.
   In 2008, the National Academy of Sciences convened dozens of experts
to study counterterrorism data mining. The group reached a similar con¬
clusion: “Highly-automated tools and techniques cannot be easily applied
to the much more difficult problem of detecting and preempting a terror¬
ist attack, and success in doing so may not be possible at all.”
   Some intelligence officials have hinted that they share the same pessi¬
mism about their ability to sort through vast amounts of data to pre¬
dict the next attack. In a 2012 speech, Matthew Olsen, the director
of the National Counterterrorism Center, said, “If there is another
attack, the likelihood is that you could look back retrospectively and
find some hint or some clue in the vast amount of data that we have
access to.”
   And after the Boston Marathon bombings, the city’s police commis¬
sioner, Ed Davis, went even further, telling Congress that more techno¬
logical surveillance wouldn’t have helped. “There’s no computer that s going
to spit out a terrorist’s name,” he said. Instead, the best leads come from
people who alert “law enforcement when something awry is identified.
That really needs to happen and should be our first step.
[501   DRAGNET NATION


                                    A.



So what can we conclude about life in a state of surveillance?
   The evidence suggests that human surveillance, or perceived surveil¬
lance through pictures of human eyes or cameras actively monitored by
humans, can modify behavior to promote positive social habits, such as
clearing up dishes in a communal cafeteria, and sometimes can deter
property crimes. However, there is some evidence that suggests that street
lighting may be just as effective. Mutually assured surveillance also
appears to have helped prevent mutually assured destruction during the
Cold War.
   However, surveillance does not appear to be good for predicting ter¬
rorism, as many terrorist events have slipped through the dragnets. Even
the Stasi failed to predict the collapse of the East German regime in 1989.
And the flood of surveillance data can be overwhelming and confound¬
ing to those who are charged with sorting through it to find terrorists.
   But ubiquitous, covert surveillance does appear to be very good at
repression. People who were indiscriminately and secretly monitored—
whether in East Germany or in the Finnish study—were found to censor
their behavior and speech.
   The question then becomes: Are the benefits of ubiquitous, indiscrim¬
inate, dragnet surveillance worth living in a culture of fear?
FREEDOM Df ASSOCIATION


Y  asir Afifi no longer believes in coincidences. If he sees the same car
    twice while driving, he tenses up and ponders changing his route.
    “Things that happen by coincidence I examine like a scientist,” he says.
    Paranoia doesn’t come naturally to Yasir. His temperament is sunny,
his gait is springy, and his handshake is firm. Just twenty-three years old,
he exudes the eternal optimism of a born salesman. But ever since Yasir
found that he was being surveilled by the FBI, he has become extremely
cautious.
   Yasir moved out of his bachelor pad—which he shared with three
friends—and married a woman with two daughters from a previous mar¬
riage. He spends evenings at home helping the girls with their homework.
He has stopped using Facebook except for playing a few games. “I’m one
of those guys now who believes that everything you type online or say on
the phone goes into a database,” Yasir says.
    He avoids conversations about politics or religion. He started using a
different name at work, Aladdin, because he didn’t want his boss to Google
his name and see news about his FBI surveillance. He is humorless about
pranks that involve breaking the law. If a friend suggests an April Fools’
joke, he says, “I would say, ‘What you are saying is wrong, it’s illegal.’
Even if they say it’s just a joke, I’ll say, ‘Delete my number.   He estimates
he has stopped hanging out with about 90 percent of his previous friends
  [52]   DRAGNET NATION

 who, he says, “liked to go get drunk or high and do stupid stuff.” He
 rarely speaks to his best friend from childhood who posts online about
 smoking marijuana and spends his free time playing video games.
     Over a leisurely lunch at an Indian restaurant with Yasir and his wife,
 Angelina Asfour, I asked her how he had changed since the surveillance.
 She told me, “He’s basically the same. He just doesn’t have any of the
 same friends.”
    Yasir added: It just made me really cautious about who I associate
 with.”




 Categorizing people by their associations is a favorite tactic of repressive
 regimes. The Stasi were obsessed with identifying anyone with an asso¬
 ciation to West Germany. The Nazis were obsessed with identifying any¬
 one with Jewish blood. The Iranians are obsessed with identifying anyone
 related to the United States. The Chinese are obsessed with identifying
 any potential opposition to the government.
    That’s why freedom of association is one of the rights enshrined in
the United Nations Declaration of Human Rights, which was adopted
after the atrocities of World War II.
    Generally, freedom of association means that people should not be
prevented from joining groups or, alternatively, coerced into joining groups.
In the United States, the First Amendment protecting freedom of speech
and freedom of assembly has also conferred the right to freedom of
association.
    In 1958, the Supreme Court ruled that the state of Alabama’s attempt
to obtain the membership lists of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People was unconstitutional, because it could
chill members First Amendment right to freedom of association and
that freedom of association was essential to the liberty promised by the
Fourteenth Amendment. Revelation of the identity of its rank-and-file
members has exposed these members to economic reprisal, loss of
employment, threat of physical coercion, and other manifestations of
public hostility,” wrote Justice John Marshall Harlan in his majority opin¬
ion. “Under these circumstances, we think it apparent that compelled
disclosure of petitioner s Alabama membership is likely to affect adversely
                                                      FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION   [53]

the ability of petitioner and its members to pursue their collective effort
to foster beliefs which they admittedly have the right to advocate.”
   In today’s world, however, the idea of protecting only members of
a group is an outdated way of looking at freedom of association. Yasir
didn’t have to join a group like “Young Muslim Men of Santa Clara” for his
associations to be noted by the authorities. His digital footprints left a trail
of associations that could be scooped up by the FBI with very little effort.
   In fact, it can be argued that the very purpose of much technology these
days is to unveil hidden associations. Consider people who track their own
movements using Fitbit pedometers and other technology tools—they are
studying their own movements in order to better understand the hidden
associations. Do they feel better on days that they walk more?
   Or consider my husband, who has installed sensors in our walls to
monitor our electricity, gas, and water usage. He is trying to unveil hidden
associations. And it has worked: we now know that our toaster is incred¬
ibly inefficient and that our water usage is weirdly spiking. (I blame my
daughter’s long showers, but we haven’t quite corralled the data to prove
that yet.)
   I’m all for learning from my own data. But the same technology
that we use to monitor ourselves is also being used by others to moni¬
tor us and to build dossiers about our likes and dislikes, about our asso¬
ciations.
   In today’s world, every choice we make associates us with a person, a
place, or an idea. Visit a political website; you are associated with its views.
Sit in a restaurant near somebody who is being watched; your cell phone is
now part of the “community of interest” that may be monitored by author¬
ities. Those associations are scooped up and entered into databases where
people use them to make predictions about your future behavior.
    Even proponents of the so-called big data movement admit that these
issues are perplexing. In their 2013 book Big Data: A Revolution That
Will Transform How We Live, Work, and Think, Viktor Mayer-Schonberger
and Kenneth Cukier state that as big data is increasingly used to make
predictions about people’s behavior, safeguards will have to be put in
place, which may include the creation of a new profession of algorith-
mists” who will conduct audits of big data usage. “Without such safeguards,
the very idea of justice may be undermined,” they write.
 m      DRAGNET NATION

    And no less a big data proponent than Eric Schmidt, the chairman of
 Google, warns in his book The New Digital Age, written with Jared
 Cohen, that the rise of “near-permanent data storage” will usher in an
 era where “people will be held responsible for their virtual associations,
 past and present.” Although Schmidt and Cohen are mostly bullish about
 how technology will empower citizens, in a section of the book called
 “Police State 2.0,” they warn, “Everything a regime would need to build
 an incredibly intimidating digital police state is commercially available
 now.” In the hands of a police state, they write, “guilt by association will
 take on new meaning with this level of monitoring.”



 The surveillance of Yasir Ahfi appears to have started with an innocent
question about why deodorant could not pass through an airport
screening.
    On June 24, 2010, a user of the social networking website Reddit.com
named “JayClay” posted a question: “So if my deodorant could be a bomb,
why are you just chucking it in the bin?”
    His post generated hundreds of comments. Some Reddit users dubbed
the deodorant ban “Security Theater.” Others talked about items they
had smuggled onto planes—nail clippers, bamboo needles, razors, knives.
One user suggested that bombing a mall would be a “softer target.”
    On June 25, a user named “Khaledthegypsy” weighed in: “bombing a
mall seems so easy to do,” he wrote, “i mean all you really need is a bomb,
a regular outfit so you arent the crazy guy in a trench coat trying to blow
up a mall and a shopping bag. i mean if terrorism were actually a legiti¬
mate threat, think about how many fucking malls would have blown up
already.”
    Khaledthegypsy signed off with a sort of joke: “... so ... yea ... now
i’m surely bugged : /”
   Khaledthegypsy was really Khaled Ibrahim, a nineteen-year-old com¬
munity college student in Santa Clara, California, and Yasir Afifi’s best
friend. Khaled was more accurate than he knew. Four months later, he
and Yasir went to get the oil changed in Yasir’s blue Lincoln LS 2000
sedan. When the car was up on its hoist, Yasir noticed a wire hanging
from the undercarriage. The wire was connected to what looked like a giant
walkie-talkie stuck to the bottom of his car.
                                                   FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION   [55]

   “That is not part of the car,” Yasir told the mechanic.
   When the mechanic tugged on the device, it came off easily; it had
been attached to the undercarriage by a magnet. Yasir thought to him¬
self: “This is either a very outdated type of tracking device or supposed to
look like a pipe bomb.”
   Born and raised in Santa Clara, Yasir had moved to Egypt with his
Egyptian-born father when he was twelve years old, after his parents’
divorce. When he turned eighteen, he returned to the United States to go
to a community college, get a job, and live on his own. Yasir and Khaled,
whose family was also Egyptian, had been best friends in elementary school
and reconnected when Yasir returned to the United States.
   Soon after Yasir’s return to the United States, he says, an FBI agent
showed up at his door when he was out and left a card asking him to call.
When Yasir called, the agent told him that the FBI wanted to talk to him
because “we got an anonymous tip that you might be a threat to national
security.” Yasir said he would be happy to answer questions, but that he
first wanted to consult a lawyer.
   Yasir called a prepaid legal service, which advised him not to meet
with the agent. So he declined the FBI’s invitation and forgot about it. He
threw himself into his business management classes and his job selling
computer equipment to businesses in the Middle East.
   But after he discovered the device under his car, his thoughts returned
to the FBI. He threw the device in the backseat and drove home to show
it off to his roommates.
   One roommate was worried it looked like a bomb. Yasir wondered
how much he could get if he sold the device. Khaled, more suspicious by
nature, suggested first posting it on Reddit to find out what it was. And
so at 10:15 p.m. Khaled uploaded a picture of the device to Reddit with a
simple question: “Does this mean the FBI is after us?”
   By midnight, Reddit commenters had identified the device as a Guard¬
ian ST820 GPS tracking unit manufactured by Cobham, a company that
sells and markets its products exclusively to law enforcement agencies. In
short: “Yes, FBI or Police is after you,” wrote user “jeanmarcp.”
   At first, Yasir was excited. The post made the front page of Reddit.
More than three thousand people commented on the article. Advice was
raining in from all around. Yasir recalled thinking, “This is awesome.”
   The next day, his excitement began to fade. Yasir’s roommates told
 [56]   DRAGNET NATION

 him that a man and a woman were standing by his car in the apartment
 complex’s parking lot. In a bit of bravado, Yasir went downstairs to con¬
 front them. They were still standing next to his car, which was parked
 inside the electronic gates that control access to his apartment complex.
 “Hi, is there something I can help you with?” Yasir asked. “You’re stand¬
 ing right next to my car.”
    “Do you know your tags are expired?” the man said with a laugh.
    “How is that your business?” Yasir asked. “Please step away from my
 car while I reverse.”
    For a moment, it seemed that Yasir would leave the strangers behind.
 He pulled out of the apartment complex and turned left onto the street.
 Then he heard the squeal of tires and saw two dark SUVs pull up
behind him. They followed him for half a block, and then they flashed
their lights. In his rearview mirror, he saw that a third car had joined—a
black Chevy Caprice.
    Yasir pulled over, having traveled only a few hundred feet. He was in
front of the elementary school across the street from his apartment com¬
plex. Six people walked up to his car—the man and woman who had
been beside his car and four agents wearing bulletproof vests holding
guns.
   Yasir’s stomach felt fluttery and his hands went cold. But he tried to
be tough. An agent identified himself as “police” and asked about his
expired tag. Is that why an army pulled me over?” Yasir responded. The
police officer asked if he could search the car, and Yasir said yes. But
instead of searching the vehicle, the police officer asked Yasir to step out
of the car and speak to FBI agents standing behind the car.
   Yasir got out of the car. The officer patted him down for weapons and
then let him approach the FBI agents—the same man and woman
who had been standing by his car earlier. The man identified himself as
Vincent and the woman as fennifer.
    Vincent asked for the tracking device back. “I don’t have it,” Yasir
said. “How do you know I didn’t sell it?”
   Vincent played tough, declaring the device to be federal property and
threatening to bring federal charges against Yasir. “Give us the device or
you can be arrested for obstruction of justice,” Vincent threatened. Yasir
asked for a lawyer but got no response.
                                                  FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION   [57]

   Jennifer played nice. “We just want the device back, just give it back
to us and we’ll leave you alone,” she said.
   Yasir suggested that he could have his attorney contact them to make
arrangements to return the device. But that only incensed Vincent, who
yelled that Yasir must turn over the device immediately.
   “Why are you doing this to me?” Yasir asked.
   Vincent pulled out a piece of paper with Khaled’s Reddit post about
bombing a mall.
   “This is why we were tracking you,” Vincent said.
   “Why don’t you put this device under his car?” Yasir said.
   “Oh, you guys are together every day,” Vincent said.
   “So what do you think about what he said?” Jennifer asked.
   “That’s so stupid,” Yasir said. “Khaled is a very smart guy. But what he
wrote was very stupid.... Why don’t you go talk to him?”
   Eventually, however, Yasir’s toughness began to crumble in the face of
men with guns. He agreed to return the device, which was sitting on the
coffee table in the apartment.
   Yasir, Jennifer, and Vincent walked across the street, back into the
apartment complex, as his friends and neighbors watched. The four
agents with guns followed them. Yasir buzzed them all into the elec¬
tronic gates, and they walked up the outdoor stairs to his second-floor
apartment.
   As Yasir unlocked the door, Vincent tried to enter the apartment with
him. “Step back from the door,” Yasir said.
   His roommates were watching TV in the living room. “Hey guys,
there are FBI right outside the door,” Yasir told them. Before they had a
chance to respond, he grabbed the device and took it outside to give to
Vincent.
   “Are you going to arrest me?” Yasir asked.
   “No,” Vincent replied. “But we’d like to ask you a few more questions.”
   Now that the tracking device was out of his hands, Yasir was curious
to hear more about how extensively he had been monitored by the FBI.
So he agreed to a brief talk.
   He walked with them back to their cars. The four agents with guns
drove away, leaving Yasir alone with Vincent and Jennifer. She gave him
a business card identifying herself as FBI agent Jennifer Kanaan.
 [58]     DRAGNET NATION

    They began peppering him with questions that seemed to be about
 jihad.
    Had he traveled to Syria, Iran, or Afghanistan? No.
    Had he ever had any type of overseas military training? No.
    Was he religious? “I go to mosque on Friday,” Yasir said.
    Jennifer wrote down on her notebook, “Yasir Afifi is not a threat to
 national security,” and showed the page to Yasir.
    Now it was Yasir’s turn to ask questions. “How do I know you guys
 aren’t following me everywhere?” he asked.
    Jennifer responded in Arabic. “I really like your taste in restaurants,”
 she said.
    Yasir was floored. “You speak Arabic. Are you kidding me?” he said.
    She continued in Arabic: “We know where you go, we know what you
do, we know you take your girlfriend to Santana Row,” a shopping mall
in San Jose.
    “Wow, what else do you know?” Yasir asked.
        We know you have a new job—congratulations on your new job,”
she said. “We know you are going to Dubai in two weeks.”
   Yasir’s heart sank. He had only talked about the job on the phone,
and he had only discussed the Dubai trip in e-mails. The FBI must have
been listening to his calls and reading his e-mails. He thought to himself:
 Do you also know what color my boxers are?”
   “I’m sure you’re listening to my calls,” he said.
   “Oh, I can’t tell you that,” she replied.
    Am I going to see you guys again? Are you going to pull me over
again with your army?” Yasir said.
   “Don’t worry about it, you’re boring,” she said. “You’re probably not
going to hear from us again. No need to contact a lawyer.”
   Yasir didn t heed the FBI’s advice. After the agents left, a friend put
him in touch with the Council on American-Islamic Relations, a Muslim
legal advocacy group.
   On March 2, 2011, CAIR attorneys filed a complaint in federal court
alleging that the warrantless GPS tracking device violated Yasir’s Fourth
Amendment rights, that compiling files about his religious behavior vio¬
lated his First Amendment rights, and that the surveillance created “an
objective chill on his First Amendment activities,” among other charges.
   The complaint alleged that Yasir now felt fear “when expressing his
                                                     FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION   [53]

political views and maintaining certain lawful associations” and that
the surveillance “deterred others from associating with him, prospective
employers most notably.”
   Yasir not only sought an injunction against future tracking, but also
requested the data about his location be deleted from the government
records.
   The FBI won the right to file a secret response to Yasir’s complaint. In its
limited public filings, the bureau said that its investigation of Yasir was
closed and that its warrantless tracking of Yasir was legal at that time.
(Since then, the Supreme Court has said that it is not acceptable for agents
to trespass when installing a GPS tracking device.) The government also
argued that Yasir could not point to any concrete evidence of his First
Amendment rights being curtailed in the future: “He has not demonstrated
a concrete, imminent threat of such conduct occurring in the future.”

                                      4 ~




The First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution is a negative right. It
states what cannot be done: “Congress shall make no law respecting an
establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or
abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the peo¬
ple peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress
of grievances.”
    As a result, it’s not always easy to tell what the First Amendment is
for. To help me sort through the legal thickets, I sat down with the renowned
First Amendment scholar Lee Bollinger, who is also the president of
Columbia University. “First Amendment theory can be described as para¬
noia,” Bollinger said. The founders believed that a functioning democracy
required freedom to criticize the government. As a result, an important
test for any First Amendment legal case is: Does the activity in question
limit participation in democratic debate?
    The Supreme Court has been extremely cautious about curbing any
activities if those restrictions might chill public participation in democ¬
racy. For instance, in 1964, the Supreme Court ruled that the New York
Times Company was not liable for publishing an advertisement that
included untruths about a public official because a rule compelling the
critic of official conduct to guarantee the truth of all his factual asser¬
tions ... leads to a comparable ‘self-censorship.’ ” And in 2000, the Supreme
 [SO]   DRAGNET NATION

 Court ruled that the Boy Scouts of America did not have to accept a gay
 member because forcing groups to accept members would violate the
 freedom of expressive association. “The First Amendment protects
 expression, be it of the popular variety or not,” Chief Justice William H.
 Rehnquist wrote.
    But the high court has not been receptive to the argument that sur¬
 veillance is harmful to free society. In 1972, the Court ruled 5-4 that
 U.S. citizens who had been spied on by a U.S. Army surveillance program
 could not demonstrate any specific harm and thus lacked a “personal
 stake in the outcome of the controversy” required for judicial redress. And
 again in 2013, the Supreme Court ruled 5-4 that U.S. citizens who had
been spied upon by the NS As warrantless wiretapping program could not
prove “concrete, particularized and actual or imminent” injury that
would require judicial action.
    However, I was struck by the eloquence of the dissent from Justices
William O. Douglas and Thurgood Marshall in the 1972 case. They called
the army surveillance program a “cancer in our body politic” that is “at
war with the principles of the First Amendment.” They wrote: “When an
intelligence officer looks over every nonconformist’s shoulder in the
library, or walks invisibly by his side in a picket line, or infiltrates his club,
the America once extolled as the voice of liberty heard around the world
no longer is cast in the image which Jefferson and Madison designed, but
more in the Russian image.”



After their brush with the FBI, Yasir and Khaled were both paranoid
about every car that drove by. But slowly, the fear wore off and a new feel¬
ing set in: acceptance of being watched.
    What can you do? Khaled told me when we met at a Starbucks in
Santa Clara, a year after the event. “Were about to lose all our privacy
anyway. Technology took it away from us.”
   Khaled walked me through what happened after the FBI showed up
at Yasir s door. A few days later, the FBI agent Jennifer called Khaled’s
cell phone and left a message. He didn’t call her back. Since then, he said,
he often got calls from a blocked number—when he picked up all he heard
was a whooshing sound. “They’ll call me twice a day for two days and
then not for three weeks,” he told me.
                                                    FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION   [BI]

   Initially, he looked under his car every time he got in, but after a
while he stopped. He figured that if the FBI wanted to follow him, it
would find a way.
   His Reddit posts slowed to a trickle. Where he used to post long trea¬
tises about injustice, he switched to mostly short, noncontroversial com¬
ments.
   Khaled also stopped hanging out with Yasir. When Redditers began
pestering Khaled for news about the GPS tracking case, Khaled wrote,
“He just kind of became a douche and flaky on us so we kind of fell
apart.”
   When Khaled and I met, he had just returned from a visit to Egypt
and he told me he was thinking of moving back there. He said that peo¬
ple in the United States are too complacent as they watch their rights slip
away.
   “Here it’s the illusion of freedom,” he said. “There it is actual freedom.
You can do whatever you want.”



It was hard for me to argue with Khaled that he should be more optimis¬
tic about his freedom. Unfortunately, Muslims in America have often
been treated as suspects in a police lineup ever since al-Qaeda’s attack on
America on September 11, 2001.
   After 9/11, the FBI set up a “domain management” system to analyze
where Muslims lived, using commercial data, and to target those com¬
munities with informants. Not surprisingly, this corresponded with an
increase in terrorism prosecutions of Muslims. The investigative jour¬
nalist Trevor Aaronson examined the 508 terrorism prosecutions brought
by the FBI since 9/11 and found that nearly half of the cases involved the
use of informants and one-third involved stings. Aaronson reported that
informants often target vulnerable, desperate people and lure them into
a phony terrorist plot. “There hasn’t been yet a sting operation on people
who had weapons themselves,” Aaronson said. “It’s almost universally the
case that the entire means is provided by the FBI.”
    One of the most aggressive efforts to spy on Muslims has taken place
in New York City, through a secret collaboration between the New York
Police Department and the Central Intelligence Agency to infiltrate Mus¬
lim political groups, neighborhoods, events, and student groups in New
 [B2]   DRAGNET NATION

 York and New Jersey. In 2008, an undercover agent accompanied a Mus¬
 lim student group from the City College of New York on a whitewater
 rafting trip. In 2009, undercover NYPD officers set up a safe house near
 Rutgers University in New Jersey, but their cover was blown when the
 building superintendent suspected them of being a terrorist cell and
 called the police.
    Consider the story of Asad Dandia, a twenty-year-old New York City
 student who was surveilled by an NYPD informant. In 2011, Dandia
 cofounded a charity called Fesabeelillah Services of NYC, which raised
 money to feed the homeless and indigent. In March 2012, he was contacted
 on Facebook by a man named Shamiur Rahman, who said he wanted to
 get involved with the charity. “We had several friends in common, and I
 was happy to help him in his quest for religious self-improvement, so I
 introduced him to my friends in FSNYC,” Dandia wrote in a blog post
 describing his surveillance.
    Rahman and Dandia, who were about the same age, became close
friends. Rahman visited Dandia’s parents’ house several times, and once
spent the night. Rahman was also nosy. “Rahman would ask everyone he
met for their phone number, often within minutes of meeting them,” Dan¬
dia wrote. He also often tried to take photos with or of people he met
through me.”
    On October 2, 2012, Rahman posted a message on Facebook reveal¬
ing that he was an NYPD informant. He later told the press that he became
an informant after a string of minor marijuana arrests and that he was
paid as much as $1,000 a month. But Rahman eventually tired of spying
on his friends and quit. I hated that I was using people to make money,”
Rahman told the Associated Press. “I made a mistake.”
   Rahman’s revelation shocked his friends. “When I learned the news, I
froze, Dandia wrote in the blog post. “It was a terrifying feeling. I couldn’t
believe that an NYPD informant had been in my home.” The incident
also cast suspicion on Dandia s charity, which had been renamed Mus¬
lims Giving Back. The local mosque asked Dandia to stop holding charity
meetings at the mosque and to stop soliciting donations from congregants.
The charity suffered financially and emotionally, Dandia says. Dandia and
other members have started blurring out their faces in photos they post
to the charity s Facebook page. Dandia has joined in a lawsuit against the
New York Police Department.
                                                   FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION   [G3]

   “I used to try to be as inclusive and public as possible about my chari¬
table work—now, I communicate mainly with people I know personally,”
Dandia wrote.



Yasir Afifi has also withdrawn behind a protective shield. He no longer
hangs out with his childhood friend Khaled. He is busy working as a
software salesman and taking night classes to complete his college degree.
He saved up to buy a house, and his wife is pregnant.
   “If you’ve grown up and your best friend hasn’t, it’s hard to hang out,”
he told me. “At this point in my life, me hanging out with him is a com¬
plete waste of my time.”
   Yasir can’t afford to take chances. He believes he is still on some sort
of watch list. When he and his wife returned from a trip to Puerto Val-
larta, Mexico, in 2012, he was questioned for nearly an hour upon
arrival, while federal agents searched his bags and asked questions. He
said the agents took his wife’s phone but that he refused to give them his
phone. “They were asking questions they had no right to ask. They asked
my wife why she broke up with her last husband,” he told me. “I was so
angry.”
   But he tries to keep his anger in check. “Would I like some policy
where they stopped harassing Muslim Americans? Yes,” he told me as we
stood in the spot where he had been pulled over by the FBI. “Would I like
if they wrote me an apology for putting [the GPS tracking device] on my
car? Yes. But these are things I’m not depending on. I’m going forward
with my life. I want to be wealthy. I want to have a nice family. I want the
American Dream. I want others to have it, too.”
   A year after that conversation, Yasir achieved his dream. He and his
wife bought a house in South San Jose. One hot day, I came to visit, driv¬
ing my rental car to their cul-de-sac. I parked next to the small swim¬
ming pool shared by all the houses on the block.
   Inside, Yasir showed me a brand-new leather couch set in the living
room, the colorful bedspreads and curtains in the girls’ bedroom. A grill
was set up in the tiny side yard.
   As I toured the house, I kept thinking about my relatives who immi¬
grated to the United States from Russia at the turn of the twentieth century.
They were escaping a world where Jews were persecuted for their beliefs.
[64]   DRAGNET NATION

They suffered a lot to come here—my great-grandmother worked in a
sweatshop, my great-grandfather was a street peddler—but it was worth
it for the freedom.
   Yasir’s family came here from Egypt to seek economic opportunity.
Yasir has worked hard and achieved financial success here. But he has
not tasted as much freedom as was promised. Instead, he has censored
himself and repressed his associations.
   Yasir has the freedom to buy grills and town houses and leather
couches on credit, but apparently not the freedom to associate with people
who make jokes about the government’s ban on deodorant at airports.
THREAT MODELS


In a world where nearly everything is being monitored, it is easy to feel
    hopeless about privacy. Often, when I tell people I have just met that I
    write about privacy, their immediate response is, “I’ve given up. Pri¬
vacy is dead.”
   In truth, I had kind of given up, too. For three years, I had been writ¬
ing about the privacy invasions that technology had made possible. But
I hadn’t done much to try to protect myself. I told myself that it was
because I was too busy, but in fact I was overwhelmed by the impossibil¬
ity of it.
    After many such conversations, I started to feel guilty. Was my report¬
ing about privacy invasions actually contributing to the hopelessness?
     I am a natural optimist: I wanted to believe there was hope. I am also
a born contrarian: I wanted to disprove the doubters. And finally, I am
stubborn: I determined that I would find some hope.
      So I decided, against all odds, to try to evade the dragnets. I would
attempt to avoid being monitored during everyday activities such as read¬
ing and shopping. I would obscure my location—at home and while out
and about. I would seal my e-mails and texts with the digital equivalent
of hot wax. I would find ways to freely associate with people and ideas.
I would try to find a way to protect my kids from building a digital trail
that would haunt them later in their lives.
  [BE]   DRAGNET NATION

     It was a daunting task. “I can’t do it,” I told a close friend. “How would
 I live without a credit card? Without a cell phone? It would be irrespon¬
 sible to my children.”
     But I realized that my questions were exactly what I needed to exam¬
 ine: Was it possible to live in the modern world and evade the dragnets?
 Had I somehow consented to ubiquitous surveillance—trading my data
 for free services or security—as the people in the surveillance business
 contend? What would happen if I tried to withdraw my consent?



 My first step was to identify the threats to my privacy.
     In the computer security industry, identifying your adversaries is called
 building your threat model. The idea is that you can protect yourself
 only against known threats. The computer security industry expert Bruce
 Schneier calls this the first lesson of security: security is a trade-off.
  There s no such thing as absolute security,” he wrote in the introduction
 to his book Schneier on Security. Life entails risk, and all security involves
 trade-offs. We get security by giving something up: money, time, conve¬
nience, capabilities, liberties, etc.” What you give up depends on what you
are trying to protect and whom you are trying to protect it from.
    Focusing on the wrong adversary can be disastrous. Consider the case
of General David Petraeus, the former director of the Central Intelligence
Agency.
    In 2012, the FBI uncovered General Petraeus using a rather low-tech
technique to conduct an extramarital affair with his biographer Paula
Broadwell. Critics decried him for using a shared Gmail account, in which
he and Broadwell left draff e-mails for each other—Foreign Policy maga¬
zine dubbed it old spycraff. But the real problem was that the general
had misjudged his adversary.
   He and his mistress were trying to hide their affair from their spouses.
In that case, a shared Gmail account, accessed from computers not in
their homes, was sufficient protection. But they had not envisioned that
the FBI would begin investigating Broadwell for sending threatening
e-mails to a volunteer event planner in Tampa, Florida, named Jill Kelley.
The FBI obtained the computer IP addresses from which the e-mails had
been sent, most likely through a subpoena to Broadwell s e-mail provider.
                                                            THREAT MODELS   [B7]

FBI agents traced those IP addresses to a variety of public unsecured Wi¬
Fi connections, including several hotels, and then sought hotel guest lists
for the dates the e-mails had been sent. The FBI soon found that Paula
Broadwell was the common guest at those hotels on those dates. And
from there it was a short step to search Broadwell’s e-mail, via either a
search warrant or subpoenas—and to discover her affair with Petraeus.
   If the general and his mistress had attempted to outsmart the FBI,
they would have at the very least needed to take steps to mask the IP
addresses from which they logged in to their accounts, to use encryp¬
tion, and to make sure their accounts were under fake names. Even then,
there’s no guarantee they wouldn’t have been caught.
   After all, perfect privacy is not possible, even if you identify your adver¬
sary correctly.
   Consider another case: Theodore J. Kaczynski, the Unabomber. For a
decade, Kaczynski lived as a hermit in a one-room cabin—with no elec¬
tricity, plumbing, or telephone—in a remote area of Montana while con¬
ducting a series of bombings through the mail that killed three people and
injured twenty-two others. But even the hermit could not evade the FBI
forever. The FBI eventually tracked him down in his cabin due in large
part to the fact that his brother stepped forward to provide an essay Kac¬
zynski had written as a young man that could be compared to a linguis¬
tic analysis of his current writing.
    And that is a good thing: society was better off when the FBI caught
Kaczynski and ended his bombing spree. But the rest of us would be bet¬
ter off building our threat models.



What is my threat model?
  I’m a working journalist with a son in preschool and a daughter in
elementary school. My husband is a professor who travels overseas often
for his research.
    If I were to describe my family in one simple word it would be busy.
We are always running in a million different directions. Privacy and secu¬
rity are exactly the kinds of things that fall through the cracks when you re
always in a rush.
   And yet I want to protect myself and my children from indiscriminate
  [60]   DRAGNET NATION

  tracking. I want us to have the freedom to associate with people and
  places and ideas, without worrying about how those associations might
  constrain our future prospects.
     I also want to protect myself against targeted threats against journal¬
  ists. After all, the Obama administration has been extremely aggressive at
  prosecuting people who pass sensitive material to journalists. Since 2009,
  the administration has charged eight government whistle-blowers with
 allegations of violating the Espionage Act, a law that had been used just
 three times over the previous ninety-two years against government offi¬
 cials accused of providing classified information to journalists.
     My concern is less about myself because it seems that the journalists
 don’t end up in jail too often. Sadly, it is the people who leak information
 to journalists who end up in jail. I want to be able to give my sources a
 pledge of confidentiality that I can honor.
    So, really, I have two threats: indiscriminate tracking and targeted
 attacks against journalists and their sources.



 When building a threat model, it’s also important to assess your own
 strengths and vulnerabilities.
    My strength is that I have been writing about privacy and technol¬
ogy for several years, so I have an army of experts I can call on for help
and guidance. I am also lucky that I do not have any privacy issues that
I have to clean up.” A few years ago, when my book about the social
network MySpace was published, I worked to make my online reputa¬
tion bulletproof. I conferred with search-engine optimization consul¬
tants who helped me build a website and sanitize my social network
profiles so that my Google search results would be dominated by items I
had written about myself, rather than items written by others about me.
   Also, my kids are young and their data are not yet publicly available.
The kids don t have cell phones or computer access. They have limited
access to the iPad and they don’t have any social media accounts
(except for the ones that my daughter’s school has set up for her within
their walled garden). So I don’t have a lot to “clean up” on their front,
either.

   But I have plenty of vulnerabilities. Probably my biggest issue is that I
have no patience. I often take shortcuts instead of hunkering down to
                                                         THREAT MODELS   [B9]

figure out why my technology tools aren’t working. As a result, I am lia¬
ble to leave myself vulnerable to exposure.
   Another huge issue: my home address is known to the world. When
my husband and I bought and renovated our home, I succumbed to the
pleas of a colleague at the Wall Street Journal and blogged about the reno¬
vation for the newspaper’s online real estate section. Although I never
published the exact address of our house, at least one blog identified it
from the photos. So one basic building block of privacy is already gone.
   My husband also doesn’t care about privacy. He is a professor, and
he always jokes that if somebody broke into his files, the number of
readers of his papers would double. Not only does he not care about
privacy, but also his field of work is essentially privacy-invading. He is
a mechanical engineer, and one of his projects is to install remote sen¬
sors to monitor energy usage. In fact, he installed energy sensors in our
home without asking me. I only found out the day we were moving in
and one of his graduate students was in the house finishing up the wir¬
ing for the system.
   That said, the real-time energy monitors that he installed are actually
kind of cool—we can see how much energy we’re using at any given time,
and we can learn from our patterns of usage. Of course, it’s a little weird
that his grad students are also monitoring our energy usage.
    “What do you do on Fridays?” one of his students asked him one day.
“Energy usage spikes on Fridays. It turns out that our cleaning lady comes
on Fridays and runs the vacuum cleaner.
   My kids also don’t care about privacy. To them, “privacy” is just a word
that means “no.” Privacy is why they can’t post videos on YouTube. Pri¬
vacy is why I won’t let them sign up for kids’ social networks. Privacy is
why I complain to their teachers about posting pictures of them on a
non-password-protected blog.
    In fact, my daughter thinks that privacy is something to be defeated.
She delights in trying to guess my passwords. Once, she figured out my
 iPhone password, accessed my phone, changed the password, and then
 forgot what she changed it to, leaving me locked out and forcing me to do
 a factory reset to gain access to the device.
     So I will be fighting this fight alone, at least on the home front. My
 fellow soldiers will be a ramshackle network of technologists, hackers,
 and concerned citizens around the world.
   [70]   DRAGNET NATION




  Now I needed a battle plan for how to defend myself. And I needed to
  determine how far I was going to go: Was I going to live in a bunker? Was
  I going to change my name?
      I read a few books about protecting privacy and they were startlingly
  extreme. In How to Be Invisible: Protect Your Home, Your Children, Your
  Assets, and Your Life, J. J. Luna writes that “your journey to invisibility
  must begin with the first step: separating your name from your home
  address. If your address is already publicly known, he advises moving.
     Luna suggests setting up a limited liability company in New Mexico
  that owns your assets—house, car, and so on. He goes on to suggest that
 you cannot send your children to public school because that will reveal
 your address. “There are only two remedies for this danger,” he writes.
  Either homeschool your kids or put them in a private school willing to
 guarantee their privacy.”
     I can t afford to put my kids in private school or to quit my job and
 homeschool my children. Nor do I want to pursue either of those options.
     Lunas privacy threat model? Private investigators. And even if you
 follow all of his advice, he says, a private investigator with unlimited funds
 will still be able to find you eventually.
    In One Nation, Under Surveillance, Boston T. Party, the pen name of
 Kenneth W. Royce, writes that “the law no longer works because Amer¬
ica has spun off her legal axis.” He advises readers to hoard their guns,
grow their own food, homeschool their children, and boot up their com¬
puters from a CD containing an operating system called Puppy Linux.
    His threat model is a hostile government that he perceives to be ready
to strike at civilians.

   I’m not that paranoid yet. I don’t believe that the government is a lost
cause. I still believe in the legal system and that our system of checks and
balances is mostly working. I’m not ready to start hoarding guns and
growing my own food (aside from a few tomatoes and basil in the back¬
yard each summer). And I’m not planning to start homeschooling, or to
move to an all-cash economy.
   I am trying to defend against a different threat: the rise of indiscrimi¬
nate tracking—the dragnets that aim to capture every element of our lives
                                                            THREAT MODELS     [71]

in a permanent record. I worry that this indiscriminate tracking will pre¬
vent me from associating with certain ideas and people, that it will cause
me economic distress, and that it will create a culture of fear. At its worst,
I am concerned that indiscriminate tracking could enable the creation of
a totalitarian surveillance state.

                                       -4p-                                 A,'


To build my threat model, I consulted with experts of all kinds—from
high-level government officials with security clearances to hackers who
build anti-surveillance tools. Each had a different suggestion. For exam¬
ple, some advised me to use different computers for different purposes—
one for banking, one for personal, one for professional; others recommended
running software that would separate my single computer into three sepa¬
rate compartments, emulating a three-computer setup; others said there
was no point in trying to compartmentalize, as my data would end up
getting mixed up anyway. After many such conversations, I came to real¬
ize that there was no silver bullet.
   I would have to come up with my own battle plan. I built a spread¬
sheet, outlining the threats and my proposed tactics to counter each threat.
Some threats would likely be relatively easy to counter; to avoid online ad
tracking, I would install different types of anti-tracking software and
evaluate which one worked best. But other threats were trickier; I didn’t
know a good tactic to counter automated license plate readers that would
photograph my car’s plate when I drove past. One expert suggested that I
could cover my license plate with a spray or a glass that could foil the
infrared cameras. But in New York, where I live, it’s illegal to cover a
license plate in a way that “distorts a recorded or photographic image of
such number plates.”
   I realized that before I chose my tactics, I needed to develop some
guidelines to govern my behavior. So I developed my own rules of
engagement.


don’t break the law. I am not trying to evade taxes or break the law. So
I will engage only in actions that are legal. That means not obscuring my
license plate.
    Sometimes it’s not clear what is legal. Consider fake driver s licenses.
   [72]   OfiAGNEI NATION

   I asked Mark Eckenwiler, a former surveillance lawyer at the U.S. Depart¬
  ment of Justice, for advice about whether fake IDs are legal.
      Mark pointed me to the statute that makes it illegal to use someone
  else s identification to commit a crime. But he also pointed me to a 2009
  Supreme Court ruling that interprets the statute to mean that the offender
  must know that he is misusing the credentials of an actual person. That
  could imply that it s acceptable to use a fake driver’s license for a fictitious
  person. But then he pointed me to the mail fraud and wire fraud statutes
  that state that it is illegal to engage in “any scheme” to obtain money or
  property by “false or fraudulent promises.”
     Not surprisingly, Mark declined to give me official advice about whether
  to get a fake ID. However, the cases seemed to indicate that I probably
 would be safe with a fake ID in a fictitious name if I didn’t use it for any
 type of fraud.
     But even so, I decided not to get a fake ID. I’d rather be on the safe
 side of the law.


 continue TO live in the modern world.         I am not interested in discon¬
 necting from technology. I believe technology has empowered people to
 make great changes in the world. I simply want to limit the harmful down¬
 sides of a technology-saturated life.
    As a result, I won’t be able to achieve perfect privacy. With a talented
 and determined adversary, almost any measure can be circumvented. John
 J. Strauchs, a former CIA agent who is now a security consultant, told me
 a story about how he was hired to break into the headquarters of a well-
protected financial entity that had three rings of guards stationed out¬
side. So he smuggled in an infiltrator in the trunk of an unsuspecting
employee’s car.                                                      &

   Similarly, most of the actions I will take can be circumvented. For
instance, if I use codes to scramble the contents of an e-mail, an adversary
could still install software on my computer that captures my keystrokes
before they are encrypted.
   My goal is not to win at all costs. My goal is simply to force my adver¬
sary to work harder. I may not be able to prevent myself from being sur¬
veyed on public streets, but perhaps I can force my adversary to watch
hours of videotape rather than simply track my location through a series
of easily analyzed GPS coordinates.
                                                           THREAT MODELS   [73]

use conventional tools.      In his delightful book about industrial food,
The Omnivore’s Dilemma, Michael Pollan prepares a meal by hunting and
gathering. He kills a pig, hunts mushrooms in the forest, and picks cher¬
ries from a neighbor’s tree. He calls it the “perfect meal.”
   Some of my hacker advisers take a similar approach to technology.
They don’t trust tools they can’t build, modify, or design themselves. They
circumvent the software installed on their phones in order to run software
of their choosing. They boot their computers from CDs rather than run¬
ning a traditional operating system.
   This may be the “perfect” way to protect one’s data, but it is sadly out
of reach for me. I am tech-savvy enough to manage my own website,
but I don’t trust myself to start modifying my phone software. Nor do I
think that it is the right approach. The beauty of the modern era is that
these powerful technologies are finally simple enough for regular people
to enjoy their benefits.
   And so, as a corollary to my guiding principle of living in the mod¬
ern world, I am also going to eschew some of the most extreme mea¬
sures taken by the kill-your-own-food hacker crowd. Instead, I will use
conventional tools that are within reach of most people with some
amount of tech savvy. (I will not pretend that your grandmother can-
do everything that I’m going to do. But certainly your teenager will be
able to.)


aim for zero data retention.      The best way to protect my data is not to
give it away. And the best way to do that is to use services that don’t store
data.
   Of course, such services are rare, but they do exist. Consider my doc¬
tor’s office, which is located in a midtown Manhattan skyscraper. Like
most New York buildings post 9/11, the doormen demand identification
from visitors. But my doctor’s office wants to protect patient privacy. So
the doctor’s office assigns each patient a code to give to the doorman
instead of identification. That way, the doormen are appeased and yet they
have zero data stored about the patients.
   During my journey, I will seek to do business with companies that
store the least amount of data that is sufficient to complete their task. In
some lucky cases, that will be zero data. In other cases, it will be mini¬
mal data.
  [74]   DRAGNET NATIOI

  USE THE mud-puddle test.       One way to determine whether I have mini¬
  mized my data trail is to use what some security engineers call the
   mud-puddle test.” It goes like this: imagine you drop your device in a
  mud puddle, slip in the mud, and crack your head so that you forget your
  password to access your data. Now, can you get your data back from the
  service you were using? If the answer is yes, then you have left a data trail.
  If the answer is no, you have successfully avoided leaving a data trail. Of
  course, you also don’t have your data.
     The problem with the mud-puddle test is that you lose either way. But
  it s a good reminder that if you are using a service that lets you recover
 your lost password, then the service has access to your data. I will use the
 mud-puddle test to evaluate the services that I use.


 engage in data pollution.       When I can’t minimize my data trail, I can
 try to pollute it by using fake names and providing misinformation.
     It s embarrassing to admit that lying is hard for me. It makes me physi¬
 cally uncomfortable to lie—even if I am just putting a fake name into a
 Web form. I start to feel hot and my pulse starts racing.
    But the fact is that I have nothing to be ashamed of. Until recently,
 anonymous transactions were the norm for many daily activities. We paid
 cash. We called from phones that didn’t have caller ID. We sent letters
 that sometimes didn’t have return addresses.
    So I vow to remind myself that the people asking me to fill out forms
online in order to accomplish simple tasks don’t always deserve truthful
answers. It s a difficult path for a girl who was such a Goody Two-shoes
in elementary school that I used to stay in at recess and clean chalkboards
for the teachers.
   But I will try to make data pollution a key part of my privacy arsenal.


protect MY traffic.       I plan to work hard to protect myself against analy¬
sis of my “traffic,” that is, the people with whom I e-mail, call, and instant
message.

   People worry about the contents of their e-mails, texts, and instant
messages being intercepted. But traffic analysis can often reveal as much
or more than the contents of a message. If I am exchanging six messages
a day with a drug dealer, do you really need to know what we are saying?
                                                          THREAT MODELS   [75]

The volume of messages alone will land me on a list of suspected affili¬
ates of drug dealers.
   Computers are also much better at analyzing lists of to/from to find
patterns than they are at sorting through huge amounts of text for pat¬
terns. As a result, indiscriminate trackers will almost always focus on
traffic patterns first. So I will put a top priority on defending my traffic
patterns.


use real-time communications.      The Wiretap Act requires police officers
to get a “super-warrant”—which is harder to get than a regular search
warrant—before intercepting real-time communications such as phone
calls, video chats, and instant messages in the United States.
   Once those communications are stored, however, the data can often
be obtained without a search warrant. So a good way to avoid being tracked
is to use real-time communications and not store the communications.
(Unless, of course, you are actually a criminal suspect and the police
have obtained a super-warrant to intercept your real-time communica¬
tions—in which case, good luck to you.)
   It’s not easy to turn off storage of texts and instant messages, particu¬
larly because you often can’t control whether the recipient is storing
the information. But, luckily, most voice and video discussions are not
stored by default.
    As a result, plain old-fashioned domestic telephone calls are still one
of the most private ways to communicate.


spread data around.     The only thing worse than losing a credit card is
losing your entire wallet. Similarly, losing some data is not as bad as los¬
ing all of your data. So I will endeavor to spread my data around—in
order to minimize the damage from inevitable leaks, data breaches,
government spying, and so forth.
    For example, I will have to choose which among Google’s many
services I will retain—e-mail, search, maps, and Android phone. Con¬
sidering that in the last half of 2012 alone, the government made 21,389
requests for information to Google, it makes sense not to store all of my
valuable data on Google’s computers.
    Of course, there is no way to completely avoid having some data stored
  [76]   DRAGNET NATION

  in a vulnerable database—unless I decide to store all my data at home.
  But I hope that by spreading my data around, I can mitigate the risk of
  exposure.


  pay for performance.          Many of the hackers who build privacy-
  protecting technology are adherents of the free software movement. They
  believe that users should be able to build and modify the software that
  they use, so that they are not trapped in systems they do not control.
     Theoretically, free (as in freedom to modify) software does not need
 to be free (as in price). But in reality, most profit-seeking companies pre¬
 fer not to open up their code to outside tinkering. And so most free-to-
 modify software ends up being free-in-price.
     The unfortunate result is that without a revenue stream, much of this
 software withers from neglect when the programmers who built it for
 free in their spare time move on to other hobbies. So in my quest to pro¬
 tect my privacy, I will aim to support (through donations or purchasing
 software) projects that pay their programmers a living wage, in the hope
 that the project will continue.


 transparency rules.        Trackers who let me see the data they have about
 me are less offensive than trackers who will not let me view my data.
    Transparency is the key. I feel better about my credit report because I
have a chance to review it and dispute any errors I find. But most compa¬
nies that track my movements won’t show me the data they hold about
me. That feels unfair. So I plan to take a more generous approach toward
trackers that provide transparency. And I will be even kinder to trackers
who let me delete my data, correct it, or download it and take it with me.


privacy as protest.       I always ask for a pat-down instead of going through
the body scanners at the airport. The pat-down is very invasive: one time
the screener stuck her hand a little too deep into my pants when patting
down my waistband; another time, the scanner pulled my waistband away
from my back with such force that I almost fell over. In many ways, it’s
more invasive than the automated scanners.
   But my purpose in opting out of the scanner is simply to register my
protest against the procedure. The body scanners are the rare form of
indiscriminate tracking that is not covert, and so I take the opportunity
                                                             THREAT MODELS   [11]

to contribute my voice to the opposition. I view it as similar to recycling
at home. The cans and bottles that I dutifully separate are not likely to
change the fate of the planet. The miles that I drive in my car are much
worse, ecologically speaking. But recycling is a kind of gateway drug; it
makes larger changes seem within reach.
   It is my hope that my small privacy protests will make larger changes
seem within reach.


don’t succumb to fear.         It’s likely that taking steps to protect my pri¬
vacy could land me on a “red flag” list of possible suspects.
   Federal prosecutors have argued in an Arizona case that the defen¬
dant had no reasonable expectation of privacy because he used a fake
name to sign up for a prepaid wireless card.
   And NSA documents revealed by Edward Snowden show that the NSA
is storing encrypted communications of U.S. citizens, even though its
own guidelines say that “domestic communications will be promptly
destroyed.” But messages that contain “secret meanings” can be retained,
meaning that my encrypted e-mails are likely placing me on some kind
of red flag list at the NSA.
   But I don’t want to succumb to fear that my privacy-protecting actions
will land me on a watch list. Instead, I plan to count those red flags as part
of my political protest against the dragnets.



In some ways, this new world that I am entering is familiar to dissidents in
repressive regimes: a world where quiet conversations in a cafe are safer
than phone calls, e-mails, and other electronic communications.
   To understand the life I was embarking on, I reached out to a man
who has deeply examined the challenges faced by dissidents—Mike Perry,
a developer at the Tor Project, which makes software designed to help
people evade censorship and surveillance. After 9/11, Perry was outraged
at the privacy invasions of the Bush administration, so he started volun¬
teering as a computer programmer for Tor. He began taking his privacy
seriously.
    When he was looking at technical material on Amazon with his boss
and the director of engineering, he was bothered that he was seeing per¬
sonalized recommendations for books on political and personal topics.
  [78]   DRAGNET NATION

  He decided that even Amazon recommendations were too “personal” for
 him, so he began erasing his data trail.
     Perry and I met in a park in San Francisco. (Public places are appar¬
 ently good places to have private conversations as long as you don’t use
 trigger words such as “bomb” that cause people to listen carefully, accord¬
 ing to John Strauchs.) Perry looked like your basic issue hacker—skinny,
 slightly pale, and clad in all black. He told me some of the basics of his
 operational security (although not all, since that would compromise his
 security).
     Perry describes himself as a “surveillance vegan”—by which he means
 that he is as strict about avoiding surveillance as vegans are about avoid¬
 ing animal products. (His two exceptions: he still books plane tickets
 and sometimes stays in hotels under his own name.)
     Even his closest friends don’t know where he lives, although some
 of them have tracked him to the city block on which he lives. (His
 family visited once but they don’t have the exact address.) One friend
 even dropped a prepaid cell phone enabled with GPS into his bag in a
 fruitless effort to locate him.
    He receives mail in several places, including a Laundromat, a UPS
box, and a business box” that allows him to get packages under other
names. He also uses multiple disposable phones. He pays cash for pre¬
paid phones that are designated for different relationships. One is for
official business, one is for personal business, and another is for commu¬
nicating with Tor. I try to keep different topics to different phones,” he
told me. He tries to remove the batteries from the phones when he is not
using them.
    Perry believes in using multiple disposable identities that are specific
for each relationship. That means that he sets up multiple e-mail and instant
messaging addresses. After our talk, he set up a dedicated instant mes-
saging address for me to reach him. He said he would delete it after our
conversations were complete.
   Perry s life sounded challenging. I asked how it had affected him.
    To be honest, he said, it s affected my ability to have close relation¬
ships.” He said his surveillance-avoidance techniques contributed to break¬
ups with two girlfriends and made it difficult to keep in touch with several
friends who didn’t want to keep a dedicated encrypted chat program
open in order to talk to him.
                                                            THREAT MODELS    [19]

   This was starting to sound like a young man’s game. After all, Perry is
a single man who works from home. I’m a mom with two kids who goes
into an office every day. It was going to be hard for me to 1 un my life
out of a Laundromat, with multiple phones for each person with whom I
communicate.
   But in his gentle way, Perry assured me that he was probably doing it
all wrong anyway and that I didn’t have to be a surveillance vegan. “Some
people are only ‘surveillance flexitarian,’ and that’s cool too,” he said.
   Then he took the muni train with me to my destination. He walked
me out of the station to my parking garage. Then he went back inside the
subway, heading home—wherever that might be.
 Y  ou should know your data,” Michael Sussmann told me, over a late
     breakfast at a cafe near Capitol Hill.
         Sussmann, a former federal prosecutor in the Department of
Justice s computer crimes and intellectual property section, had been out
late the night before. A devoted Bruce Springsteen fan, he had driven two
and a half hours with his wife to see the Boss play in Charlottesville, Vir¬
ginia. Sussmann was bleary-eyed but had kindly agreed to help me build
my threat model.
    It s boring, he admitted, but audits are usually the first thing he does
for his clients. Sussmann is now a partner at the law firm Perkins Coie,
where he advises companies such as Google on Internet privacy issues.
 We start with an org chart and then begin to find out every bit of data this
company collects, from every source,” he told me.
   He raised a good point: if I didn’t know where my data was, how could
I protect it? For me, however, the challenge was not to locate my data
internally; it was to locate it externally. So I decided to begin my privacy
quest by trying to find my data.
                                                              THE AUDI!   [B1]

I started with the most obvious sources of data—Google, Facebook, and
Twitter, the companies I’ve called the Freestylers. What did they know
about me?
   To find my Google data, I visited the website of the Data Liberation
Front, a quirky Google project that lets users download the data that they
have stored with Google. Using the Data Liberation Front’s “take-out”
menu, I downloaded the contacts for 2,192 people whom I have e-mailed
since I started using Gmail in 2006. I also got a few photos I had stored
on Picasa (Google’s photo service, which I had forgotten I used). And I
pulled down twelve documents that I had shared with people using Google
Di ive (but not all 204 that had been shared with me by others).
   But that was about it. When I tried to download the history of web¬
sites I have visited, the Data Liberation Front declared: “There is no cur¬
rent way to escape from Google Web History.”
   I found a bit more information on my Google Dashboard—a page
that contains information about my activity on various Google services
that was buried in my Gmail account settings. The Dashboard noted that
of the 2,192 people I’ve contacted on Gmail, the person I contact the most
is—not surprisingly—my husband. It also noted that I have had 23,397
e-mail and chat conversations on Gmail.
   Strangely, my Web search history wasn’t on my dashboard. It was hid¬
den away in a section of my account called “Other Tools.” There, I found
that Google had apparently been logging my Web searches from the time
I opened my account in 2006. Apparently, I conduct about twenty-six
thousand Google searches per month!
   Google had helpfully sorted my searches by date and by category
(maps, travel, books, etc.), and they were a horrifying insight into what
Buddhists call the “monkey mind,” leaping from place to place restlessly.
   Consider November 30,2010:1 started the day reading some technology
news. Then, suddenly, I was searching for “Pink glitter tiny toms” for my
daughter. Then I was off to the thesaurus to look up a word for an article I
was writing, then to OpenTable to book a restaurant reservation, and then a
visit to Congress to download the text of privacy legislation. Phew.
   My searches not only illuminated my inner thoughts, but they also
revealed my whereabouts. A bunch of searches for “Berlin city map” were
conducted during my trip to Berlin; “Hyatt Regency Pune” was in the midst
 [82]   DRAGNET NATION

 of my annual trip to see my in-laws in India; my search for “DFW air¬
 port, Irving, TX->3150 Binkley Ave., Dallas, TX 75205” was during a
 business trip to Dallas.
    This was more intimate than a diary. It was a window into my thoughts
 each day. I felt nostalgic perusing my searches for nursing pillows after
 my son was born and my searches for good Mexican restaurants during
 a family vacation in Arizona.
  ' I really wanted to download the data. But there was no way to easily
 get it. A Google spokesman, Rob Shilkin, told me, “There are lots of prod¬
 ucts that are not a part of Takeout—we started with five products in 2011
and have been steadily adding.” He added that I could delete my Web his¬
tory. But once I had seen it, I didn’t want to delete it. I wanted to own it.
    Facebook was considerably less forthcoming with my data. I clicked
on “Download a copy of my data,” and Facebook sent me an archive that
was notable for what it did not include. It did not include my list of friends,
my posts, likes, or comments on other people’s posts. Instead, my Face-
book archive contained a few photos I thought I had deleted, friends I
had deleted, and a comprehensive list of when and from where I had
logged in to my Facebook account (mostly my home, my office, and a few
business trips). It turns out that the posts and likes are in another section
of Facebook called the “Activity Log.” But it, too, was weirdly incomplete.
My activity log contained only a few posts, no likes, and no comments.
And it couldn’t be downloaded.
   My Facebook data were a pale shadow of what Max Schrems got when
he obtained his data from Facebook in 2011. Schrems, a law student in
Vienna, requested his data from Facebook under European privacy laws
and received 1,222 pages of personal data. Not only did it list all his friends,
his posts, and so forth. It also had a lot of data that Schrems thought he
had deleted     friend requests that he had rejected, pokes he had removed,
and wall posts and status updates that he had deleted.
   In August 2011, Schrems filed a complaint with the Irish Data Pro¬
tection Commission (Facebook’s European offices are in Ireland)
alleging that much of the data stored by Facebook violates European
Union data protection laws. The European Union requires holders of
personal data to be transparent about their data collection practices
and to keep data only as long as necessary for the purpose for which it
was collected.
                                                              THE AUDIT   [83]

   As a result, the Irish commission reviewed Facebook’s practices and
recommended some “best practices,” including better explanations of its
policies around deleted content. A year later, Facebook changed its d^ta
use policy and stated explicitly that “information associated with your
account will be kept until your account is deleted.” In 2012, the Irish
commission reviewed Facebook’s compliance and found that the com¬
pany had implemented “most” of its suggestions. But the agency found
that Facebook was still not providing fully verified account deletion
“beyond all doubt.”
   In short, it seemed that Facebook planned to keep my data—whether
or not I deleted it. But I wasn’t likely to obtain a comprehensive set of my
Facebook data anytime soon.
   Getting my data from Twitter was easy. I simply pressed a button
labeled “Request your archive.” Twitter promptly sent me an e-mail with
a handy Excel spreadsheet containing my 2,993 tweets since I opened my
account in 2008.
   It wasn’t always this easy. Twitter didn’t give users an opportunity to
download their entire archive of tweets until 2012—even though since
2010 it had been offering similar data to companies who paid to sub¬
scribe to the entire Twitter stream in order to monitor trends.
   My tweets were less intimate than my Google searches. Many were an
extension of my work—tweeting articles by colleagues or myself and live-
tweeting at events. But there were some tweets I had forgotten. On March
9, 2009: “My first night of real sleep in an entire year—baby finally slept
thru the night. Hallelujah.”
   In total, the Freestylers had compiled a pretty revealing portrait of
my life over the past few years. It was far more comprehensive than any
of the files I had reviewed from the Stasi archive.
   And yet, as creepy as it was, much of it made me nostalgic. This was a
digital record of my life.
   It reminded me of the time that I ran into a friend and her husband at
the playground in our neighborhood in Manhattan. As we watched our
daughters—who are the same age—play on the jungle gym, the husband
asked me about the articles I had been writing regarding privacy.
   “I used to care more about privacy,” he said. I braced myself for the
usual “I have nothing to hide” argument. But he surprised me with an
entirely different approach. He said he realized that he liked the idea of
 [U]    DRAGNET NATION

 leaving artifacts” about his life more than he worried about his privacy.
 In short, he said, all this data were providing “immortality.”
    Looking at my old tweets and Google searches, I couldn’t help but
 think of my talk with my friend’s husband. Of all the arguments for ubiq¬
 uitous data collection, immortality did seem like a good one.

                                      +
 I *got another glimpse at immortality when I peeked at the information
 that data brokers have about me. This happened when I was sitting on
 Mike Griffin’s deck overlooking Chesapeake Bay in the Baltimore suburbs.
    Mike is a “repo” man who stumbled into the automobile surveillance
 business. He is tall and thin and filled with nervous energy. He seems to
 subsist entirely on coffee and cigarettes.
    I was doing research for an article about the rise of automated license
 plate readers and decided to pay Mike a visit. He runs one of the largest
private license plate snapping operations in the United States. His fleet of
ten camera-equipped cars log three hundred to four hundred miles a day,
scanning plates in the Baltimore and Washington, D.C., metropolitan
areas. Each month, his two shifts of drivers collect data about the location
of one million plates.
    Mike primarily uses the data to spot cars that are wanted for repos¬
session. The technology has boosted his captures to fifteen cars a night, up
from about six per night without the cameras. But Mike says his ultimate
goal is to sell access to his data to bail bondsmen, process servers, private
investigators, and insurers.   In the next five years, I hope my primary
business will be data gathering,” he told me.
   He mused about one possible buyer for the data: a company called
TLO. I had been hearing about TLO for years. The founder, Hank Asher,
was legendary. A former drug smuggler turned law enforcement buff, Asher
was the most flamboyant guy in the data brokerage business.
   Asher made millions through owning a business that painted high-
rise buildings in Florida and retired at thirty. He moved to Great
Harbor Cay in the Bahamas, drove a fast boat, flew a twin-engine
Aerostar, and developed a cocaine habit. Eventually, after agreeing to
fly a few loads of cocaine to Florida, he realized he’d gone too far. He
quit cold turkey and decided he wanted to clean up drug smuggling on
the island.
                                                             THE AIIOIT   [05]

   He started working with the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration
and noticed that the agency needed better databases. In 1992, he
launched a product called AutoTrack that would change the data-collection
industry.
   AutoTrack was a better way to search public records: Asher bought
data from the Florida Department of Motor Vehicles and made it easily
searchable. Suddenly police could look up a person’s driving and vehicle
records just by searching an address or part of a social security number
or fragment of a name. Previously, police had to enter a person’s entire
name, gender, and birth date to obtain a plate. AutoTrack changed the
way police investigations were done. Journalistic investigations, too. I’ve
used AutoTrack many times to find the names and addresses of people
I was investigating.
   Eventually, however, Asher’s flamboyance and drug history caught up
with him, and his company bought him out for $147 million. Undeterred,
Asher soon started another company with a very similar product called
Accurint. After 9/11, he put together a program called MATRIX that would
create a “High Terrorist Factor” list, but it ran aground on privacy con¬
cerns. Again, Asher resigned from his company under pressure.
   In 2009, Asher made another run at the business, founding a data¬
base company called TLO, standing for The Last One, as in the last one
he planned to launch. He turned out to be right about that; he died at age
sixty-one in 2013.
   Mike said TLO’s data were good and cheaper than data provided by
LexisNexis, which years earlier had bought Asher’s two previous firms.
TLO charged only 25 cents to conduct a simple search and $5 for an
advanced search. By comparison, LexisNexis’s PeopleWise service charged
$1.95 for a basic report and $24.95 for a premium report.
   “Can I see my report?” I asked.
   “Sure,” he said.
   In less than a minute I was holding a four-page report, containing all
my previous addresses—dating back to the number on my dorm room in
college: #536B. There was not a single piece of inaccurate information in
the report.
   It took my breath away. I had forgotten the number on my dorm room,
the address of the group house in Washington, D.C., that I had shared
with five other recent college graduates, and my brief tenure in a New
  [BE]   DRAGNET NATION

  York City studio before moving in with my husband. Each address
 brought back a wave of memories.
     This was, in some ways, even deeper than the data the Freestylers had
 about me. After all, this was my real life, dating back decades. Talk about
 immortality.



 As I sought out my information from other data brokers, my love affair
 with immortality lost steam. I compiled a list of more than two hundred
 commercial data brokers, and I was pretty sure I hadn’t identified all of
 them. This wasn’t immortality, this was prostitution.
     Some of them were well-known names, like the credit-reporting
 agency Experian. But most were tiny outfits in the voyeuristic “lookup”
 business—websites that let people look up information about other people
 for a small fee, or sometimes for free in return for selling advertising.
    There are very few barriers to entry in the lookup business. Consider
 the story ofBeenVerified.com. In 2007, Tosh Levy and Ross Cohen decided
 to offer cheap online background checks. The two set up shop with a
 $200,000 investment. By 2011, the company said it had revenues of $11
million, and just sixteen employees. Not bad work if you can get it.
    The U.S. data business is largely unregulated, which is not the case in
most western European countries. Those countries require all data col¬
lectors to provide individuals with access to their data, the ability to cor¬
rect errors in the data, and, in some cases, the right to delete the data.
    After reading the fine print on 212 websites, I learned that only 33 of
them offered me a chance to see the data they held about me. But upon
closer examination, not all of them were real offers. Some required me to
set up accounts in order to see my data.
   I contacted twenty-three data brokers and received my data from thir¬
teen of them. Some asked me to send my requests by postal mail, along
with a copy of my driver s license. Others allowed e-mail requests. Most
of the responses I got were from the biggest players in the industry.
   Epsilon, one of the largest direct marketers, with more than $3 billion
in annual sales, sent me a sparse two-page report identifying my name,
address, age, and political affiliation. It listed recent purchase categories
in extremely broad categories—apparel, media, business, health, home
office, and sports. The most specific information was a description of my
                                                              THE AUDIT   [87]

household interests: cycling, running, and sports. For someone who hasn’t
gotten on her bike in five years, that is more aspiration than reality.
   I was shocked that Acxiom, the data-gathering giant with annual sales
of around $1.1 billion, asked me to send a $5 check as a processing fee to
obtain my data. But I sent it in, gritting my teeth. One month later, Acxiom
sent me a nine-page report with my social security number, birth date,
voter registration, and addresses dating back to childhood. None of the
information that Acxiom sells about my interests was provided. Acxiom’s
reluctance to share was particularly galling, since it brags in its annual
report that it has more than “3,000 propensities for nearly every U.S. con¬
sumer.” One of its main products is the PersonicX database, which lumps
people into seventy “clusters” within twenty-one “life stage groups.”
   Thanks to the journalist Dan Tynan, who does great work covering
privacy issues, I found a page on Acxiom’s website that lets you enter
your age, marital status, income, and age of children to determine your
PersonicX cluster. When I entered my real information (which was a bit
scary), Acxiom reported back that I was in a cluster called “Fortunes and
Families”—“one of the most educated and wealthy of all the groups.” Peo¬
ple in this cluster are more likely to have attended graduate school (yep)
and be Asian (yep, that’s my husband). Also true: “Their busy lives make
Internet shopping a necessity rather than a preference.” However, the
stock photo on the “Fortunes and Families” cluster was a little absurd—a
picture of a man and a woman standing in front of a private jet. We’re not
private-jet wealthy. We’re not even business-class wealthy. We are strictly
coach class.
   Other Acxiom clusters have names like “Truckin’ and Stylin’,” “Mar¬
ried Sophisticate,” “Urban Scrambler,” “Rural Rover,” and “Lavish Life¬
style.” However, it’s not clear which cluster Acxiom has actually assigned
me to, since its demonstration website doesn’t ask for names. Acxiom
later introduced an online service that would let people see their data if
they entered their name, address, birth date, e-mail address, and last four
digits of their social security number. I was reluctant to hand over so
much sensitive information but, once again, I gritted my teeth and sub¬
mitted my information. The resulting demographic data were remarkably
poor: Acxiom said I was a single Asian parent, with a seventeen-year-old
child, who drives a 2009 Toyota Corolla—all of which is incorrect. How¬
ever, the shopping data were impressive: it correctly flagged that I prefer
 [SB]   DRAGNET NATION

 online ^hopping over off-line shopping and identified categories in which
 I had spent money, such as linens, housewares, and “women’s apparel—
 underwear and hosiery.”
    Datalogix, which claims to have data on “almost every U.S. household
 and more than $1 trillion in consumer transactions,” took three months
 to respond to my request. But one day a FedEx envelope arrived contain¬
 ing two sheets of paper from Datalogix listing my “interest segments.” It
 was a mishmash. Yes, I am a “mom” and a “foodie” and an “online buyer”
 of “women’s fashion & apparel,” but calling me a “fashionista” and “young
 and hip” is likely a bridge too far.
    Similarly, my family does buy energy-efficient lightbulbs and organic
 milk, but I was surprised that this qualified us as “green consumers” and
 “health food” purchasers. And some data were outright wrong: we have
 no pet and no television, thus we have never purchased any “pet supplies”
 nor have we watched “Spanish language television.”
    Other Datalogix categories were deliberately obscure. “Political views”
and “political geography” were among my interest categories, but the report
did not disclose what views they believe I hold. Similarly, my household
income and home value were listed as categories but not disclosed.
    Infogroup merely sent me an e-mail containing my name and
address—the same information that I had provided in order to access my
dossier. Gee, thanks.
    I got better results from LexisNexis, another giant in the field. Four
days after I submitted my request, LexisNexis mailed me a free ten-
page Accurint Person Report,” containing every address I’ve lived at
since 1989.
   Like the TLO report, it was disturbingly accurate. It had captured the
one month I spent at my parents’ house while looking for an apartment
in San Francisco in 1996. It grabbed the two months that I spent living in
my boss’s attic while interning at the Washington Post in 1992. Under
 Possible Associates, it listed my husband and his mother, and dates that
she had visited him in his New York apartment.
   Thomson Reuters s Westlaw was the most generous, kindly sending me
two free reports: a thirty-four-page “summary” that was mostly correct
except for listing my brother as the head of my household and an eight-
page “comprehensive” report that listed my license plate, mortgage infor¬
mation, and employer. The Westlaw comprehensive report was the only
                                                               THE AUDIT   [09]

report I saw that listed the sources from which it obtained my historical
addresses—all were from credit-reporting agencies.
   Some companies’ olfers of access seemed to be little more than win¬
dow dressing. Intelius, one of the largest of the online people-search sites,
which had $150 million in sales in 2010 (the last year that this informa¬
tion was publicly available), offered a website called TrueRep.com that
allows users to see their data. However, the service was not advertised on
any of the Intelius sites that I found. And when I visited TrueRep to find
my data, it didn’t work. After I contacted the company, it fixed the “bug”
and I was able to access my data—first I had to answer a set of personal
questions, such as when my house was built and what model car I drive.
Strangely, once I passed those questions, the report didn’t provide any
details about my house and car. Obviously, Intelius must have more infor¬
mation that it is not disclosing, though it did report the correct names of
my parents, husband, and brother. But it had two incorrect addresses for
me—one in the Bronx and one at the United Nations.
   Still, on average, the data brokers were largely correct about me. They
correctly located most of my addresses and relations. And in large part
they correctly identified me as a harried working mom, prone to choose
convenience over thrift.



I hoped I would find even more accurate information in the one realm of
commercial data brokerage that is regulated—the credit scoring industry.
   The Fair Credit Reporting Act, enacted in 1970, requires anyone who
uses a credit report, and some other types of reports, to provide people
with notice if they suffer an “adverse action” such as being turned down
for a job, insurance, or a loan because of data in the report. That notice
must provide information about the data gatherer who provided the infor¬
mation. However, until recently, people couldn’t easily access their reports
before being turned down for something.
   In 2003, Congress passed a law requiring the big three credit-reporting
agencies—TransUnion, Experian, and Equifax—to provide free annual
access to credit reports from AnnualCreditReport.com. However, those
free reports do not include the actual credit “score” on which consumers
are judged.
    When I requested a free copy of my credit report from TransUnion,
 [90]   DRAGNET NATION

 my first clue that the data were wrong was when I couldn’t correctly
 answer the security question designed to verify my identity: “Which two
 of the following five employers have you worked for?” I had worked for
 only one of the companies on the list, but I couldn’t get past that ques¬
 tion until I clicked on two companies. So I chose one at random and got
 into my report anyway. Hmm, so much for security. (Turns out I wasn’t
 the only one to notice that the security questions were easy to circum¬
 vent. In March 2013, it was revealed that hackers had answered security
 questions and obtained credit reports for public figures ranging from
 First Lady Michelle Obama and FBI director Robert Mueller to celebri¬
 ties Beyonce and Paris Hilton, which were then posted online.)
    When I got into my credit report, I saw that it listed me as working
 for a company called Borjomi 1 Inc. as of 1/30/2011. A quick Web search
 suggested that Borjomi 1 Inc. was a Brooklyn-based distributor of bot¬
 tled mineral water from the republic of Georgia. It also listed a garbled
 previous address for me: “304 06920304 T75 Apt 79.”
    My experience was not unusual. The latest review of credit report
 accuracy by the Federal Trade Commission determined that 26 percent
 of people found at least one significant error on at least one of their three
 reports.




I soon found even worse data about myself in an unregulated corner of
the data broker industry—the data-scoring business.
    I stumbled on this arena when I received my data from a company
called eBureau. It was a one-page report that indicated that I had no chil¬
dren, had not completed high school, and had an income of $35,000—all
of which are far from the truth.
   With a bit of research, I discovered that eBureau was a hot new start¬
up in the field of data scoring—where companies use widely available
personal data to create new categorizations of people. There are compa¬
nies that analyze the popularity of your tweets and Facebook posts to
determine if you are influential.” And there are a bunch of companies
aiming to use new sources of data—such as personality or mobile phone
behavior—to develop alternative credit scores.
   Based in Chicago and founded in 2004, eBureau is trying to build a
better credit score and has raised $38 million from venture capitalists for
                                                               THE AUDIT   [91]

its predictive “scoring” system. The company says it analyzes informa¬
tion about people and predicts their “contactability” and “lifetime cus¬
tomer value” so that marketers can decide whom to target. eBureau
promotes its scores as helping people with limited banking and credit
histories obtain financial services and allowing debt collectors to predict
the likelihood of collecting on an account. In a marketing sheet for its
“income estimator,” eBureau says its scores can be used to evaluate “newly
admitted hospital patients for charity care program eligibility.”
   When I contacted eBureau about the inaccuracy of my data, I received
an e-mail from “eBureau Compliance” noting that some of its data was
labeled as estimates. In addition, the company noted that it “secures its
information from third-party sources and neither eBureau nor its infor¬
mation providers, vendors, licensors, agents or affiliates warrant that the
information is accurate or error free.” It said that if my information was
inaccurate, I could opt out; I availed myself of the offer.
   Even creepier was a company called PYCO, which claimed it might
be able to determine my personality type based on just my name and
address. In its marketing materials, PYCO says it has created an “algo¬
rithm to reverse-engineer the data on a person’s behavior—relationships,
transactions, activities, interests, hobbies, purchase behavior, and so on.”
PYCO obtains data from the big data brokers and analyzes certain life
decisions and translates what they might mean about your personality.
For example, getting married can mean willingness to make a commit¬
ment. It then uses that data to determine things such as if you are extro¬
verted or introverted or if you are a leader or a follower.
   PYCO says it has built profiles for 181 million U.S. adults. But it said
it didn’t have one for me.



Finally, I sought to extract my data from the U.S. government. Obvi¬
ously, the National Security Agency was not going to give me my files
(others have tried and failed to get those), but some other agencies might.
   The Privacy Act, passed in 1974, gives individuals the right to see their
government files and to correct the information in those files if it is incor¬
rect. But the Privacy Act has a giant loophole: agencies can exempt them¬
selves from provisions of the law.
   As a result, it’s not easy for individuals to obtain their files. Consider
 [92]   DRAGNET NATION

 the story of an Ohio resident named Julia Shearson who was flagged as
 “armed and dangerous” and a “suspected terrorist” when she drove up to
 a U.S. Customs and Border Protection checkpoint after a weekend in Can¬
 ada in 2006. Federal agents detained her and her four-year-old daughter
 for several hours before releasing them.
    Shearson, who is a convert to Islam, wanted to know why she had
 been placed on a terrorist watch list. So she requested her files from
 Customs and from the Department of Homeland Security under the
 Freedom of Information Act and the Privacy Act. But the data she received
 did not include the reason she was targeted. So she sued the agencies for
 violating the Freedom of Information Act and the Privacy Act. They
 responded that they were exempt from providing information about the
 watch list.
    Shearson obtained some documents in 2008 but was never able to
 find out why she was flagged. In 2011, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the
 Sixth Circuit ruled that if the government had unlawfully maintained
records of First Amendment protected activity, it could be held liable for
damages. The case was remanded to a lower court. Shearson settled for
damages in 2013, after more than seven years of legal battles.
    Still, I figured I would see what I could get about myself. I requested
my FBI files and was informed that it had no records for me (phew!) but
that this response “neither confirms nor denies the existence of your sub¬
ject’s name on any watch lists.”
    My request to the U.S. Customs and Border Protection agency proved
more fruitful. About three months after I filed my request, I received a fat
envelope full of data—a fairly speedy response by government standards.
   For help interpreting the files, I called Edward Hasbrouck, a San
Francisco-based independent travel writer who worked in the travel indus¬
try for fifteen years. He had requested his own records after the U.S.
Customs agency revealed in November 2006 that it had begun using a
system of records called the Automated Targeting System (ATS), which
compiled travel records for U.S. citizens for the purpose of “risk assess¬
ment.” He initially submitted a request for ATS records in 2007 and renewed
his request in 2009. A year later, he sued the agency, alleging that its
refusal to turn over his complete Customs files was a violation of the Pri¬
vacy Act. He lost when a federal court said that it was legitimate for Cus¬
toms to retroactively exempt his files from the Privacy Act, even after he
                                                                THE AUDIT   [33]

requested them. Hasbrouck agreed to look at my files and help me decode
them.
   The first eight pages were from the TECS database—an updated and
modified version of the former Treasury Enforcement Communications
System—which is a kind of super-database that includes data from vari¬
ous parts of the Treasury Department and the Department of Homeland
Security. My TECS file contained information about my international
arrivals and departures dating back to 1990. For each crossing, it noted
the airport, date and time, and a blacked-out category called “result”
that Hasbrouck said was likely to be an indication of whether I was sent
for secondary screening.
   It was a limited peek at my travel history. The airline flights included
my arrival time in the customs hall, but not where I was flying to or
arriving from. There was only one “VEH” vehicle crossing—when I crossed
into Canada at Niagara Falls in 2003.
   A much more robust view of my travel was contained in a second set
of documents—thirty-one pages of detailed international travel reserva¬
tion information from a database called PNR, which stands for Passen¬
ger Name Records.
   PNRs didn’t used to be in government hands. They are commercial
records held by the airlines. But after the 9/11 terrorist attacks, Congress
hastily passed the Aviation and Transportation Security Act, which
required the airlines to provide their commercial reservation data to the
Customs agency “upon request.” In typical fashion, “upon request” soon
became codified as requiring the airlines to give the agency electronic
access to the entire airline reservation databases.
   Now, airlines routinely contribute their customers’ international travel
reservations to Customs and Border Protection’s Automated Targeting
System—which assesses the “risk” that individual travelers pose to the
United States. The agency says that it uses the reservation data for five years
but stores it for counterterrorism purposes for fifteen years.
   After 9/11, European governments objected to this change, arguing
that it violated European privacy laws. After a protracted legal and diplo¬
matic battle, during which the European Court of Justice briefly invali¬
dated the agreement, the Europeans eventually gave in and signed a deal.
After all, they didn’t want their citizens to lose the right to visa-free travel
to the United States. And they did win some concessions—there are limits
 [94]   DRAGNET NATION

 on how long the United States can store and use PNR data, and sensitive
 data may be accessed only on a “case-by-case” basis.
     I understood that battle once I looked at my files. Each PNR was incred¬
 ibly detailed, containing every single interaction, from the initial making
 of the reservation to the boarding of the plane.
    My full credit card number was in there several times, as were my
 e-mail address, my birth date, my passport number, and all of my phone
 numbers—work, home, and cell. My fellow travelers’ information was
 there as well—my husband’s e-mail address, my children’s birth dates,
 and all of our passport numbers. My children’s names (they were identi¬
 fied as CHD 1 and CHD 2) and our meal requests were the only informa¬
 tion that appeared to be redacted.
    Hasbrouck deciphered the cryptic instructions that the airlines use to
 communicate in their mainframe systems. “OSIYY TCP-4PAX-RECLOC
 5CLMWQ/5BUOEM” was an all-system message alerting airline staff
 that my family wanted to sit together to complete a party (TCP) of four
 passengers (4PAX) despite having two separate reservations in two differ¬
 ent record locators (RECLOC).
    It appeared that my corporate travel agency was also contributing
information to the federal government. For a trip to London, the agency
sent Customs my hotel reservation (Bloomsbury Hotel, queen bed), my
corporate credit card number and expiration date, my employee ID num¬
ber, my department budget code, and an internal code indicating that I
was “NOT VIP.”
    Even more troubling, the agency had sent the government the “pur¬
pose of travel field that reporters fill out when booking a trip. That descrip¬
tion is forwarded to a reporter’s boss for approval.
   Luckily, I am super-paranoid, so I write only “conference” or “reporting
trip in those fields. But I m sure some of my colleagues might have written
more extensive descriptions of their plans. It’s not at all far-fetched to imag¬
ine that some reporters have written in that field something like: “reporting
trip to meet government whistle-blower John Smith in Maryland.”
   I called up our attorneys at the Wall Street Journal, and they were
surprised that reporters travel plans were being sent to the government.
After looking into it, a spokeswoman told me that the problem was inad¬
vertent and isolated to international travel on one particular air carrier.
The Journal suspended travel on that carrier until the technical glitch
                                                             THE AUDIT   [35]

could be fixed. “We are working closely with our travel agency to resolve
this matter as quickly as possible,” she told me.
   In the meantime, detailed information about my reporting trips was
sitting in government files and being analyzed for my terrorism risk. And
there was nothing I could do to remove it.



My audit was deeply unsettling. I had obtained only a tiny amount of the
information available about myself. And even this tiny amount was dis¬
turbingly comprehensive. It included:


   • Every address I had lived at dating back to college.
   • Every phone number I had ever used.
   • The names of nearly all my relatives (as well as in-laws).
   • A list of nearly three thousand people with whom I exchanged e-mail
     in the past seven years.
   • Records of about twenty-six thousand Web searches I had conducted
     every month dating back seven years, neatly sorted into categories
      such as “maps” and “shopping.”
   • A glimpse of my shopping habits.
   • My internal communications with my employer, the Wall Street Jour¬
      nal, about reporting plans.


   Most of my data were held by commercial data brokers. But all of it
could be easily swept into government dragnets.
   I couldn’t help but compare my data to the Stasi files I had reviewed,
with their rudimentary surveillance and limited windows into people’s
lives. Even in their wildest dreams, the Stasi could only fantasize about
obtaining this amount of data about citizens with so little effort.
 THE FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE


B  efore I had a chance to launch my privacy project, I was hacked.
        It was Labor Day weekend of 2012. My brother and his fiancee had
    taken my kids camping, and my husband and I were excited to finally
have a chance to hang around the house on our own.
    We woke up lazily on Saturday morning. And because we weren’t in
our usual rush to feed the kids and get them to swim practice, I sat down
at my computer to check e-mail and Twitter. Immediately, I spotted sev¬
eral comments from people who said they had received spam messages
from my Twitter account. I checked my sent messages and saw that I had
sent out dozens of messages to my friends asking them to click on links.
    It was obvious what had happened: my account had been hacked.
     Apologies to those who received DM spam from me. I was hacked.
Am cleaning up the mess now,” I tweeted at 9:27 a.m. It took me an hour
to delete more than one hundred messages that had been sent from my
account. Luckily, that was the extent of the damage.
    It could have been much worse. My password was a single six-digit
dictionary word that I had used as a base for nearly every account since I
first logged on to the Internet. A smart hacker could have tried several
other accounts and likely broken into those, as well.
    I knew better than that. As a reporter who covers technology, I knew
that I should use long, complicated passwords and that I should have dif-
                                                  THE FIRST IWE Of DEFENSE   [3?]

ferent ones for each account. The embarrassing truth was that for nearly
a year, I had been debating about the best password strategy. I consid¬
ered coming up with a key phrase and varying it slightly for each web¬
site, but worried that a single hack would force me to change every
password. I examined various types of password-management software,
but I couldn’t decide whether I trusted free or paid software more in this
situation, and I worried about managing the software across the differ¬
ent computers that I use at home and work. I had also considered a
strategy that my hacker friend Michael J. J. Tiffany suggested—a “method
of loci”—in which you teach yourself to memorize super-long passwords
by using memory techniques that the ancient Greeks used to remember
long poems. But whenever he talked to me about how easy it was, it
sounded difficult.
   In short, I had been paralyzed by the password issue for about a year,
during which time I kept all my passwords at their absurdly hackable
level, thinking that I wouldn’t change them until I figured out my opti¬
mal strategy.

                                     —j—


The hack was a wake-up call: before I could tackle privacy, I needed to
clean up my approach to security.
   The two are sometimes considered to be at odds with each other. After
all, we are constantly being asked to give up privacy in the name of secu¬
rity. Consider just a few instances: airport body scanners, programs to
scan the Internet for terrorist keywords, cameras on every street corner.
   “We have a saying in this business: ‘Privacy and security are a zero-
sum game,’ ” Ed Giorgio, a security consultant who used to work at the
NSA, once told the New Yorker.
   But in fact privacy is nothing without security.
   “We have to cast aside the notion that our liberty and our security are
two opposing values that are on the opposite sides of a seesaw, that when
one is up the other necessarily must be down,” said Secretary of Home¬
land Security Janet Napolitano in a 2012 speech. “The plain fact of the
matter is that you cannot live free if you live in fear. Security is a prereq¬
uisite if we wish to exercise the rights we cherish.”
   She was right. Before I could start protecting my liberties, I needed to
secure my digital domain. After all, what was the point of defending myself
 [38]   DRAGNET NATION

 against indiscriminate tracking if I left myself open to hackers and other
 intrusions?
    I wasn’t prepared for how difficult this project turned out to be.



 The problem with computer security is that most of the advice we are
 given is absurd.
    Consider the issue of child predators. When I was writing my book
 about MySpace in 2008, online child predators were the bogeymen of
 the moment. The advice being peddled by all the experts was to keep the
family computer in the living room and police your children when they
used it. It was absurd advice and impossible to follow. Most parents work—
whether it is in an office or running a household. And most kids
multitask when they are on a computer—they are simultaneously doing
homework, instant messaging with their friends, and surfing the Web. The
idea that parents can supervise all those activities while also earning a
living wage and getting dinner on the table is ludicrous.
    I ve come to think of warnings like this as similar to the labels on
mattresses that say it’s illegal to remove the scratchy label, or the labels on
the hair dryer cords that read: do not remove this tag! These labels
are designed for one audience only: lawyers. The rest of us either blithely
ignore the labels or feel guilty about ignoring them.
    Similarly, much of the advice that we receive about computer secu¬
rity is impossible to follow. Consider the computer security advice I
found in a simple Web search: run antivirus software; install a firewall;
back up your files; turn off your Wi-Fi network when you’re not using it;
dont connect to public Wi-Fi spots unless you are using encryption;
lock your laptop with a security cable when you are in a hotel (!); avoid
websites that contain JavaScript; uninstall old software; don’t use
Microsoft Outlook or Adobe Reader; record the IMEI (International
Mobile Equipment Identifier) number of your phone in case your phone
is lost or stolen. Some of that is good advice—backing up files and being
wary of public Wi-Fi networks, in particular—but most people who
aren t computer professionals have a hard time sorting out the necessary
from the unnecessary.
   One reason for all the confusion: the computer security industry has
                                                  THE FIBS! IINE Of DEFENSE   [39]

to get us really scared in order to convince us to pay for their products. It
is in their interest to exaggerate the threats. Remember the Y2K world¬
wide computer meltdown that didn’t occur?
   An interesting data point: most of the computer security profession¬
als I know do not rely on antivirus software. Instead, they keep their
software up to date, and they are choosy about what software they install.
Most important, they do not click on links or open documents if they are
not entirely sure of their origin. Some of the most paranoid computer
security professionals I know also have minimal information about them¬
selves available on social networks.
   Passwords are the best example of the absurdity of computer security
advice. The conventional wisdom is that you should change your pass¬
word every three months; it should be made strong with multiple sym¬
bols and letters; and it should not be written down anywhere.
   Those rules are treated as gospel at my office. Every three months, I
receive an e-mail reminding me to reset my password. Before this regime
started, I had a reasonably long password—about eleven characters long,
if I recall correctly. But the constant pressure to make a new password
has steadily degraded my ingenuity. In 2012 I gave up and just made each
password into the month that the e-mail reminder arrived. So when the
March e-mail password reset reminder arrived, I changed my password
to March2012! (with the requisite exclamation point to satisfy the sym¬
bol police). In June, I changed it to 2012June?, and on like that. I had
dropped to nine easily guessable characters.
    There is ample evidence that I am not the only one cutting password
corners. In 2010, computer security researchers analyzed a database of
thirty-two million passwords (which was hacked and briefly posted online)
and found that the most popular password was “123456,” followed by
“12345,” “123456789,” and “password.” The researchers, at the computer
security firm Imperva, found that about 30 percent of the passwords were
fewer than seven characters long and that nearly 50 percent used names
or dictionary words. The result: In just 110 attempts, a hacker will typi¬
cally gain access to one new account on every second or a mere 17 min¬
utes to break into 1000 accounts.”
   A more recent study, from 2013, suggests that not much has changed.
The British telecom regulator Ofcom found that half of all adult Internet
 [100]   DRAGNET NATION

 users in the United Kingdom use the same password on most, if not all,
 websites they visit. Additionally, 26 percent said they used a very easily
 guessable password such as their birthday or name.
    Thankfully, computer scientists have also concluded that our terrible
 passwords are not our fault. In his well-regarded textbook Security Engi¬
 neering, Ross Anderson of the University of Cambridge Computer
 Laboratory writes, “The password problem has been neatly summed up
 as: ‘Choose a password you can’t remember, and don’t write it down.’ ”
    In 2004, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers pub¬
lished a study on “Password Memorability and Security”—with Anderson
as one of the coauthors—that concluded that the deficiencies of pass¬
words are due in part to the instructions people are given, if they are
given any at all, when creating passwords.
    The authors conducted an experiment in password creation among
approximately three hundred students. One group was asked to create
their own passwords, at least seven characters in length and containing
at least one nonletter. Members of a second group were given a sheet with
numbers and letters on it and were told to choose eight at random with
their eyes closed. And a third group was asked to create a password
based on a mnemonic phrase, such as “It’s 12 noon I am hungry” to cre¬
ate the password “I’sl2Iah.” The researchers then tried to break the pass¬
words using various hacking techniques. They cracked about one-third of
the passwords in the first group (where users created a password without
much advice) and fewer than 10 percent of the passwords in the two
other groups. We suggest changing the advice given to users for select¬
ing passwords,” the researchers concluded. In some cases, users should
be given instruction on how to create mnemonic passwords, and in other
cases it might be better for institutions to simply assign passwords to
users. On their own, they said, “users rarely choose passwords that are
both hard to guess and easy to remember.”
   In 2010, computer scientists at University College London also laid
the blame for bad passwords at the doorstep of institutional password
policies. The authors studied “password use in the wild” at two major
organizations and found that excessively strict password rules—forcing
users to create strong passwords and to change them frequently—caused
stress for users and caused them to write their passwords down, thus
thwarting security. When the requirements of the policy exceed users’
                                                THE FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE   [101]

capabilities, they are forced to develop more complex—or, alternatively,
less secure—coping techniques,” the authors wrote.
   And by the way, many computer security experts say it’s perfectly fine
to write down your passwords, as long as you keep them in a safe place.
   In 2005, Jesper Johansson, who was then senior program manager for
security policy at Microsoft, spoke at a security conference and berated
the industry for giving bad advice about passwords. “How many have [a]
password policy that says under penalty of death you shall not write down
your password?” asked Johansson. The majority of the audience raised
their hands. “I claim that is absolutely wrong. I claim that password pol¬
icy should say you should write down your password. I have 68 different
passwords. If I am not allowed to write any of them down, guess what I
am going to do? I am going to use the same password on every one of
them. Since not all systems allow good passwords, I am going to pick a
really crappy one, use it everywhere and never change it. If I write them
down and then protect the piece of paper—or whatever it is I wrote them
down on—there is nothing wrong with that. That allows us to remember
more passwords and better passwords.”
   The research made me feel better about my weak passwords. But it
still didn’t solve my problem of how I was going to come up with dozens
of strong passwords.
    After all, there are only so many mnemonics I can remember. And
many websites are not worth the mental effort.

                                     1
The morning I was hacked, I changed the passwords on my key accounts—
e-mail, banking, and social networks. Instead of using variations of a
single six-character dictionary word, I made longer combinations of let¬
ters, numbers, and symbols, and I wrote them down on paper.
    It was just a stopgap measure. I knew my passwords still weren t good
enough. They were mostly variations on a single passphrase. But when¬
ever I tried to think up new phrases, my mind went blank. I was reminded
of a study that claimed that 38 percent of adults would rather do household
chores, such as cleaning a toilet bowl or doing the dishes, than create a
new username and password.
   After a few weeks of mental blankness, I gave up. I decided to install
password-management software. Drawing on my philosophy to pay for
  [102]   DRAGNET NATION

  performance,” I chose 1 Password because it was a paid service and well
  reviewed. I hoped that meant it was a real business that wouldn’t go
  under and would provide good customer service.
      IPassword is essentially a password vault; you store all your passwords
 in its software. You unlock the vault with a single master password. To
 ensure that the passwords are totally secure, they are not stored at 1 Pass¬
 word’s offices in Canada, but on your machine in an encrypted file. If
 you forget your master password, you lose access to all your passwords.
 In other words, IPassword passed the mud-puddle test.
     Putting all my passwords on my computer was scary. But confronted
 with my blank mind and my inability to generate passwords, I took the
 plunge. I downloaded the software and began the process of entering
 passwords as I encountered them online.
     It truly was a slow process. I had forgotten how many frequent flier,
 hotel, and random commerce sites I had accounts with. On some sites, I
 used IPassword s password generator to create a password with the right
 length and mix of letters, numbers, and symbols. On less important sites,
 I simply entered my weak password and promised myself I would improve
 it later.
    In the course of three months, I loaded up fifty-one passwords into
 IPassword. But I still felt leery about putting sensitive passwords such as
banking and e-mail and important work files into IPassword. I kept those
on paper. Immediately, I had a problem: I had no idea what any of my pass¬
words were. The ones that I created through IPassword were an incompre¬
hensible string of letters, numbers, and symbols, like qwER43@! The ones
that I made up myself were words with symbols and numbers interposed,
such as Tr0ub4dour&3. None of them was easy to recall.
   I was surprised at how often I needed my passwords when I was away
from my computer. My husband called to ask me for the password to my
Amazon account so he could use my free shipping—and I had to tell him
that I was at lunch and didn t have it. He e-mailed me to ask for the pass¬
word to one of my frequent flier accounts; I didn’t have that one, either.
When I got a new cell phone, I kept trying to set up my Twitter
account when I was away from my desk—and then realized I didn’t
know my Twitter password. (IPassword has a phone version, but I felt it
was too risky to store all my passwords on my phone.)
                                                THE FIRST LINE OF BEFENSE   [103]

   At first I was annoyed. But eventually I came to see these password
emergencies for what they really were: nonemergencies. It turned out
that the tweet could wait, and so could the Amazon order.



Meanwhile, I started trying to secure my data in other ways.
   To combat impersonation (a.k.a. identity theft), I bought a shredder
and started shredding documents containing personal information. And
I bought a wallet that blocks radio-frequency identification signals on my
credit cards and passport, which can be skimmed by hackers.
   To ensure that my data would be safe in case of a more serious hack, I
bought an external hard drive and started backing up my files regularly.
(Yes, I had not been backing up before. Terrible, I know.) To foil hackers
who might make it into my machine, I encrypted my hard drive (which
on a Mac was a one-click operation).
   I put a sticker over my Web camera so that hackers couldn’t use it to
remotely spy on me. I bought a privacy filter that shields my laptop screen
from people trying to read over my shoulder or from the seat next to me
on a plane.
   To combat hackers who try to steal passwords from Wi-Fi connec¬
tions in coffee shops, I installed software called HTTPS Everywhere,
which ensured that my connections to the Internet were encrypted when¬
ever possible.
   I also started being much more cautious about my use of Wi-Fi in
general. Instead of relying on my home Wi-Fi router, I plugged my com¬
puter into a hard-wired Ethernet connection. When traveling, I started
using a portable Wi-Fi hot spot that I carried with me. The connection
was sometimes spotty, but it made me feel a lot better than connecting to
all those intrusive hotel Wi-Fi systems that force your Internet traffic
through their system.
   I also set up double password systems—known as two-factor
authentication—when it was available. On Gmail, that meant installing
an app that gave me a code to enter in addition to my password. At my
bank, that meant rooting around in the online settings until I found a
way to require a “pin” number before authorizing any payments.
    But I set up those systems only at places where I didn’t have to give
 [104]   DRAGNET NATION

 out my phone number. Twitter offered two-factor authentication, but only
 for people who are willing to receive text messages from them—so I
 declined.
    I also tried using a system called “Little Snitch” to monitor all the
 connections my computer was attempting to make, but quickly aban¬
 doned it. It turns out that I didn’t really want to know how many connec¬
 tions my computer was making at any given time. I found that I had to
 approve seventy-six connections just to open my Web browser, to connect
 to Gmail, and to start streaming music on Spotify. Each request looked
 like this: “Allow outgoing connections to port 80 (http) of dlhza3lyffsoht
 .cloudfront.net until Spotify quits.” My two choices were to allow “forever”
 or just until quits.” After an hour I had made ninety-seven extremely ill
 considered choices, I realized that I had no idea what I was doing, and I
 uninstalled the software.
    As I investigated security options, I decided that the biggest problem
was that I didn t know whom to trust. I knew enough to be wary of cyni¬
cal attempts to prey on my fear. But I didn’t know enough to actually test
the products to see how well they worked.
    So far, I was mostly using tools from people I knew or tools that were
well established. I knew and trusted the technologists at the Electronic
Frontier Foundation who made the HTTPS Everywhere software. Little
Snitch was a well-known program. Similarly, IPassword was well estab¬
lished. But I didn t know what to think about an encrypted cloud service
called SpiderOak that I was considering. I wanted to store my data in the
cloud in case something went wrong with my backup, and to be able to
access my files from anywhere. But SpiderOak wasn’t well known.
   I couldn t get a good sense of the company from its website. I liked
that it didn t look like most computer security websites—which tend to
sport a black background and lots of references to “military-grade encryp¬
tion. SpiderOak was a sunny orange and touted its “zero-knowledge pri¬
vacy environment, which is similar in concept to the mud-puddle test.
SpiderOak had also been recommended to me by Christopher Soghoian,
a technologist at the American Civil Liberties Union. But a website and a
recommendation were pretty thin gruel for someone seeking a full meal.
So I e-mailed the CEO, Ethan Oberman, and set up a time to meet him
the next time I was in San Francisco.
   We met at a trendy coffee shop. With his blond hair and muscular
                                                 THE FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE   [105]

arms, Ethan looked more like a jock than a computer geek. I was imme¬
diately skeptical.
   Over coffee, he told me his story—and indeed, it was not the typical
computer geek narrative. He grew up in a tony Chicago suburb, went to a
prep boarding school, Hotchkiss, and then to Harvard. He was, as I had
guessed, a hockey player and captain of the Harvard lacrosse team. After
graduation in 2000, he went to work for his dad’s business—which helped
magazine publishers manage their circulation lists. The company wanted
a digital strategy, so Ethan built an e-mail marketing operation within
his father’s company. But a few years later, he was tired of working for the
family business. He took a break and traveled. He also bought his first
Macintosh computer. When he had to call his mom to ask her to e-mail
him a file from the tower PC that he stored in his parents’ closet, he real¬
ized there was a market opportunity.
   There were plenty of “backup services” such as Xdrive and Mozy, but
they offered backup for only a single machine. He also wanted to synchro¬
nize his data across machines. “Backup is not sexy,” he told me. “It’s like
brushing your teeth. What’s really sexy is accessing your data everywhere.”
    Sexy wasn’t quite what I was looking for; I wanted more specifics about
the company’s zero-knowledge promise. For that, Ethan cheerfully
referred me to his business partner Alan Fairless. (To be fair to Ethan, he
probably wasn’t used to journalists who wanted anything more than a
sexy quote for their article.) Still, Ethan seemed to have the finances in
hand. He told me that the company was profitable and made money by
selling subscriptions rather than advertising. This fit with my pay-for-
performance guiding principle.
    Two weeks later I spoke by phone with Alan Fairless, Ethan’s partner
and SpiderOak’s chief technology officer. Alan explained that he was the
one who had pushed for encrypting the data. “It was important to me
that it was encrypted before it left my computer.” He explained how Spider-
Oak takes users’ passwords and turns them into unique methods of
encryption. The encryption is only as strong as the password a user cre¬
ates. “There is no requirement on how long the password has to be,” he
said. “We decided that it was not a good idea to make users change their
computer password selection methods at the same time that we tell them
that if they forget their password their data is gone.”
    Given what I had learned about passwords, I appreciated SpiderOak
[IOS]      DRAGNET NATION

not forcing users into an unwinnable situation. Alan really won me over
when he told me that “the threat model is that we are protecting the user
against ourselves, which also turns out to be a good way to protect the
user against the rest of the world.” He said that the company had already
received law enforcement requests for data but once the officers learned
that SpiderOak had no way to decrypt the data the requests were dropped.
    I breathed a sigh of relief. Straight talk about threat models and pass¬
words made him credible to me. And SpiderOak passed the mud-puddle
test. I signed up for a subscription. But the whole experience seemed an
absurd way to shop for computer security. Was I really going to have to
visit all my technology providers to determine their trustworthiness?
   And after all that, my security on SpiderOak still relied on the strength
of my password.



It used to take some skill to crack a password. Now anybody can do it.
   Increased computing power has helped password crackers work faster.
And the increasing availability of huge lists of leaked passwords has
allowed programmers to write programs that make password cracking
more accurate. To show how easy it has become, the journalist Nate Ander¬
son cracked eight thousand passwords in one day using a free online pro¬
gram called Hashcat. “Even though I knew password cracking was easy, I
didn’t know it was ridiculously easy—well, ridiculously easy once I over¬
came the urge to bash my laptop with a sledgehammer and finally figured
out what I was doing,” he wrote.
   The way password cracking works is as follows (greatly simplified):


   • A hacker obtains a list of passwords to crack.
   • These lists are usually encrypted—or “hashed.”
   • The hacker then attempts to decode the hashes.
   • Usually, the hacker first attempts to run a “dictionary” attack—
        meaning he or she compares the patterns of the hashes with tradi¬
        tional dictionary words.
   • The hacker then compares the patterns of the hashes to well-known
        databases of leaked passwords.
   • The hacker then tries a “brute force” attack—which attempts options
        in simple sequences such as “aaaaaa,” then “aaaaab,” then “aaaaac,” etc.
                                                  THE FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE   [1117]

   Brute force attacks are what the computer security researcher Robert
Graham calls “an exponential problem. The amount of time it takes
quickly grows out of all reasonableness.” For that reason, Anderson ran
brute force attacks only on passwords that were six digits long. If he had
tried for passwords of nine or ten characters, he estimated it would take
weeks or months to crack. And he was able to crack only eight thousand
of the seventeen thousand passwords he attempted. “The lesson was clear:
I could crack every last hash in the file—but I’d probably need the better
part of a year to do it, assuming my machine didn’t simply collapse under
the strain,” he wrote.
   One lesson from the world of password cracking is that people who
store passwords should do a better job of hashing. The industry best prac¬
tice is to “salt” hashes—meaning that if a user creates a six-character pass¬
word, the hasher would add several unique characters to it, making it
longer, before hashing it. That makes it harder to break.
   Sadly, salting is not common enough: recent hacks at Linkedln, Yahoo!,
and eHarmony revealed troves of unsalted hashes that were quickly
broken.
   For those who have to make passwords, the lesson from the world of
password crackers is simple: make longer passwords and avoid simple
dictionary words or well-known passwords (such as “passwordl”).



The measure of password strength is something computer scientists call
“entropy.” Fligher entropy means harder to break. Jeffrey Goldberg, a pass¬
word expert at AgileBits, the makers of IPassword, told me that entropy is
a measure of “how many ways you could get a different result using the
same system.” Short, simple passwords, such as dictionary words, have very
low entropy because they can easily be guessed. Longer passwords that
contain many types of symbols, letters, and numbers often have larger
entropy because it takes more guesses to figure them out.
   Julian Assange knew this when he created the following password
to the WikiLeaks cables database: AcollectionOfDiplomaticHistory-
Since_1966_ToThe_PresentDay#. It is fifty-eight characters long, with
very few symbols, and easy to remember. Of course, the reason we know
his password is that the Guardian newspaper published it in a book about
WikiLeaks. So, obviously, it wasn’t a secure password in other respects.
 [100]   DRAGNET NATION

     Entropy is frustratingly difficult to estimate. A long password can have
 low entropy if it is comprised of simple words and easy grammar. I started
 to become obsessed with measuring the entropy of the passwords I had
 created. One day I was sitting outside my daughter’s dance recital when I
 stumbled on an online entropy estimator that had been built by Dan
 Wheeler, an engineer at Dropbox. His estimator measured the “entropy”
 of each password, as well as the “time to crack,” and I was immediately
 entranced by the thrill of testing my newly created mnemonic passwords.
 I recklessly started entering all my passwords.
    I started with my bank password (created by me using mnemonics,
 twelve characters long). Ooh, very exciting. It had fifty-six bits of entropy
 and would take “centuries” to crack!
    Then I tried my Gmail password created by 1 Password (eighteen char¬
acters). It had eighty bits of entropy and would take “centuries” to crack.
However, I hate that password: I can never remember it.
    But my Wall Street Journal e-mail password (nine characters) was dis¬
appointing. I created it using the mnemonic method, but it had only
twenty-eight bits of entropy. It would take just seven hours to crack!
    Oh dear. How is this? The password I use to protect my 1 Password
account (another homegrown mnemonic that was seventeen characters
long!) had thirty-seven bits of entropy and could be cracked in five
months. Ugh.
    This was an addictive but depressing sport. A pattern was emerging—
my IPassword-created passwords were super strong; my homegrown
passwords varied from strong to super weak.
   The worst of my homegrown passwords: the password to log in to my
computer could be cracked in four minutes. My password to log into my
blog could be cracked in an “instant.”
   As the thrill of cracking them all wore off, I realized that it had
been spectacularly stupid to enter my passwords into an unknown crack¬
ing system while using Wi-Fi. Even though it was my own portable Wi¬
Fi spot, an encrypted Web connection, and a website that promised not
to store the passwords, my passwords could still somehow end up in a
database used by password-cracking teams.
   Now I had two reasons to make new passwords: (1) the fact that my
passwords didn’t have enough entropy and (2) my own stupidity.
                                                THE FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE   [103]




In my search for high-entropy passwords, I considered a wide variety of
options, including passwords created using obscure languages and long
passphrases like the one used by Julian Assange.
   But again I ran into the problem of my own mind. I could come up
with one or two words in an obscure language, or one or two passphrases,
but eventually I knew that I would run out of ideas and start using weak
passwords.
   Studies show that even when people are making longer passwords, they
tend to take shortcuts. In 2012, researchers at the University of Cambridge
studied the use of passphrases on Amazon.com and found that many
were based on well-known movies or music or phrases, such as “dead poets
society,” “three dog night,” and “with or without you.” As a result, many
passphrases are just as weak as regular passwords. “Our results suggest
that users aren’t able to choose phrases made of completely random words,
but are influenced by the probability of a phrase occurring in natural
language,” wrote the authors, Joseph Bonneau and Ekaterina Shutova.
   The study confirmed my suspicion: I needed a system where I didn’t
have to think.
   I found what I needed in a password system called Diceware. It is
deceptively simple: you roll a six-sided die five times and use the results
to pick numbers from the Diceware word list, which contains 7,776 short
English words. Each word is numbered. It looks like this:


   16655 clause
   16656 claw
   16661 clay
   16662 clean
   16663 clear
   16664 cleat
   16665 cleft
   16666 clerk


   Diceware’s creator, Arnold Reinhold, recommends using a string of
at least five words. So the resulting passwords look something like this:
 [110]     DRAGNET NATION

 alger klm curry blond puck. You can make the password stronger by add¬
 ing more words, or by adding a few letters, symbols, or capital letters. But
 even the simple Diceware string of five lowercase five-letter words would
 take more than eighteen hundred days to crack, according to Bruce Mar¬
 shall, founder of PasswordResearch.com.
     Using dice ensures that you pick the numbers randomly. There are
 also, of course, software and websites that will generate random num¬
 bers for you. But Reinhold and other security experts caution against
 using unknown random number generators, which could be built by
adversaries seeking to crack your password system. In fact, documents
released by Edward Snowden show that the NSA had authored one of
the scientific standards for a random number generator and could
break it.
    Excited by the prospect of not having to think about passwords ever
again, I printed out the thirty-seven-page Diceware word list, punched
holes in the paper, and put it in a binder. But I was daunted by having to
roll the dice hundreds of times for all the passwords I needed to create.
The binder sat on my desk until I thought of a brilliant idea: enlist my
eight-year-old daughter who was sitting around the house bored, in the
time-honored tradition of kids out of school during the summer. I told
her I would pay her to make passwords for me.
    Within an hour, she presented me with a piece of paper with five hand¬
made passwords—and demanded cash. I paid her $3.50.
    Excited by the easy money, she e-mailed her grandparents, her uncle,
and a few family friends to let them know she was starting a password¬
making business. This is what she wrote:

         Subject: My Buisness [sic]

         I m starting my own password business where I make passwords.
         5 passwords cost s $3.50 cents. 5 passwords per page. Hope you try
         them.


    My mom immediately wrote to me asking if my daughter’s e-mail
account had been hacked. I assured her that it was a real business, and
she signed up for some new passwords. By the end of the summer, my
daughter had made about fifty passwords for family and friends and
raised her prices to $1 per password.
                                               THE FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE   [111]

   I was thrilled. I now had a bunch of passwords stored in IPassword
that I didn’t know, and a dozen strong memorable passwords for my key
accounts. And, as an unexpected bonus, I had finally persuaded my daugh¬
ter to care about privacy—or, at the very least, to care about profiting
from privacy.
 LEAVING GOOGLE


O  n June 8, 2004, an FBI agent showed up at the public library in
    Deming, Washington, demanding to know the names of people
    who had checked out the book Bin Laden: The Man Who Declared
War on America by Yossef Bodansky.
    Nothing like that had ever happened before in Deming, a tiny town
near the Canadian border with a population of just 353 people. Deming
is not known as a hotbed of terrorism; if Deming is known at all, it is as a
place to fuel up for gas and beer in the foothills of the North Cascade
Mountains.
    Even so, the librarians were prepared. A year earlier, the Whatcom
County library system s attorney at the time, Deborra Garrett, had trained
the staff on how to handle law enforcement requests. Librarians became
information defense warriors during the 1980s, when FBI agents started
showing up at college libraries demanding to know which books had been
checked out by foreigners. Subsequently, forty-eight states adopted laws
in some way protecting the confidentiality of circulation records.
    So when the FBI agent showed up in Deming, the librarian on duty
refused to hand over the records. Instead, she promised to pass on the
agents request to her lawyers and showed him the door.
    When Garrett got the request, she called the FBI agent and asked what
he wanted. lie said that a reader had called the agency to report that
                                                         LEAVING GOOGLE   [113]

someone had scribbled a handwritten note in the margin of the book
that said, “if the things I’m doing is considered a crime then let history
be a witness that I am a criminal. Hostility toward America is a religious
duty and we hope to be rewarded by God.”
   After the conversation, Garrett discovered that the quote was from a
1998 interview with Osama bin Laden. She sent the interview to the FBI
agent, thinking “that would be the end of it,” Garrett said. But a few weeks
later a grand jury subpoena arrived for the library records, along with a
request for the librarians not to discuss the order.
   The Whatcom County library was in a difficult situation. Complying
with the subpoena would mean abandoning principles the librarians
believed in. Fighting the subpoena was going to be difficult, as the law
requires compliance with a lawful grand jury subpoena. The library was
going to have to fight to narrow the subpoena. Garrett suggested that it
could rely on a 1998 precedent: a federal court in Washington, D.C.,
found that the bookstore Kramerbooks 8c Afterwords did not have to
turn over records of Monica Lewinsky’s book purchases because of First
Amendment protections of reading material.
   The library trustees were worried. If they fought and lost, they would
face a terrible choice: turn over the information and betray their princi¬
ples or possibly face jail time for refusing to comply with a subpoena.
The trustees discussed the issue and decided to fight, “ft was a frighten¬
ing stand to take,” recalled Amory Peck, chair of the board of trustees of
the Whatcom County library system. “But we could do no less. We could
do no less than protect a very basic right of our patrons: their ability to
read widely, curiously, broadly, maybe even dangerously... in complete
certainty their choices would be confidential.”
   After Garrett filed a motion to quash the subpoena on First Amend¬
ment grounds, the FBI withdrew the subpoena. “In my view, this case
illustrates what happens when people know their actions are going to be
reviewed by a court,” said Garrett, who is now a judge, “ft keeps people
honest.”



I couldn’t realistically expect my Internet providers to mount such a spir¬
ited defense of my reading materials.
   Of course, they do try to defend their customers. Google has a phalanx
[114]   DRAGNET NATIDN

of great lawyers. In 2006, Google challenged a Justice Department
request for two months’ worth of search records, winning the right to
narrow the request to just fifty thousand URLs instead of the billions
requested. In 2007, Amazon successfully fought a government subpoena
that sought the identities of people who bought books from a used book¬
seller on its site. The government sought to interview the book buyers as
part of its tax fraud investigation into an Amazon third-party bookseller,
but Amazon refused to hand over the names. The court agreed that “it is
an unsettling and un-American scenario to envision federal agents nosing
through the reading lists of law-abiding citizens while hunting for evi¬
dence against somebody else.”
    But when it comes to surveillance, Internet companies often lose the
fight because the law is stacked against them. There are no Internet equiv¬
alents of the state privacy laws that protect library circulation records.
First Amendment claims are often dismissed for lack of actual harm. And
most technologists haven’t adopted a view of themselves as fighters for
intellectual freedom, as librarians often do.
    The relevant law governing most surveillance of Internet communi¬
cations is the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986, which
was designed to expand the protections that were in place for phone calls
and regular mail to the digital realm. However, at the time, the law didn’t
envision that people would store so much information on computers and
services outside their home. As a result, stored communications, such as
e-mails and cell phone location records, can often be obtained by the
government without a search warrant. The law only requires the govern¬
ment to show that the data are “relevant and material” to an investigation.
   Thus it is easier for law enforcement to legally read people’s e-mail
than to open their postal mail. Not only that, courts often seal the court
orders related to electronic surveillance so that users are never notified
that a search had been conducted. As a result, the gatekeepers of our data
are hampered in their fight to protect their customers. In 2012, Microsoft
produced customer data for 83 percent of law enforcement requests. That
same year, Google handed over data about its users in about two-thirds
of the cases where information was requested.
   The leading Internet companies, including Google, Apple, and Face-
book, have joined a coalition that is pushing to amend the electronic com¬
munications privacy law to require search warrants for e-mail and cell
                                                         LEAVING GOOGLE   [115]

phone location records. But so far their efforts to reform the law have not
been successful.
   The few instances where we have learned that companies fought gov¬
ernment surveillance have not ended well. Consider just two cases—a
small Internet provider, Sonic.net, and Internet giant Yahoo!. In 2011,
Sonic.net went public with the fact that it had fought—and lost—a secret
court order demanding the e-mail addresses of people who had corre¬
sponded with a WikiLeaks volunteer, Jacob Appelbaum, in the course of
two years. Challenging the order was “rather expensive, but we felt it was
the right thing to do,” said Sonic’s chief executive, Dane Jasper. By speak¬
ing to me, Jasper was defying the court’s gag order that prevented him
from discussing the government’s request. (Jasper later said that he was
unaware that the gag order remained in force when he spoke to me.)
   As for Yahoo!, in 2008 the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
rejected its challenge to a warrantless order for user data. Yahoo! argued
that the government’s broad requests were unconstitutional, but the court
ruled that the company had not proved that anyone was harmed by the
surveillance: “Notwithstanding the parade of horribles trotted out by
the petitioner, it has presented no evidence of any actual harm, any egre¬
gious risk of error, or any broad potential for abuse in the circumstances
of the instant case.”
   There have been many more cases. But the same thread runs through
them all: the Internet companies’ hands are often tied when it comes to
surveillance.



I don’t dislike Google.
    In fact, Google has tried hard to be transparent about surveillance. It
was the first big Internet company to start publicly reporting the number
of law enforcement requests it received. It has been active in the coalition
pushing for reform of the electronic communications privacy law. And
Google is appealing the government’s gag order that prevents it from
revealing how many requests it receives from the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Court.
   But Google has also repeatedly abused users’ trust. In 2010, Google
launched a social networking tool called Buzz that automatically listed
people as “followers” of people with whom they frequently e-mailed or
[116]   DRAGNET NATION

chatted on Gmail. Users who clicked on a button “Sweet! Check out Buzz,”
were not adequately informed that the identity of their closest Gmail con¬
tacts would be made public. Google later agreed to settle charges by the
Federal Trade Commission that Buzz was deceptive, and paid $8.5 mil¬
lion to settle a class action lawsuit about Buzz. In 2012, my colleagues
and I broke the news that Google was bypassing the privacy settings of
the Safari browser used by millions of iPhone and other Apple users by
using a special computer code to trick their browsers into allowing
Google tracking. Later that year, Google agreed to pay $22.5 million to
settle the FTC charges that its Apple circumvention had violated the
terms of its Google Buzz settlement. The $22.5 million settlement was, at
the time, the FTC’s largest civil penalty of the kind. And in 2013, Google
agreed to pay $7 million to settle with thirty-eight attorneys generals
from thirty-eight states who claimed that Google violated people’s pri¬
vacy when its Street View cars inadvertently collected personal informa¬
tion from Wi-Fi networks.
    I also have too much data stored with Google. My audit revealed that
Google had stored all of my searches dating back to 2006 and had identi¬
fied all 2,192 people that I had e-mailed in that time. Given the outdated
privacy laws, I couldn’t expect the company to keep all that data secret. I
needed to go on a Google data diet.
   I started by quitting Google search.
   I’d been annoyed about the change in Google’s privacy policy,
announced in 2012, that allowed Google to combine information from its
various services, for example, using information about my searches to
show me customized ads on Gmail. Google also doesn’t delete search his¬
tory related to my account unless I delete it myself. If I search from a com¬
puter where I am not signed in to a Google account, it will remove some
identifiers from the data after nine months. Theoretically, that means the
government can ask Google for all my searches dating back to 2006. No
such requests have been disclosed publicly, but the availability of search
history seems like an open invitation for fishing expeditions.
   My searches are among the most sensitive information about me. If
I’m looking into buying a burner phone, all my searches are about burner
phones. If I’m researching an article about facial recognition technology,
all my searches are about facial recognition technology. Basically my
searches are a fairly accurate prediction of my future actions.
                                                           LEAVING GOOGLE   [II?]

   To replace Google search, I found a tiny search engine called Duck
DuckGo that has a zero-data retention policy. It doesn’t store any of the
information that is automatically transmitted by my computer—the IP
address and other digital footprints. As a result, DuckDuckGo has no way
to link my search queries to me. “When you access DuckDuckGo (or any
Web site), your Web browser automatically sends information about
your computer,” the company’s privacy policy states. “Because this infor¬
mation could be used to link you to your searches, we do not log (store) it
at all. This is a very unusual practice, but we feel it is an important step to
protect your privacy.”
   As soon as I switched, I realized how dependent on Google I had
become. Without Google’s suggested searches, and Google’s perfect mem¬
ory of what I usually search for, each search required more work from me.
For instance, DuckDuckGo doesn’t know that I live in New York City, so
when I mistyped “Naturaly History Museum,” it brought up the Natural
History Museum of Los Angeles. For comparison, I checked Google: sure
enough, it corrected my spelling and guessed I was in New York, listing the
American Museum of Natural History in Manhattan at the top of my
results.
   DuckDuckGo’s lack of knowledge about me forced me to be smarter
in my searches. For instance, I noticed I had become so lazy that I had
been typing URLs—such as CNN.com—into the Google search bar
instead of the navigation bar, even though I knew exactly where I was
going. So I began typing in the addresses into the correct spot on my
Web browser.
   The next thing I noticed: I had been Googling Web pages that I visit
very regularly—such as my kids’ schools and my yoga studio schedule—
instead of just bookmarking them. And so I began bookmarking
them.
   In fact, I had gotten so accustomed to letting Google do my work that
I found it a bit jarring to have to finish typing an entire word without
Google finishing it for me. Without Google’s suggestions, however, I
found that I was less distracted to search for things I didn’t need. No
more typing in the letter a and having Google suggest “amazon,” and
then suddenly remembering I needed to order something from Amazon
.com.
   With DuckDuckGo, I usually found what I wanted, although sometimes
[IIB]    DRAGNET NATION

it was strange to be confronted with just three results. I was so condi¬
tioned to seeing “millions” of results for everything on Google.
    But DuckDuckGo had some black holes. I desperately missed Google
Maps and couldn’t find any other online maps that I liked as much. And
I missed the Google News section.
    Before going to a friend’s dinner party, I searched to remind myself of
the promotion he had just landed at Columbia University. There had been
some recent news about it, but all my searches on his name alone, Sree
Sreenivasan, and his name and Columbia, turned up nothing. Finally, I
tried “Sree, Columbia and News” and an article popped up. The news
was there. I just had to retrain myself to use DuckDuckGo’s structure for
news searches.
    It dawned on me that I had tuned myself to Google. I had always
thought of Google as a clean sheet of paper—possibly because of its nice
white interface—but in fact I had molded my questions to adjust to how
Google likes to answer questions.
    Now I was tuning myself to a different service, DuckDuckGo, which
had different ways of answering questions. It was like a new relationship;
I was discovering my new partner’s quirks and foibles. And it was empow¬
ering; I was tuning myself to a partner that didn’t have a hidden agenda
of tracking me.
    I had broken free from Google, and the world was still on its axis. I
had mastered another service and could still find the information I needed.
The whole experience reminded me of a quote from Marc Andreessen, the
man who created Netscape, the first Web-browsing software, back in 1994.
“The spread of computers and the Internet will put jobs in two categories,”
Andreessen said in a 2012 interview. “People who tell computers what to
do, and people who are told by computers what to do.”
   Mastering my switch to DuckDuckGo made me feel I had a better
chance of being in the category of people who tell computers what
to do.



After using DuckDuckGo for a few months, I started to feel a bit uneasy.
Who were these guys that I was trusting? And why was their logo a duck
with a bow tie? It seemed kind of weird.
                                                          LEAVING GOOGLE   [119]

   For all my dislike of Google’s tracking practices, I had developed an
emotional snapshot of Google as a place with all the cheerful arrogance
of an Ivy League university. It had principles but few scruples: it took a
high-profile brave stand against censorship in China but was making
money off my personal data every day.
   I was having a hard time getting the same kind of mental image of
the principles and scruples behind a cheerful duck in a bow tie.
   And so I boarded a train to Philadelphia to meet the people behind
the duck. From Philadelphia, I rolled for another twenty minutes through
leafy suburbs and past the Bryn Mawr College campus before arriving at
my destination, Paoli. It was easy to spot DuckDuckGo’s founder, Gabriel
Weinberg, in the parking lot—he was the one whose car had duck
stickers on it. Other than his shock of auburn hair, he looked like any
other geek with his thick-framed glasses and a hoodie. I jumped in the
car and we drove two minutes to his office.
   To my surprise, we pulled into the parking lot behind a stone castle
with colorful round turrets. “You work in a castle?” I said.
   Yep, he did. DuckDuckGo’s offices were on the second floor, the walls
decorated with ducks. Weinberg had a polka-dot couch in his office and a
play area near his desk for his kids. He told me that his focus for the com¬
pany wasn’t initially about privacy. He just wanted to build a better
search engine. After selling a social networking website called the Names
Database for $10 million in 2006, he and his wife moved to Valley Forge,
Pennsylvania, so she could be close to her work at the pharmaceutical
giant GlaxoSmithKline.
   A freshly minted millionaire, Weinberg experimented with a bunch
of projects. He made his own TV studio, worked on a social network for
golfers, and started a service that sought to use crowdsourcing to find
better search results. As he played around with search, he started to get
increasingly annoyed by Google search results that were filled with the
equivalent of spam.
   So he decided to build a better search engine. “I wanted to go back to
the Google old days when the focus was on quality links,” he told me.
Privacy came up only after he launched the first version of the website to
the technology community, and some users asked about the site’s privacy
policies. “Honestly I hadn’t given it one thought at all until then,” Weinberg
 [120]   DRAGNET NATION

told me. “So I took a hard look at search privacy. I thought it was pretty
creepy what a search engine could have on someone—it’s arguably the
most sensitive data you could have on someone on the Internet. I decided
the coolest course of action would be to take it completely out of my
hands—and not store the stuff. After doing that, I realized this is kind of
a core thesis for the company.”
    By 2011, he had embraced privacy completely. He bought a billboard
in San Francisco that said, “Google Tracks You. We Don’t,” and accepted
an investment from a venture capital firm, Union Square Ventures, that
was betting on the emerging market for privacy tools.
    Over take-out sandwiches, a few of his engineers joined us to discuss
the challenges of building a search engine from scratch. We talked about
the challenges of building better maps and my frustrations with their
news search results. Keeping DuckDuckGo privacy-friendly was difficult.
The engineers had to build many of their technical tools from scratch.
For instance, they had to build their own blogging software because the
free blogging software contained tracking technology.
     It’s like you guys are survivalists,” I told Weinberg. “You have to grow
your own food and stock your own guns.”
    As we talked, I was surprised at how earnestly they approached build¬
ing a better search engine. Somehow, with the polka-dot couch, the
ducks, the castle, and Weinberg’s auburn hair, I had allowed myself to be
lulled into thinking that it was more of a hobby than an actual company.
But they appeared to be dead serious.
    It reminded me of when I was a reporter at the San Francisco Chroni¬
cle in the late 1990s. I was dismissive of this newfangled search engine
Google. I remember thinking: How could its reliance on machine-based
page ranking be better than the hand-curated results on my favorite search
engine, AltaVista?
    Now I was sitting on a polka-dot couch in suburban Philadelphia won¬
dering how a few guys working in a castle could pose a threat to a search
engine that pulls in nearly $30 billion a year.
   And yet, in the technology industry, some of the best ideas sound
crazy at first.
                                                          LEAVING GOOGLE   [121]

I really didn’t want to quit using Gmail. Most of my hacker friends used
it—even the ones who were paranoid about privacy. And Gmail makes it
so easy to share documents and to chat with other Gmail users.
    But it was hard to justify using an e-mail service that admitted to read-
ing my mail. Of course, Google says (and we have no reason to disbelieve
them) that humans aren’t reading my mail. It’s only computers that scan
my e-mail for keywords, and then insert ads based on those keywords.
    But that’s what the National Security Agency says about domestic spy¬
ing, too. Yes, its computers are scooping up all sorts of U.S. data “inad¬
vertently” in the course of foreign espionage. But it “minimizes” data
about U.S. citizens so that humans don’t see it except under certain con¬
ditions, such as during an intelligence investigation or if it contains evi¬
dence of a crime.
    Ultimately, the question is the same as for all dragnets: Will the data
be abused eventually? The answer seems doomed to be yes. In 2010,
Google fired an engineer for snooping on teenagers’ Gmail chats—and
said it was the second time an engineer had been fired for snooping on
user data. In 2008, two former NSA intercept operators revealed that they
and their colleagues had listened in on hundreds of Americans’ phone
calls—including phone sex.
   Still, I kept delaying my departure from Gmail. It was just so easy and
friendly and searchable.
   Finally, it was a project at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
that convinced me to find a new e-mail service. A group of researchers
there built a tool called Immersion that allowed people to visualize the
metadata in their Gmail accounts.
   It was a little hair-raising to authorize Immersion to access my Gmail
account, but the developers promised they would delete their findings.
So I took the plunge. After a few minutes of calculating, Immersion pre¬
sented me with a beautiful graphic showing my connections to my top
504 e-mail “collaborators”—people with whom I have exchanged more
than three e-mails. According to Immersion, my top “collaborator” was
my best friend, followed by my husband. (Gmail had already reported to
me that my husband was my most frequent e-mail partner. I’m not sure
which report is correct.)
   The graph of my collaborators looked like this:
 [122]   DRAGNET NATION




    The graphic made it crystal clear that I e-mailed about a dozen people
far more than anyone else. It reminded me how unique my social net¬
work was.
    Disturbed, I set about trying to disentangle myself from Gmail.
    I briefly considered running my own e-mail server at home after I ran
across a blog post called “NSA Proof your e-mail in 2 hours.” But I aban¬
doned the idea eight paragraphs into the post when the author stated,
 I m going to assume you’re running Debian Wheezy.” It was clearly too
technical a job for me.
    So I looked around for privacy-protecting e-mail services. It turned
out that there were dozens of them—with names such as Hushmail, Neo-
Mail, and CounterMail. I really liked CounterMail—a paid e-mail service
that passed the mud-puddle test—but I had to rule it out because it was
based in Sweden. As a U.S. citizen, my e-mail is protected by law. The
NSA has to at least minimize” its spying of U.S citizens’ e-mails. But if
the NSA thinks I am a foreigner, there are far fewer restrictions.
   That left only a few options based in the United States, including Lav-
abit, a Texas service that seems to have been used by Edward Snowden,
                                                                LEAVING GOOGLE   [123]

and Riseup, a service run by a collective in Seattle. After studying their
privacy policies, I decided Riseup was slightly more appealing. Both stored
minimal user information and passed the mud-puddle test. But Riseup
also stripped out location from e-mail addresses, while Lavabit said it
retained the location in e-mail addresses so it could be used by law
enforcement.
   Joining Riseup wasn’t easy. It was free but I needed to get “invited” by
a member. Luckily, I was able to arrange an invitation through Christo¬
pher Soghoian, a technologist at the American Civil Liberties Union who
also happens to be one of the most paranoid people I know (and I mean
that as a compliment).
   Invitation in hand, I started the signup process. But I was soon stumped
by the social contract that I was asked to sign:


   We ask that you do not use riseup.net services to advocate any of the
   following:

   • Support for capitalism, domination, or hierarchy.
   • The idea that class oppression supersedes race or gender oppression.
   • A vanguard strategy for revolution.
   • Population control.

   If you disagree with this, then riseup.net is not for you.


   Most of it was pretty unobjectionable. I was not planning to use Riseup
to foment revolution, to push population control, or to argue either side of
the class v. race/gender oppression debate. Nor was I likely to advocate
for domination or hierarchy.
   But disavowing “support for capitalism” was difficult. After all, I
worked for the Wall Street Journal—a newspaper that once promoted itself
with the tagline “Adventures in Capitalism.” But, I argued to myself, my
job as a reporter is to be a watchdog of capitalism, not to support capital¬
ism unreservedly. Maybe I was parsing words, but I decided I could agree
to Riseup’s social contract.
   I wasn’t done yet. I had to find a way to manage my e-mail from my
computer instead of from the Web. Riseup lets users store only a small
amount of data on its servers, which keeps its costs down and, more
important, means that there is less data for the government to grab from
 [124]   DRAGNET NATION

 Riseup. Of course, Riseup promises it will “actively fight” any attempt to
 obtain user data—but that is always an easier fight if there are no data to
 fight over.
    With or without Riseup’s quotas, I should have been storing my old
 e-mails on my computer instead of in Gmail’s “cloud.” The 1986 Elec¬
 tronic Communications Privacy Act allows the government to obtain
 e-mails stored with a third party after 180 days without a warrant, so
 storing old mail anywhere outside the home is, unfortunately, an invita¬
 tion to government dragnets.
    I searched around for e-mail software that was privacy-friendly. The
 best option was a free open-source project, Thunderbird, which supported
 encrypted e-mails. But Thunderbird’s biggest backer, Mozilla, withdrew
 support for it in 2012.
    Hewing to my guiding principle of “Pay for performance,” I purchased
 a paid version of Thunderbird, called Postbox. (I also donated to the
Riseup collective, in the hopes of keeping the e-mail service alive.) I down¬
loaded all my Gmail into Postbox and set up Riseup to work with Postbox.
Once I got it working, I felt an amazing sense of freedom. Suddenly, I could
easily switch between e-mail providers; I could receive an e-mail in Gmail
and reply from my Riseup account.
    Strangely, I was tentative at first about using my Riseup account. I
was worried that people wouldn’t want to be linked to e-mails from an
anticapitalist collective. So I e-mailed a few people who I thought would
be most worried—people in top government jobs and high-ranking busi¬
ness executives and asked if they minded me e-mailing them from an
anarchist collective address.
   The responses ranged from “Huh?” to “What?” Nobody seemed to
care. It occurred to me that when I joined Gmail, I never asked anyone to
 agree to have his or her e-mails scanned by Google.
   (It is worth noting that a few non-Gmail users have joined a class
action complaint against Google over this very issue, on the theory that
Google is violating the Wiretap Act when it scans e-mails they send to
Gmail users. Google argues that there is implied consent, “just as a sender
of a letter to a business colleague cannot be surprised that the recipient’s
assistant opens the letter.” I’m not sure I buy that argument. After all, I
always ask before opening my husband’s mail.)
   I realized I was doing my e-mail contacts a favor by switching to a
                                                        LEAVING GODGLE   [125]

service that wasn’t going to scan their messages. I stopped asking and
began using Riseup for all my professional contacts.
   But I didn’t pull the plug on Gmail entirely. I decided to keep it, just
as I have kept my AOL account all those years. AOL has slowly devolved
into my e-mail address for online shopping. I decided to keep Gmail and
use it only to handle my “mom” e-mails—setting up playdates for my
kids, signing my kids up for camp, and communicating with school
through the inevitable Google shared documents.
   As a final step, I downloaded all my shared Google documents onto my
hard drive. Now I would rarely need to log in to Google’s website again.
And frosting on the cake: in case I decided to sneak in an occasional
Google search, it wouldn’t be tied to my identity if I wasn’t logged in to
Google. (Although the searches would still be tied to my computer IP
address, unless I masked my address by using anonymizing software.)
   I felt as if I had scaled a kind of technological Everest. I had taken
control of my e-mail. It no longer controlled me.

                                    +
My euphoria was short-lived.
   In August 2013, Edward Snowden’s e-mail service, Lavabit, abruptly
shut down. The founder, Ladar Levison, wrote that he shut down rather
than “become complicit in crimes against the American people.” Levison
said he was planning to take his fight to the Fourth Circuit Court of
Appeals, implying that he had already fought—and lost—in a lower court.
   As in so many electronic surveillance cases, Levison received a gag
order that prevented him from discussing the request. But after some
documents were unsealed in the case, Levison disclosed that he had been
asked to hand over the encryption keys that would have unlocked all of
his users’ communications. In other words, he’d been asked to breach
the mud-puddle test. “It was the equivalent of asking Coca-Cola to hand
over its secret formula,” Levison said.
   That kind of thing had happened to an encrypted e-mail service before.
In 2007, Hushmail, a privacy-oriented e-mail service, strongly suggested
that it may have been ordered by a court to install software that could
intercept a user’s password when that user logged in to the service, thus
allowing the government to decrypt the user’s data.
   I could understand why Levison decided to shut down on principle
[126]   DRAGNET NATION

rather than oreach his users’ privacy. But I couldn’t help also feeling for
the four hundred thousand people who lost their e-mail accounts with¬
out any notice. “Years of email accounts, saved email and important details
all gone without any notice. Disgrace of a company,” wrote one user on
Lavabit’s Facebook page. “This is horrible.... Thanks for screwing up
my life,” posted another user.
   It could have been me. Lavabit had been my runner-up choice for an
e-mail service.
   After Lavabit shut down, another privacy-protecting company, Silent
Circle, abruptly shut down its e-mail service. The company said that it
had not yet received any government requests, but it wanted to act before
any requests arrived. “We see the writing on the wall, and we have decided
that it is best for us to shut down Silent Mail now, the company wrote.
    Suddenly, Riseup was among the last privacy-protecting services stand¬
ing. The Riseup collective posted a message reassuring users that it would
fight any attempts at government surveillance and was working to build a
“radical new infrastructure” that would better protect users’ e-mails.
However, this message was not entirely reassuring.
    “We would rather pull the plug than submit to repressive surveillance
by our government, or any government,” the collective’s leaders wrote.
And they reminded users to download and back up their e-mails.
    As I triple-checked that I was backing up my e-mails onto my hard
drive and into my encrypted cloud service, I thought about how absurd
my privacy journey was becoming.
    I was hoarding all my data in case of an apocalypse. And even more
strangely, the apocalypse seems to be right around the corner. I was turn¬
ing into a data survivalist.
Ida Tarbell was an investigative journalist who exposed the abuses of
    the Standard Oil Company at the turn of the twentieth century. She is
    also my alter ego.
     Creating a fake identity was a key part of my strategy of data pollution.
In cases where I couldn’t avoid a dragnet, most likely when buying things
or logging in to websites, I would try to contribute Ida’s information to
the dragnet rather than my own. After all, there is no reason that every
single website that requires a log-on needs to know my real name.
     Of course, a determined adversary would likely be able to connect the
dots between Ida and me. But I wasn’t looking for perfect; I just wanted
to force the trackers to put some effort into tracking me specifically, rather
than sweeping up data about me effortlessly.
     I chose Ida because she is part of a generation of journalists that I
admire. Known as “muckrakers,” investigative journalists such as Ida Tar¬
bell and Upton Sinclair exposed the underbelly of the industrial revolu¬
tion, from monopolistic price gouging by the trusts to working conditions
in slaughterhouses. Their work led to laws that reined in the worst excesses
of the era.
    I believe that today we are at a similar turning point. As our nation
shifts toward an information economy, there are few laws policing the
booming industry giants and few governmental or nonprofit institutions
 [1211]   DRAGNET NAIIOII

with the technical savvy to police the information economy. And so it
falls to today’s muckrakers—investigative journalists and conscientious
objectors like Edward Snowden—to reveal the underbelly of the infor¬
mation revolution. I hope that once we see the abuses clearly, we will be
able to find a way to restrain the excesses of the information age.
     But I wasn’t sure how to create an online identity for Ida. I had already
decided that I wasn’t going to create a fake driver’s license. But every¬
thing else—fake e-mail addresses, phone numbers, mailing addresses—
was fair game.
     I soon found myself on a slippery slope of lies.

                                       +
I started small. I set up a Gmail account for Ida, which meant creating a
birthday and a zip code for her. I decided that she lived in Berkeley, Cali¬
fornia, and was born in 1966.
     Then I started making reservations in the name of Ida Tarbell at a few
restaurants. The problem was that Ida didn’t have a cell phone—and res¬
taurants often asked me for a phone number when I made the reservation.
     I was able to convince some restaurants to give me a reservation with¬
out a phone number, by promising that I would call them to confirm the
reservation. They said okay, and often if I forgot to call they still kept
the reservation.
     But I found that lying was difficult for me: I got a little bit red and hot
whenever I had to say the name Ida. I soon realized that Ida needed an
OpenTable account—to book online reservations—so that I wouldn’t have
to lie on the phone.
    But when I tried to sign up for OpenTable, it asked for a cell phone
number. I knew that I should just enter a random phone number such
as 212-555-1212, but somehow I couldn’t do it. I abandoned the sign-up
screen.
    This was the same problem I had with passwords. The problem wasn’t
the technology. The problem was my mind.

                                       -j—



I’m a terrible liar.
    I squirm and I don’t make eye contact and my face gets hot and red.
Or I giggle. I’m such a terrible liar that a colleague once took me aside
                                                        IKTIDDOUIE IDA   [129]

and told me that I should never attempt to lie because I can’t do it cor¬
rectly.
    I had always believed that it was easier to lie online. Some studies
show that avoiding the physical cues that accompany lies can make lying
online easier. But I wasn’t finding the process any easier online. I didn’t
understand why until I stumbled on the research of Jeff Hancock, a psy¬
chologist at Cornell University who studies online deception.
    In a 2012 study, Hancock asked 119 college students to create a tradi¬
tional resume or a public Linkedln profile, and then analyzed the truth¬
fulness of the results. The students who created traditional resumes
were more likely to exaggerate information about their previous work
experiences than those who created Linkedln public profiles. But the
Linkedln folks were more likely to lie about their hobbies and interests.
On the whole, Hancock said, “those Linkedln resumes were more hon¬
est on the things that mattered to employers, like your responsibilities or
your skills at a previous job.”
   In an earlier study, Hancock compared people’s real height, weight,
and age with what they stated in an online dating profile. Most people
exaggerated, but only by a little bit. Most of the men lied about their
height, Hancock said. “In fact, they lied about their height about nine
tenths of an inch, what we say in the lab as strong rounding up.’ ”
   Hancock believes that people can be more honest online than in per¬
son if they believe they will be held accountable for what they write. In
other studies, he found that lies increase when the conversation is more
ephemeral—whether an online chat or a face-to-face conversation. Truth¬
fulness increases when the people knew each other in real life. In short,
Hancock speculates that it is harder to lie when you are creating a perma¬
nent record for which you know you will be held accountable. After my
data audit, I am keenly aware that everything I do is being recorded. So it
makes sense that I have a hard time lying online.
   Now that I understood the situation, I faced a difficult choice: Was it
ethical for me to try to overcome my aversion to lying? To answer this
question, I found myself in the company of philosophers. One of the stron¬
gest views on lying was held by the eighteenth-century German philoso¬
pher Immanuel Kant, who argued that lying was always wrong—even if
a murderer shows up at your door seeking an innocent victim.
   As a mother, I found it easy to discard Kant’s extreme view. Any mother
[130]     DRAGNET NATION

knows that sometimes you have to lie to your children. When my son’s
fingertip was sliced off in an accident and we were in the emergency
room, I did not tell him the truth—which was that the surgeon was stuck
in a blinding snowstorm and was not sure he would be able to get to the
hospital in time to sew it up. I told him that everything was going to be
okay. (And, yes, the plastic surgeon was able to stitch up my son’s finger—
but it took him nearly five hours to get to the hospital.)
    So, in my mind, some lies are acceptable. But which ones? I found
myself attracted to the “publicity test” described by the Harvard writer
and philosopher Sissela Bok: “Which lies, if any, would survive the appeal
for justification to reasonable persons?”
    Some of the questions she asks:


    • Are there truthful alternatives to your lie?
    • What is the moral justification for telling the lie?
    • What is the relationship that exists between you and the person you
        are lying to?
    • What goods and bads will be brought about by your lie?
    • What would happen if everyone in your situation lied?


   Here, I felt myself to be on fairly solid ground. I was planning to use
my fake identity for commercial transactions with companies that I
believed were asking for more information from me than necessary to
complete a transaction.
   I can walk to a newsstand, hand over cash, and anonymously buy a
copy of a newspaper. But every online newspaper wants me to fork over
my identity—even if it is only for a “free” subscription. Similarly, I used
to go to my local bookstore and buy books in cash. Now, all the book¬
stores are dying, and Amazon is my local bookstore. But why does Ama¬
zon need anything more than my money? Do restaurants where I book a
reservation really need anything more from me than my money?
   Some, if not all, of this information was clearly going to be used against
me. Consider two examples.
   In 2012, the International Air Transport Association adopted new
rules that would allow the airlines to present different prices to differ¬
ent customers. The New York Times editorial board warned that the
new pricing model will likely be used to present higher prices to people
                                                         IHIRODUCING IDA   [131]

who try to shop anonymously and to people who appear to be able to
pay more.
    In 2013, Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina said it began buy¬
ing information from data brokers about the spending habits of more
than three million people that it covers. The insurer said it could flag
people who purchase items such as plus-size clothing and send them
information about weight-loss plans.
    To me, all this was the beginning of an era of financial manipula¬
tion. Big companies were seeking to use personal data to gain leverage
over me. So I felt my lie was justified as a way of rebalancing the
relationship.
    However, Bok’s last question gave me pause. What would it be like to
live in a world where everybody had fake identities?
    I tried to envision that world. It would be a world where you couldn’t
trust people you didn’t know in real life, where you wouldn’t open e-mails
from people claiming to be a friend of a friend and where you couldn’t
trust reviews from an untrusted source. Maybe it was even the kind of
world where a famous football star could be hoaxed into falling in love
with a woman he met online; the woman was really a fictional identity
created by a man who was in love with him. (For those who don’t know,
I just described the story of the Notre Dame linebacker Manti Te’o.) Maybe
I don’t have a good enough imagination, but it sounded a lot like the world
we live in today.
   And what about the appeals to reasonable persons? The people I con¬
sulted thought I was silly to even ask about the ethics of a harmless lie.
My husband thought fake names were okay as long as I didn’t get a fake
ID card. My children’s godmother thought it was a no-brainer; she already
had several different fake e-mail addresses that she used for different
aspects of her life. A colleague thought it was a great idea and started set¬
ting up fake name accounts right away.
   It was admittedly a small sample, but I decided that my lying passed
the publicity test.

                                     ♦
With my newfound commitment to lying, I regrouped and started again
with Ida’s online identity. This time I was serious: I was going to get a
credit card for Ida Tarbell.
 [132]   DRAGNET NATION

     I got the idea for Ida’s credit card from the cryptographer }on Callas.
 He had come to my office to show me apps he had built that let you encrypt
 calls and texts from your iPhone. I mentioned to him my struggles to build
 a robust alternate identity. Without missing a beat, he pulled out his wallet
 and fanned out an array of credit cards with different names—including
 one with the name Dale B. Cooper, after the FBI special agent in the ’90s
 TV show Twin Peaks.
     It’s easy, he told me. Just tell the credit card company that you want a
new card with a new name added to your existing account. Parents do it
for their kids all the time.
    Aha. Now I got it. It was a threat model problem. Hiding my identity
from the credit card company wasn’t the threat. Hiding my identity from
everywhere that I spend money was the threat. If I was suspected of a
crime, a prosecutor could send a subpoena to American Express to learn
the true identity of Ida Tarbell.
    I decided to do it. I tried requesting a new card through the American
Express website, but the website said that I needed to call. Finally, I called
from the office late one night when no one was around. I still felt shy. I
didn’t want anyone in my family—or at the office—to overhear me.
    Of course, the customer service representative was completely unruf¬
fled by my request for an additional card to be linked to my account. He
asked Ida’s birth date—luckily I had one from making the e-mail account.
When he asked for Ida’s social security number, I just said I didn’t have
one. He didn’t even blink, just moved on. The card would be in the mail
within a few days, he said.
    A few days went by, and no card. A week, then two weeks. Finally, I
called and requested another card. A week went by and that card didn’t
arrive, either.
    Meanwhile, I started getting e-mails and calls from American Express
asking for Ida s social security number. The automated calls said, “Press 1
if you are Ida, press 2 if not. Press 1 if Ida is available, 2 if not.” I felt trapped
by the questions: I wasn’t Ida or not Ida. So I hung up.
   I started to wonder if the missing social security number was delay¬
ing the card. But I forced myself to call one more time. The representa¬
tive said she would overnight me a new card.
   The next day it arrived—nice and shiny and green with Ida’s name in
                                                       IITIODUCIIG IDA   [133]

raised letters. I had never loved a card so much. That evening, when my
husband came home from work, I showed the card to him proudly.
   “Oh!” he said. “Why didn’t you tell me you were Ida Tarbell? I have
been throwing out her mail for weeks.”
   Note to self: in the future, warn husband before setting up fake
identity.



Now Ida needed a new mailing address.
   Having seen my files from data brokers, it was clear to me that if Ida
started receiving mail regularly at my address, she would eventually show
up as an associate or family member in my records.
   I considered getting Ida a post office box, but the post office requires
users to present identification when picking up packages. That wasn’t going
to work. I checked with the UPS Store, but it had the same policy
requiring identification when picking up packages.
   So I convinced a friend to accept mail and packages for Ida. My
friend lived in a big apartment building where everyone’s mail is sorted
into mailboxes, similar in size to post office boxes. All I had to do was
tape Ida Tarbell’s name inside the mailbox and, presto, Ida had an
address.
   With a credit card and an address, Ida’s possibilities were limitless.
Still, I wanted to be cautious with her online accounts.
   I consulted with Michael Sussmann, the former Justice Department
prosecutor who now works as outside attorney for companies such as
Google. He told me that most Web services keep the registration Internet
address forever, so it is worth being mindful of the location from which I
set up my accounts.
   So I launched Ida’s online life by taking my laptop to a cafe with free
Wi-Fi. I sat down, ordered a cappuccino, opened up my laptop, and
launched Tor, the anonymizing software that masks the Internet address
of your computer by routing traffic around the world. This time, I appeared
to be in Germany.
   Browsing on Tor is slow. As a test, I typed New York University’s Web
address, www.nyu.edu, into the Tor browser and into the regular Firefox
Web browser and clocked each of them. It took twenty seconds to launch
 [134]   DRAGNET NATION

in Tor and three seconds to launch in Firefox. At least I had plenty of
time to sip my coffee as I browsed on Tor.
    I started by signing up for a free e-mail account for Ida from Micro¬
soft’s Outlook.com. I steeled myself and entered 212-867-5309 as her
backup phone number (after the famous ’80s song by Tommy Tutone). I
turned off Microsoft’s targeted ads feature.
    Feeling quite pleased with myself, I also set up an OpenTable account
for Ida, using the Outlook address. I left the phone number entry blank.
(I don’t know why that hadn’t occurred to me earlier.) And then I set up
an Amazon.com account for Ida, using my friend’s mailing address and
Ida’s credit card number. I declined Amazon’s offer to provide Ida with
the “Amazon betterizer,” which would provide her with more personal¬
ized recommendations.
    The first book I ordered was a used copy of Surveillance in the Stacks:
The FBI’s Library Awareness Program. Published in 1991, it is a librari¬
an’s recounting of the FBI’s efforts in the 1980s to enlist librarians to
spy on books checked out by foreigners, the program that prompted
nearly every state to adopt laws protecting the confidentiality of library
circulation records.
  This was my privacy joke: using a fake name to order a book about
why privacy of books should be protected.



It took me a while to learn when to deploy Ida and when to be myself.
    Ida ordered all my books from Amazon. She made all my restaurant
reservations. And she paid for my meals in restaurants when I was meet¬
ing someone for an interview. Soon, I had half a dozen online accounts
for Ida. I built a spreadsheet with all of her log-ins and passwords.
    But I learned there were some things Ida couldn’t do. I tried to use
Idas credit card in a Modell’s sporting goods store and the clerk asked
for identification to match my credit card. So I paid cash. The same thing
happened at Old Navy, but not at the rag & bone designer store, where
Ida purchased a sweater, no problem. It seemed that Ida needed to stick
to designer stores.
  Ida also made me aware of where I was known. When I sat down at
my favorite bar near my office, the bartender greeted me by name with,
                                                         INTRODUCING IOA   [135]

“Hi, Julia.” I was surprised she knew my name—although we have often
chatted at the bar, I didn’t remember telling her my name. I realized she
must know me from ringing up my credit card purchases. I also realized
I would arouse suspicion if I suddenly switched identities. So when it
came time to pay the bartender, I tucked my Ida Tarbell card back in my
purse and pulled out my Julia Angwin card.
   The more I used Ida, the more I worried about overusing her identity.
Soon she was going to have a credit score of her own. Already, Ida was
getting credit card offers in the mail from other companies. (American
Express says it doesn’t sell its customers’ names, so it’s not clear how Ida
got on the marketing lists.) If I wasn’t careful, Ida was going to end up on
my data broker reports listed as an “alias.”
   I realized I wanted more fake identities to lessen the burden on Ida.



I didn’t have the mental energy to build another Ida, what with thinking
up her birthday and her hometown and her passwords, and summoning
the courage to lie about her.
   I wanted an easier, faster way to create fake identities.
   I found that there were plenty of services that let you create dispos¬
able e-mail addresses—mostly to prevent spam. For instance, if I created
an account at a website called spamgourmet.com, I could create unique
e-mail addresses for each website that I logged in to.
   Once again, however, I was lazy: I didn’t want to think up new e-mail
identities. So I started using a free service called MaskMe, from a pri¬
vacy start-up called Abine, which would create a new fake e-mail
address for every account. For instance, when ForeignPolicy.com asked
me to create an account to read an article, MaskMe created an e-mail
address for me to use to log in: 18123al8@opayq.com. MaskMe for¬
warded to me all e-mails sent to that address. But if a website sent too
many e-mails, I could instruct MaskMe to block them.
   I enjoyed blocking e-mails. After receiving three e-mails from Klout,
a social influence ranking company that I had logged in to during my
audit, I blocked them. After seven e-mails from RecordedFuture.com, a
big data analysis company, I blocked them.
   I also signed up for a premium service from MaskMe for $5 a month,
 [136]   DRAGNET NATION

which issued me a new phone number that I could then forward to any
phone. Now, I could enter my phone number onto forms without worry¬
ing about receiving annoying marketing calls.
     I was starting to get the hang of this lying business. The best way to
do it was to automate it.



But it was hard to automate deception at the cash register.
     Of course, I could always use cash. Unloved and untrendy, cash is
mostly anonymous. U.S. notes contain serial numbers and some true pri¬
vacy paranoids will exchange cash to avoid being tracked by the serial
number. But for my threat model—avoiding dragnets—cash is fine.
    However, carrying a lot of cash is unwieldy and often impractical. I
tried to wean myself off credit cards, but I still preferred them—mostly
because I like to keep track of my spending and I hated stuffing my wal¬
let full of cash receipts and trying to remember to log them later.
    I tried using a $200 prepaid debit card, which I bought at a drugstore
for cash. I used it for small purchases—lunch near my office, coffee, a
pair of $27 shorts at J.Crew. I liked how the receipts said “MyGiftCard”
where the name would normally be located, and cashiers didn’t blink
when I handed it over. But as the balance on the card declined, I stopped
using it. I felt silly asking a clerk to charge $5.32 to the card and have me
pay the rest in cash. And yet I hated wasting the last dollars.
    So I tried another route: a disposable credit card number. These are
onetime numbers that can just be used at a single merchant. In effect,
they are prepaid debit cards issued for each transaction. I got my dispos¬
able credit card numbers from MaskMe Premium, the same service that
gave me disposable e-mail addresses and phone numbers.
    My first attempt to use my disposable credit card number was a disas¬
ter. I wanted new yoga tops to replace the ones I had that were fraying. So
I found the tops online and put them in my online shopping basket. I
then entered my real name and address for shipping and billing. Once
the website calculated the price—including shipping—MaskMe generated
a credit card number that I could use for the exact amount of the trans¬
action. But the card was rejected. I tried again but got the same message:
PAYMENT AUTHORIZATION TRANSACTION DECLINED.

   Now I was in a bind. MaskMe seemed to think I had paid. The credit
                                                        IIIRODUCIIGIIA   [11?]

card number stated that the money had been spent. But the website didn’t
think it had been paid. My money was lost somewhere in the ether.
   After an hour on the phone with Abine, I figured out my mistake: I
needed to enter Abine’s address as my billing address. In the meantime,
I called the website, canceled the transaction, and ordered the tops over
the phone using my regular credit card number.
   A week later, I tried again, buying a CD of kids’ folk songs from the
Smithsonian—using Abine’s address as my billing address. This time
it went through, no problem. Phew. Of course, this whole thing seemed
a bit silly because I was still providing my real name and address for
the goods to be shipped. I decided to try to find a more anonymous
currency.
   I hoped to buy bitcoins, a virtual digital currency that was all the rage
in the hacker community. But I couldn’t find a place that would let me
buy bitcoins with a credit card. They all wanted my bank account num¬
ber or a wire transfer—apparently because people often call their credit
card company complaining that they didn’t receive their virtual coins.
   Bitcoins can be used on online “black markets” that can sell drugs
and weapons. However, some brick-and-mortar businesses have started
accepting bitcoins. In May 2013, Kashmir Hill, a reporter for Forbes, lived
for a week only on bitcoins—subsisting mostly via a food delivery service
in San Francisco that accepted the currency.
   However, all Bitcoin transactions are logged and publicly viewable.
People’s names are not attached to their transactions, but a determined
investigator could likely identify people behind certain Bitcoin transac¬
tions. This was not the anonymity I was seeking.

                                    -4jh


The deeper I looked at anonymous digital transactions, the less I liked
them. They seemed to be havens for criminals.
   In 2007, a digital cash start-up, E-gold, was charged with money laun¬
dering. The indictment said the company knew that its services were used
by identity thieves, child pornographers, and other criminals. The follow¬
ing year the company and its owners pleaded guilty to money laundering.
And in 2013, federal prosecutors shut down the anonymous online
currency exchange Liberty Reserve, charging that it was a $6 billion
money-laundering operation for child pornographers and other criminals.
[138]   DRAGNET NATION

“If Al Capone were alive today, this is how he would be hiding his
money,” said Richard Weber, the head of the Internal Revenue Services
criminal investigation division.
    Some have even predicted that truly anonymous financial transac¬
tions could cause society to break down. In 1996, self-proclaimed Inter¬
net anarchist Jim Bell posted on an Internet forum an essay titled
“Assassination Politics,” describing how anonymous cash could enable
the establishment of cash prizes to people who correctly “predict some¬
body’s death. “It would be possible to make such awards in such a way so
that nobody knows who is getting awarded the money, only that the award
is being given.” Bell described this death prediction market as a way to
punish “violators of rights” by putting a price on their heads. “Consider
how history might have changed if we’d been able to ‘bump off’ Lenin,
Stalin, Hitler, Mussolini, Tojo, Kim II Sung, Ho Chi Minh, Ayatollah Kho¬
meini, Saddam Hussein, Moammar Khadafi, and various others, along
with all of their replacements if necessary, all for a measly few million dol¬
lars,” he wrote.
    Bell’s idea of placing “bounties” on the heads of government officials
wasn’t well received. In 1997, IRS agents raided Bell’s home. He was
charged with obstruction of justice and using fake social security num¬
bers. He was sentenced to eleven months in prison.
    Bell was clearly staking out an extreme position. But his essay made
me reconsider Sissela Bok’s ethical question: What would happen if every¬
one in your situation lied?
    I started to think that what I really wanted was not anonymity but
immunity. I wanted to be immunized from the consequences of my
inconsequential transactions. I didn’t want people having lunch with me
to be suspected of passing information to a journalist. I didn’t want my
purchases to peg me as a “high spender” so that I would never be offered
discounts online. I didn’t want to be suspected of being an anarchist after
exploring bitcoins. However, I did not expect or want immunity from
criminal transactions.
    My desire for immunity from the consequences of commerce reminded
me of the anthropologist David Graeber’s beautiful meditation on the
meaning and moral implications of debt. In his book Debt: The First 5,000
Years, Graeber describes how there are debts that should never be paid,
such as our debt to our parents or a debt for an unsolicited kindness.
                                                      INTRODUCING IDA   [139]

   Only some debts can be settled with money. Those debts have certain
characteristics, he says. They are debts between “potential equals” but
“who are not currently in a state of equality” who use money to set mat¬
ters straight. “Debt... is just an exchange that has not been brought to
completion,” he writes.
   I realized that the immunity I wanted was similar to what a debtor
seeks: I wanted my debts to be fully discharged—returning me to a state
of equality with my debtor—once my transaction had been completed.
   But in the personal data economy, it seemed that I would never be
free of my debts. All my transactions would haunt me forever, stalking
me and informing the choices that were presented to me. And so, until I
could find a better way, I was going to have to rely on Ida and my masked
identities to settle my debts.
POCKET LITTER


I   was standing under the world clock tower on Alexanderplatz in Berlin,
    feeling nervous. I had just arrived in the city and had arranged to meet
    Jacob Appelbaum, the computer security researcher whose e-mail had
been secretly investigated by the U.S. government after his involvement
as a volunteer for WikiLeaks was publicly disclosed in 2010. But I didn’t
have any way to get in touch with him—no cell phone number, no street
address, nothing. I simply had to wait to see if he would show up at our
planned meeting point.
     I’d flown halfway around the world for this meeting. But I had no
backup plan if he didn’t show up. I felt exposed.
     This is what it takes for me to do my job as a journalist in a world
where my location can be tracked remotely through my cell phone. That
means I must meet some of my sensitive sources in person, without the
aid of digital technology.
     And so I stood awkwardly under the clock that for decades has been
a meeting point for people in Berlin. Everyone around me was checking
his or her phone. I imagined them texting their friends with those reas¬
suring exchanges—“Where r u?” “On my way”—that are the privilege of
the digital age. I had no such digital reassurance.
     I glanced at a long-haired man locking up his bicycle. Was that Jake?
It occurred to me that I had only seen his picture on the Internet—and
                                                           POCKET LIIIER   [Ml]

for all I know, he could be shielding his identity by using an outdated or
inaccurate photo. But the bicyclist pulled out a cell phone to make a call,
so I decided it wasn’t him. A few minutes later, my gaze landed on a man
with wire-rim glasses who was not staring into a phone. Maybe it was
him? But he didn’t glance at me, and a few minutes later he waved to a
man across the plaza.
    Finally, without warning, Jake appeared right at my side. He looked
exactly as I expected. Since my photo is easily findable online, he recog¬
nized me immediately. I sighed with relief as we walked to a nearby cof¬
fee shop to talk.
    Eventually, I confessed that my cell phone was in my purse. I knew I
shouldn’t have brought it, but at the last minute I threw it in my bag. I
was in a strange city and I was afraid that somehow I would need it.
    “I turned it off,” I said, apologetically.
    “Ha!” Jake laughed. “How do you know it’s off?” he said. “Did you
remove the battery? Spyware could have been installed on your phone to
force it to continue to transmit information even when it appears to be off.”
   At the time, I thought that Jake was being slightly paranoid. As a
WikiLeaks volunteer who is often detained at the U.S. border, Jake is far
more attuned to surveillance threats than most people. But in this case
he was right. About a year after our meeting, Ira “Gus” Hunt, the chief
technology officer for the Central Intelligence Agency, gave a speech brag¬
ging about the CIA’s capability to track mobile devices. “You are aware of
the fact that somebody can know where you are at all times, because you
carry a mobile device, even if that mobile device is turned off,” Hunt said
in a speech titled “The CIA’s ‘Grand Challenges’ with Big Data.” “You
know this, I hope? Yes? Well, you should.”
   It’s still not clear exactly what tracking technology Hunt was refer¬
ring to. But in 2006, the FBI sought and obtained a court order to install
a “roving bug” on the phone of a mobster that allowed agents to eaves¬
drop even when his phone was off. Hunt was confirming what Jake and
others already knew: our cell phones are the world’s most effective track¬
ing devices, even when they are turned off.

                                       -j-


In spycraft, there is a term of art called “pocket litter.” It used to mean,
literally, the scraps of paper and other items that can be found in a
[H2]   DRAGNET NATION

person’s pocket. These items often contain information about the per¬
son’s associations—phone numbers, addresses, an account number—that
can further an investigation.
   Today, our pockets contain the ultimate litter: cell phones that are
miniature computers. In them can be found our entire address book, nearly
all of our written communications, our photos, our music, and even the
games we like to play.
   Even worse, our electronic pocket litter can sometimes be viewed
remotely. In the old days, law enforcement agents had to arrest a suspect
before they could search his pockets. Now, commercial and governmental
dragnet operators can view the location and some of the contents of our
phones from afar—by demanding information from cell phone carriers.
   The most outrageous example of cell phone monitoring is, of course,
the program exposed by the former NSA contractor Edward Snowden, in
which for seven years the phone companies have been turning over every
single record of calls made in the United States. President Obama described
the program as simply collecting “call pairs.” He gave a very innocuous
description: “You have my telephone number connecting with your tele¬
phone number. There are no names, there’s no content in that database.
All it is, is the number pairs, when those calls took place, how long they
took place.”
   The vast majority of local police departments also track cell phone
usage by submitting secret requests to cell phone companies, often with¬
out obtaining a search warrant. In 2011, the top U.S. wireless carriers
responded to 1.3 million law enforcement demands for subscriber infor¬
mation, including caller location. For instance, AT&T said it responded
to about seven hundred requests a day—approximately three times the
number it received in 2007.
   As warrantless cell phone tracking has increased, some judges have
started questioning its legality. Since 2005, more than a dozen magistrate
judges have written opinions denying applications for court orders to track
cell phones. The revolt started in 2005 when Stephen Smith, a magistrate
judge in the Southern District of Texas, turned down a government request
for real-time cell phone location data. Smith challenged the government’s
“creative” legal theory to justify not needing a search warrant. After Smith’s
decision, magistrate judges across the country began turning down war¬
rantless requests for cell phone location data.
                                                            POCKET LITTER   [143]

    Higher courts have split on the issue of access to historical cell phone
location data. In 2010, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals ruled that mag¬
istrate judges have the discretion to require a search warrant for histori¬
cal cell phone records, even though “we are stymied by the failure of
Congress to make its intention clear.” But in 2013, the Fifth Circuit Court of
Appeals overturned a 2010 decision by Judge Smith to deny historical cell
phone location records to the government without a warrant. “We under¬
stand that cell phone users may reasonably want their location informa¬
tion to remain private ...” Judge Edith Brown Clement wrote. “But the
recourse for these desires is in the market or the political process.”
    Until the Supreme Court or Congress sorts it out, cell phone dragnets
are the law of the land.



How important is pocket litter? Whom we call and when we call can be
just as revealing as what we say.
   Spies who cannot read the contents of their enemies’ messages have
long relied on what is known as “traffic analysis”—studying the patterns
of the sender, the receiver, the time, and the length of messages. During
World War I, the French had difficulty deciphering the German code—
known as the ADFGVX cipher. But they knew that the cipher was used
to communicate orders and directions for an advance, so they were able
to predict the approximate time of German offensives during the spring
and summer of 1918. Even when the Germans changed radio call signs—
the characters that identified the broadcaster—the French traffic analysts
could identify the calls by other patterns. “Several days prior to an oper¬
ation the volume of messages which were intercepted always increased
noticeably above the normal,” U.S. Army Lieutenant J. R. Childs wrote in
German Military Ciphers from February to November 1918.
   During World War II, the Japanese outsmarted the United States in
part by creating deceptive radio traffic. Prior to the attack on Pearl Har¬
bor, the Japanese transferred their aircraft radio operators ashore, which
persuaded Americans that the Japanese fleet was still in port.
   The United States learned its lesson. In 1942, it set up a traffic analysis
group devoted to studying the Japanese messages in the Pacific. Although
it didn’t break the Japanese codes until 1943, the traffic analysis unit was
able to “identify troop locations, chain of command and order of battle.”
[144]   DRAGNET NATION

    During the 1950s, the National Security Agency moved traffic analy-
sis from punch cards to computers. The goal of a traffic analyst was to
“draw a picture of his communications target,” according to a 1982 NSA
study. “Once he knows what his target’s normal behavior is, then he is in
a position to detect variations, and report them to intelligence consumers.”
   Those “anomalies” can divulge a lot of information. In 2004, Hezbol¬
lah in Lebanon captured what some estimates place at one hundred
spies—which may have included some CIA operatives—by identifying
cell phones that were rarely used or used only from specific locations for
a short period of time.



The more I learned about cell phone dragnets, the more impossible it
seemed that I would be able to escape them.
   The obvious solution was to leave the phone at home but, as a mother
of small children, I felt it would be irresponsible not to be reachable on
my cell phone at any time of day or night—and my husband agreed. So I
decided that the next best thing would be to buy a “burner.” Burners are
a slang term for prepaid phones that are used for a short time and then
ditched.
   Burners are not a perfect option—with enough effort, investigators
can tie a burner to your identity based on your calling patterns or loca¬
tion. But buying one anonymously means that, at the very least, when
your data are sold or collected by the government, it will take investiga¬
tors some time to tie the information to your actual identity.
   So I figured I would give it a try. As I researched phones, I decided I
needed an Android phone because there were more privacy-protecting
apps available for Android phones than for the iPhone. Choosing a car¬
rier was more difficult. None of them offer a zero-data storage option.
According to a law enforcement document obtained by the American
Civil Liberties Union, most cell phone providers store call detail records
for about two years, and AT&T stores them for five to seven years. In the
end, I decided they were basically all equivalent, except AT&T, so I chose
a cheap prepaid plan from Virgin Mobile.
   The best practice when buying a burner phone is to pay cash and buy
it at a store far from home. So I withdrew $200 in cash and went to a
store in midtown Manhattan—which seemed suitably anonymous—to
                                                           POCKET LITTER   [145]

buy the phone. The checkout clerk insisted that I click through a few
screens on the credit card swipe machine, even though I was paying cash.
Then she offered me a discounted warranty if I would enter my personal
information onto the machine. Then she offered me a discount on the
phone, as well, if I would enter the information. I respectfully declined,
but being forced to repeatedly decline to identify myself made me feel
like a criminal. By the time I left the store, with my phone in a bag, I felt
like I was carrying contraband. I looked up to see if I could spot surveil¬
lance cameras near the door. I wished I had worn a baseball cap.
   My next stop should have been to buy a prepaid monthly service card
with cash from a different store. But I knew I would eventually miss a
monthly deadline if I relied on cash. I went home and used my Ida Tarbell
credit card to sign up for a monthly prepaid service from Virgin Mobile.
   After all, my goal is not to be perfectly anonymous: it’s just to make
the trackers work a little harder.



I didn’t give out the phone number for the burner. Instead, I gave my
husband, my babysitter, and a few friends the MaskMe phone number
that I had purchased from Abine. I set it up so that all calls to the masked
number forwarded to my burner.
   But the problem was that I couldn’t make outgoing calls or send texts
using the masked number. I could receive text messages through the
masked number, but my text message replies would reveal my burner
number.
   I was veering close to a gray area of the law. It is illegal to “spoof”
your phone number with an intent to defraud. In 2010, President Obama
signed into law the Truth in Caller ID Act, which made it illegal to “know¬
ingly transmit misleading or inaccurate caller identification information
with the intent to defraud, cause harm, or wrongfully obtain anything of
value.”
   Of course, I was not planning to use the spoofed number to defraud
or cause harm, but even if I successfully spoofed my number, my calls
were likely to reveal my identity. Looking through my calling log on my
regular phone, I realized that my calling patterns are highly predictable
(and rather boring). Every day I call my husband at around six p.m. Every
other day or so, I speak to a rotating cast comprised of my mom, my
[MB]   DRAGNET NATION

brother, and a few friends. All of my other calls slip into the contours of
that larger outline.
 , So I decided I would use the burner only for work calls. I took it on a
business trip to Washington, D.C., and used it exclusively for three days of
meetings and interviews. I brought my personal iPhone as well and kept
it in the hotel room, turned off, vowing to use it only for personal calls.
   But, ultimately, it was difficult to keep the two phones separate. I was
stuck in traffic in a cab and wanted to call home, so I used the burner.
And when I was back at the hotel room, I forgot to turn off the burner so
as to keep a separation between the locations of the two phones.
   I started to understand what Mike Perry, the self-proclaimed “sur¬
veillance vegan,” was talking about when he said that his practice of using
different phones for different social networks had hurt his ability to have
close relationships.

                                     |
I also loaded up my burner with privacy-protecting apps. Almost imme¬
diately, I hated them.
   To navigate the Web, I had installed anonymizing software that would
bounce my Internet traffic through computers around the world. That
way, websites I visited on my phone wouldn’t know where I was coming
from. (Of course, my cell phone provider still knew where I was, or at
least where Ida Tarbell was.)
   I had thought that the anonymizing software—Tor—was slow when I
used it to set up Ida’s online accounts on my laptop computer. But on my
phone it was far worse. It was glacially slow and it wore down my bat¬
tery. I took out a stopwatch and found that it took fourteen seconds to
activate the worldwide routing through the Tor network, and then it took
another six seconds to launch the Web browser that routes through Tor,
and finally a simple Web search for “weather NYC” took forty-three sec¬
onds. In total, that meant it took more than a minute to search for the
weather.
   By comparison, launching Google’s Web browser, Chrome, and search¬
ing for “weather NYC” on my iPhone took nine seconds.
   Harlo Holmes, head of metadata at the Guardian Project, which makes
the official Tor software for Android, told me that browsing the Web
using Tor takes longer because it makes more “hops” between my phone
                                                          POCKET LITTER   [147]

and the website I’m visiting. “There is definitely a trade-off between
speed and anonymity when using Tor,” she told me.
    Eventually, I gave up on Tor and installed DuckDuckGo’s app on
my phone. Launching DuckDuckGo and searching for “weather NYC”
took only fifteen seconds—still slower than Google but not as intermi¬
nable as Tor.                                                              >*
    Even so, I realized I was avoiding conducting Web searches at all. One
evening, when I met my friend for a drink, we decided we would like to
get something to eat. But where? As people do today, we each pulled out
our phones. I searched on DuckDuckGo for restaurant recommenda¬
tions, but since it doesn’t know where I am located it takes a while to get
the coordinates right. By the time I had typed in “Mexican restaurants
Madison Square Park New York City,” my friend had already found a
restaurant nearby.
   Depressed, I called Moxie Marlinspike, the developer who built the
secure texting and calling apps that I was using (which were actually
fairly easy to use). Marlinspike is one of the most thoughtful and tal¬
ented cell phone hackers out there. I asked him why it was so difficult to
use all these anonymizing tools.
   “There is not really a market for consumer privacy software,” Marlin¬
spike told me. He and other privacy-oriented cell phone developers—such
as the Guardian Project—are funded largely through grants.
   Marlinspike said he has been trying to attract talented program¬
mers who might otherwise go to work at Silicon Valley start-ups. He
used his latest grant to fly a team of developers to Hawaii for a week of
programming at the beach. But Marlinspike is working on a small scale.
His apps—RedPhone and TextSecure—work only on Android and most
of my friends are on iPhone, so I can’t encrypt our communications with
his apps.
   He laughed when I told him about my struggles with Tor. “Whenever
I’m using Tor and it’s fast, I get nervous that I’ve misconfigured it,” he
said. “All this stuff is unusable. All the tools we have are awful. We have
to acknowledge that.”

                                    4 -




Meanwhile the cell phone tracking industry has been building ever more
sophisticated tools for location tracking.
[MB]   DRAGNET NATION

   The private sector race to map the location of every device in the
world started with a practice called “wardrivingI first went wardriving
ip DenveMp 2002 with some cable company technicians who were show¬
ing me how it worked. We drove around in a car, while the technician in
the passenger seat kept a laptop open. On his computer was software that
would scan the surrounding areas for Wi-Fi networks. When we found
an unencrypted Wi-Fi hot spot, we would stop and watch the Internet
traffic streaming through his computer screen. We didn’t read any of it,
but we could have.
   In 2003, a Boston company called Skyhook made wardriving into a
business. Skyhook deployed cars that scanned the names and signal
strengths of Wi-Fi hot spots. Skyhook didn’t read any of the Wi-Fi traffic,
it was just mapping the location of Wi-Fi hot spots around the world. “For
the first four or five years, people thought we were nuts,” said Skyhook’s
founder, Ted Morgan.
   But Skyhook’s bet paid off. It turned out that Wi-Fi hot spots were
dense enough that they could often provide accurate location informa¬
tion. The way it works: a cell phone notices the Wi-Fi networks around it,
locates them in Skyhook’s database, and uses that information to esti¬
mate the phone’s location.
   Finding a location via Wi-Fi was often an improvement over previous
methods—by triangulating between either cell phone towers or Global
Positioning System satellites, whose signals can be blocked by buildings
or other obstructions.
   Soon, Skyhook had competition. In 2007, Google began using its Street
View cars to wardrive and build its own Wi-Fi database. After its cars
were caught sweeping up e-mail passwords and other personal informa¬
tion via this process, Google stopped wardriving and started using its
Android phones to collect information about Wi-Fi signals.
   In 2010, Apple also started building its own Wi-Fi database, using its
iPhones to collect Wi-Fi information. In essence, Google and Apple were
using their customers’ phones to do their wardriving. (Shall we call it
“war-phoning”?)
   Meanwhile, cell phone apps and advertisers were war-phoning, too.
In 2010, the privacy investigative team I led at the Wall Street Journal
tested 101 smartphone apps and found that 47 of them transmitted the
phone’s location to outside companies. Forty-five of the apps didn’t pro-
                                                            PICKET UTTER   [MI]

vide privacy policies that stated what they might do with the informa¬
tion.
    Start-ups raced to build equipment that could pull Wi-Fi signals from
users phones as they walked by a location. Some companies placed the
equipment in shopping malls to track visitors. One London marketing
company, Renew, even installed smartphone trackers in London recy¬
cling bins to monitor people as they walked by. (The company stopped
after the financial district requested the collection be stopped.)
    Kaveh Memari, the CEO of Renew, said that the system worked because
80 percent of Londoners leave their Wi-Fi on when they leave their home
or office. “The chances are, if we don’t see you on the first, second, or third
day, we’ll eventually capture you,” he said. “We just need you to have it
on once.”
   Suddenly, the wireless carriers no longer had a monopoly on the
location of cell phone users. There was no reason for them not to sell the
data, too.
   In 2012, Verizon launched a business called Precision Market Insights
to sell data about its cell phone users’ “age range, gender and zip codes
for where they live, work, shop and more,” as well as information about
mobile-device habits “including URL visits, app downloads and usage,
browsing trends and more.” In 2013, AT&T said it would also begin sell¬
ing information about its users’ locations and website browsing habits.
Tracking people’s location via their cell phones became a hot business
opportunity, spawning conferences such as Location Intelligence in Wash¬
ington, D.C., the Geoweb Summit in New York City, and Location
Business Summit USA in San Jose, California.
   At the Signal conference in Chicago in 2012, a location analysis com¬
pany called JiWire described the insights it had gleaned from its profil¬
ing the behavior of more than seven hundred million devices. “Where
you are says more about you than any other point of data,” JiWire’s presi¬
dent, David Staas, said.



Of course, all the location tracking companies say the data they collect are
anonymous. All they gather is a bunch of numbers that are the equiva¬
lent of a serial number for your phone.
   “We cannot and never will receive any information relating to names,
[150]   DRAGNET NATION

addresses, phone numbers, emails, etc.,” wrote Will Smith, the CEO of
the location company Euclid in a letter to Senator Al Franken of Min¬
nesota, who has introduced legislation that would require companies to
seek permission before tracking peoples location.
    Euclid helps retailers to identify shoppers via the Wi-Fi signals emit¬
ted by their cell phones and the phones’ MAC (media access control)
addresses, which are unique identifiers assigned to a phone, sort of like a
serial number. Since its launch in 2011, Euclid says it has counted fifty
million devices in its clients’ stores.
    Smith said that by collecting only anonymous information, Euclid
seeks to “safeguard consumer privacy.” But the truth is that location is
one of the most revealing pieces of data about a person. In 2013, research¬
ers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the Universite
catholique de Louvain in Belgium studied fifteen months of location data
for 1.5 million people. They found that four instances of a person’s location
at a given point in time were enough to uniquely identify 95 percent of the
individuals in the study. “Human mobility traces are highly unique,” the
researchers wrote. “Mobility data is among the most sensitive data cur¬
rently being collected.”
    Location is also predictive. Researchers at Microsoft found that loca¬
tion data can be used to predict fairly accurately where people will be
located in the future. Using data from more than three hundred volun¬
teers, they found that they could predict where people would be located
in the future. Wednesdays were the easiest to predict, and weekends the
hardest. “While your location in the distant future is in general highly
independent of your recent location,” the researchers wrote, “it is likely
to be a good predictor of your location exactly one week from now.”
    This seemed pretty far afield from anonymity. Not only do they know
who I am and where I’ve been, but they know where I am going to be
next week.



To limit location tracking, I turned off Wi-Fi on my cell phones (regular
and burner) and vowed never to turn it on again. I disabled location ser¬
vices on both phones as well. I even changed the name of my home Wi-Fi
router, adding _nomap to the end of the name, in order to opt out of
Google’s Location Service database.
                                                           POCKET LITTER   [151]

    I also identified fifty-eight companies that appeared to be in the mobile
location tracking business—ranging from advertisers, to the folks track¬
ing phones from recycling bins, to wireless carriers. Of those, only eleven
offered opt-outs—which I completed.
    I still wasn’t very far out of the location tracking net. I decided to
start turning my cell phone off more often, so that my location wouldn’t
be continuously tracked. I considered putting it in airplane mode, but
then (once again) I didn’t want to bother with constantly fiddling with the
settings.
    I decided it would be easier to put my cell phone in a bag that blocked
the signal. Such bags are called “Faraday cages” after the English scien¬
tist Michael Faraday, who discovered that lining a room with metal can
block electromagnetic radiation. Since then, Faraday cages have been used
in health care, the military, and other places where people want to prevent
electromagnetic interference with their instruments.
    When I told John Strauchs, the former CIA agent, that I wanted a
Faraday cage for my phone, he laughed and told me a simple trick that
can be used in a pinch. “You can just use aluminum foil!” he told me.
    Sure enough, it worked. I wrapped my burner phone in tinfoil and
tried calling it. It didn’t ring. So I threw the aluminum foil-wrapped
burner in my purse and went out for a full day of meetings in New York.
    I kept it in my purse and unwrapped it only between meetings when
no one was looking. It took a few minutes for it to connect to the tower
and download any texts, e-mails, and missed calls. Satisfied, I wrapped it
up again and threw it in my purse.
    By the end of the day, the tinfoil was a mess. It was crinkly and was
torn in a few places. Rewrapping the phone completely was becoming
more difficult as I tried to patch up the holes. My colleague Jeremy Singer-
Vine was mock horrified when he saw my tinfoil contraption. “I have a
Faraday bag that I’m not using,” he told me. “Do you want it?”
   A few days later, Jeremy brought me a lovely silver bag with a Velcro
closure. My phone fit perfectly in the bag—and calls didn’t get through. I
loved it.
   The tinfoil made me seem like a crazy person. The Faraday bag made
me cool; all my friends wanted one.
[152]     DRAGNET NATION

Of course, I was curious about the inventor of my Faraday bag. So Jeremy
introduced me to Adam Harvey.
  , Adam and I met for coffee in midtown. Tall and lanky, Adam told me
tbit he goUfnterested in the convergence of fashion and countersurveil¬
lance when he was in a graduate program at New York University in 2009.
    His first so-called stealth wear was an “anti-paparazzi clutch.” It is a
purse that responds to a camera flash by firing a bright light that ruins
the photo being taken. “I believed that people being photographed by
paparazzi should have a way to flash back,” he told me. The clutch didn’t
take off, but it got him thinking about other ways to protect privacy in
public. For his master’s thesis, he created a series of hair and makeup
styles that could thwart face detection software. However, the system
wasn’t very practical: many of the styles involved wearing hair over your
face or painting parts of your face black.
    Eventually, he stumbled on the idea of building Faraday cages for cell
phones. At first, he tried creating a pair of pants that contained a pocket
made of cotton and silver threads, which would block the cell phone sig¬
nal. But he soon realized that it was unrealistic to build it into the pants.
So he started working on a cell phone sleeve—which he calls an OFF
Pocket.
    The one that I had in my purse, he said, was a prototype. It would
reduce the signal strength of a cell-tower signal by 80 decibels. “What you
want for full protection is over 95 decibels,” he said. The new one he was
launching would be more than 100 decibels. “My vision is that privacy
won’t be given to you as a law completely,” he told me. “You have to com¬
mercialize it so people can speak with their money.”



Even by throwing money at the problem, I hadn’t gotten very far. My
masked phone number and burner phone were fun, but neither protected
my location or calling network.
   Putting my cell phone in the Faraday cage worked. But it was almost
as bad as leaving my phone at home; I wasn’t reachable until I took it out
of the bag.
   My experiments with cell phone privacy were my biggest failure by far.
W    hen I told my brother that I was going to take down my profile on
      Linkedln, he told me I was crazy. “It’s how you get recruited for
      your next job.”
   I could hardly afford to pass up my next job. My industry—newspapers—
was basically in free fall. Even if I didn’t need my next job this year, it
definitely wouldn’t be long before I did.
   But I really couldn’t justify staying on Linkedln, given how much it
exposed my social network. Linkedln’s privacy settings allowed me to
prevent others from seeing my “connections,” but its privacy policy states
“people will always be able to see shared connections.”
   That means that if you and I share a Linkedln connection, we will
both see that friendship displayed. That sounds innocuous, but it really
isn’t much different from the NSA’s database of telephone calls. It’s a
giant dragnet of associations.
   There was also this disturbing line in Linkedln’s privacy policy: “We
do not rent or sell personal information that you have not posted on
Linkedln.” Um, I guess they are selling all the information I have posted
on Linkedln? Linkedln says that it doesn’t sell personal information to
third parties, but it does sell services that allow recruiters to search mem¬
bers’ information and contact them.
   And I was exposing all this in exchange for what? I rarely use Linkedln.
[154]   DRAGNET NATION

I had 220 connections, 27 unread messages, and 570 invitations awaiting
me. Even if a recruiter tried to reach me through Linkedln, I probably
wouldn’t notice.
  But I was seduced by the idea that I might use Linkedln one day, that
it might help me get a new job when I was in a bind. This is what the
behavioral economist Dan Ariely calls our “irrational compulsion to keep
doors open.”
   Ariely describes an experiment he conducted, in which students played
a video game where they were shown three doors—red, blue, and green.
Each door opened to a virtual room where players could earn a certain
amount of money per click. The goal of the game was to make the most
money with a fixed number of clicks.
    Once the game began, it became evident that those players who picked
a room and stayed in it would have the best economic outcome. Even
when the economics were explained clearly, however, players persisted in
keeping all the doors open. “They still could not stand to see a door close,
Ariely wrote. “They still had the same irrational excitement about keep¬
ing their options open.”
    The problem is that humans hate to experience a loss, even if the loss
is of something inconsequential. That perfectly described my feeling about
leaving Linkedln. I obsessed about it for months. I consulted two experts
in search-engine optimization to ask whether quitting would hurt my
search results. (It wouldn’t.) I talked to friends and family about whether
I should pull the plug.
    All this for a website I hadn’t logged in to in nearly two years. A
website whose passwords had been hacked and revealed to be not prop¬
erly “salted.” A website that sent me an annoying amount of e-mail. A
website I didn’t need to describe my job accomplishments because
I had a full bio on my own website. Talk about an irrational fear of
loss.
    Finally, I took the plunge and closed my account. Linkedln said that
after closing my account, it would de-personalize any logs related to my
account within thirty days.
    In a culture where people judge each other as much by their digital
footprints as by their real-life personalities, it’s an act of faith to opt out
of sharing your data. Now I would simply have to trust that future employ¬
ers would find me some other way.
Opting out of the personal data marketplace is a trust exercise.
    In the digital world, our profiles on sites like Linkedln and Facebook
help us establish trust with people we’ve never met. The strength of social
networks is that your “connections” or “friends” serve as an implied
endorsement of your trustworthiness. “A public display of connections is
an implicit verification of identity,” the researchers Judith Donath and
Danah Boyd wrote in their 2004 paper on social networks.
    It’s easier to verify trust when you meet someone in person. Scientists
have found that people make surprisingly accurate judgments about each
other within thirty seconds, but that additional time spent doesn’t usually
improve the accuracy of their assessments. Online, people have fewer tools
with which to assess trust. Online photos are notoriously misleading,
birthdays can be faked, and e-mails arrive that look like they are from
your bank but are really from a criminal.
   Donath, who is a fellow at Harvard’s Berkman Center for Internet and
Society, has done fascinating work comparing online trust issues to the
problems that animals have in sorting out honest signals from deceptive
signals. For example, consider the “femme fatale” Photuris firefly, which
mimics the behavior of a female Photinus firefly. It then lures the male Pho-
tinus, attacks him, and eats him. This is an example of a deceptive signal.
   On the other hand, consider big horns on a stag deer. An animal can¬
not support massive horns without being big and strong. “Potential rivals
or mates need not directly test the stag’s strength; they can simply look at
the size of the horns,” she writes. This is an example of an honest signal.
   Donath says that online friendships are viewed as honest signals. If
an unknown person is a friend of my friend, then he may be worth a bit
of my trust. But the pressure to create online identities is creating tension
between “privacy and reliability.” Public histories of a person’s behavior
are helpful for creating reliability, she said, “but if everything has to be
done in your real name, then you have the chilling effect or you make
people very vulnerable.”
   Donath is working on ways to design systems that will add reliability
to pseudonyms. “If I am going to rate underarm deodorant, I don’t need
to share my real name with the online world,” she said. “Pseudonymity is
key to our online privacy.”
[156]   DRAGNET NATION

    In honor of Donath, I created a Linkedln profile for my online pseud¬
onym, Ida Tarbell. Ida has no “connections,” but she does allow me to log
in to Linkedln and see what is going on there. And her presence assuaged
my irrational feeling of loss about quitting Linkedln.



As I prepared to unplug from Facebook, I consulted a recent college grad¬
uate, Gaebriella Todesco, for advice.
    Todesco deleted her Facebook account during Christmas break of her
senior year at Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo. She was studying to become a
high school teacher and she didn’t want a future employer to see her col¬
lege photos. “There are pictures out there—especially with the red cups—
those are really dangerous,” she told me. “It just really scared me, so I just
deleted all of it.”
    Gaeby’s relationship with Facebook was complicated. During her
freshman year, she and her friends logged on to Facebook all the time and
uploaded photos from parties where they were holding red plastic cups.
    Stuck in their dorm rooms without a car, she and her three freshman
roommates had what she called a “strange addiction” to Facebook. “There
was nothing to do but go on Facebook or upload pictures or stalk people,”
she said.
    Like a true addict, Gaeby also regularly quit Facebook. For the first
three years of college, she gave up Facebook for Lent. If there was too much
“drama” with a boyfriend, she and her friends would cut each other off
from Facebook for a few weeks. “You change my password and when I
decide to go back on it, you give me the password,” Gaeby would instruct
a friend, to force herself to go cold turkey.
    Gaeby knew her way around Facebook’s privacy settings and she never
allowed her profile to be completely open. She restricted access to her pic¬
tures and her “wall.” Before a breakup, she took down her “relationship
status” so it wouldn’t be too public when it happened. And she deleted
albums and tagged pictures of herself that she didn’t want her friends to see.
    Still, she wasn’t sure it was enough. In the fall of her senior year, as
she started planning to pursue her teaching career, she began censoring her
posts and she asked her roommates to get permission before uploading
photos of her to Facebook. “We go through it together and say ‘don’t put
up this one,’ ” Gaeby said. “It’s good teamwork.”
                                                              OPTING OUT   [157]

    By December, she realized that it would just be easier to quit Face-
book than to police it. After reading an article about a teacher who lost
her job because of a picture she posted on Facebook, she decided to pull the
plug.                                                                    ♦
    On December 24, 2010, she downloaded all her photos and deleted
her account. She missed it at first. “In the beginning, I felt like I wanted
to relapse a little bit,” she told me. But she soon began to appreciate all
the time she had reclaimed, now that she wasn’t checking Facebook every
day and every night.
   When I checked in with her a year later, she had landed her dream job
and was glad she had quit Facebook. She was happy her students couldn’t
locate her there.
   Of course, there were moments she missed on Facebook. When one
of her high school classmates passed away unexpectedly, she didn’t hear
about the funeral service until it was too late to attend. “I realized that if
I had been on Facebook, I’m sure I would have known when the cere¬
mony was,” she said. “I felt out of the loop.”
   On the other hand, not having Facebook was intriguing to some
potential dates. “It makes me a little unique and mysterious,” she said.



When I joined Facebook on June 26, 2006, simply having an account
indicated that you were connected to an elite university. At that time,
membership was available only to people with e-mail addresses from uni¬
versities and some high schools. In fact, I signed up for an alumni address
from my college just for the purpose of joining Facebook.
   My motivation was primarily journalistic: I was researching a book
about the social network MySpace and needed to understand the social
networking landscape. But I also enjoyed stumbling across the high school
math teacher who inspired me, or the girl who stole my college boyfriend.
I liked keeping up with the Pakistani journalist who once visited my office
on a fellowship.
   But Facebook has also repeatedly abused users’ trust. I’ve lost track of
the number of times the company has changed its privacy settings and
forced me to dig deep in its menus to reclaim control of my data. But it’s
worth taking a closer look at just one of Facebook’s privacy snafus, in
order to understand how it views its users as objects to be sold rather
[15B]   DRAGNET NAIIDN

than as customers. Facebook’s position is somewhat understandable, since
users don’t pay for the service, but that doesn’t make its approach any
more appealing to me.
  In 2007, Facebook launched a service called Beacon that aimed to help
people “share” their online shopping activity with their friends. As a
result, when Sean Lane bought a diamond ring for his wife on Overstock
.com as a surprise gift for Christmas, he was shocked to find that his pur¬
chase was automatically posted to all 720 of his friends, including his
wife. In 2009, Facebook agreed to pay $9.5 million to settle a class action
lawsuit over Beacon and to shut down the service.
    Instead of dropping the idea of turning its users into free product adver¬
tisements, however, Facebook revived it in 2011 with a product called
Sponsored Stories that allowed advertisers to buy the rights to republish a
user’s post and display it to that user’s friends as an advertisement. In 2013,
Facebook agreed to pay $20 million to settle a class action lawsuit over
Sponsored Stories. But rather than do away with the product, Facebook
simply added new language to its privacy policy to make it clear to users
that Facebook has the right to use its customers’ images and posts in adver¬
tisements. In other words, Facebook has been waging a six-year war to be
able to turn its users’ conversations into ads that it can sell. (Google has since
joined the fray, launching a similar program called “shared endorsements”
that will turn users’ reviews, ratings, and comments into advertisements.)
    My breaking point with Facebook came in December 2009 when Face-
book suddenly made changes to its privacy policy that included exposing
the names of my friends to the public, when they had previously been
private. As a journalist, I need to protect my sources. And as a human
being, I prefer not to have a hidden audience keeping tabs on me as I get
in touch with friends.
    Outraged, I wrote a column for the Wall Street Journal declaring that
Facebook had betrayed the confidential nature of friending and that I
was going to treat it as a public forum like Twitter. I opened up my profile
entirely; I began accepting all friend requests, even really creepy ones,
and scrubbed my profile clean of any personal details. (Facebook later
agreed to settle charges brought by the Federal Trade Commission, which
alleged that Facebook’s actions were unfair and deceptive. But that settle¬
ment came two years after the changes were implemented—too late to
make a difference to me.)
                                                               OPTING OUI   [159]

    The technical name for my approach to Facebook was “privacy by
obscurity.” By burying good data (my actual relationships) amid bad data
(people I didn’t know), I hoped that my real relationships could hide in
plain sight among the fake ones.
    But I found myself sanitizing all my posts as I tried to address a wildly
diverse audience that included my boss, my sources, the parents of my
kids’ friends, and strangers I had friended on a trip to Brazil. I found I had
less and less to say to such a broad range of people. In 2012, my updates
petered out to exactly zero. I realized that my approach had erased my
ability to have a real relationship with anyone on Facebook.
   Still, I wasn’t ready to leave Facebook entirely. I still wanted to be able
to find people and to be found by others.
   I considered trimming my friends list to a small and manageable list
of close friends, but I realized that I don’t actually keep up with my clos¬
est friends and family on Facebook (we use e-mail, texting, and phone).
And when I considered keeping a wider list of acquaintances, I was tripped
up by Facebook’s continued exposure of the friends list.
   I dug around in Facebook’s privacy settings and found that it still
didn’t allow you to completely protect your list of friends. It stated: “Peo¬
ple on Facebook may be able to see mutual friends, even if they cannot
see your entire list of friends.”
   For a journalist, even that amount of disclosure is too much. Imagine
a low-level employee of an institution who befriends a journalist to share
information. If an official spokesman for that same organization notices
that he or she shares a “mutual friend” with a journalist, that disclosure
could expose the employee as a source. So that argued against reducing
my list of friends to people with whom I actually have a relationship.
   I considered just deleting my profile. But, again, I was irrationally reluc¬
tant to close off my options.
   I was going to miss three things about Facebook: (1) I liked being able
to send private messages to people through Facebook when I didn’t have
their latest contact information; (2) I liked being notified when I was
tagged in a photo or in a post (usually so I could request being untagged);
and (3) as a journalist and author, I like being “found” by people who
wanted to read my writing.
   So I decided to unfriend all of my Facebook friends—more than six
hundred—and keep a bare-bones profile for the simple purposes of
[160]   DRAGNET NATION

messaging, untagging, and being found by people who might want to
find me.
    It turned out that unfriending was hard. I felt awful when I tried to
unfriend a former calculus student or the page for my upcoming high
school reunion.
   I ended up having to pay my researcher Courtney Schley to hit the
“unfriend” button for me.
    It took her seven hours. But after it was over, I felt as if a huge burden
had been lifted.



I soon found an unexpected upside to living without Facebook: people
no longer expected me to know what was going on with their lives.
    I was at dinner with a friend I hadn’t seen in nearly ten years. He
started talking about his vacation in Italy as if I already knew the details,
then paused and stopped himself. “Oh yeah, you don’t do Facebook,” he
said. He rewound and started from the beginning (which, by the way,
started with his baby being born—something I also had missed).
    It was a huge relief to have an excuse for not keeping up with people’s
Facebook updates. When I first joined Facebook, I found the stream of
updates provided a comforting sense of intimacy with far-flung friends.
But when I dug deeper, I realized that this sense of intimacy could be
misleading.
    I learned that lesson the hard way when I was on a business trip to
Chicago in 2009, where I met up with an acquaintance from college.
    I hadn’t seen him in seventeen years, but I had been keeping up with
his life through his Facebook and Twitter updates. I knew that he had
recently lost his job and had moved into a new apartment. I even knew
about his struggles to get DSL installed in his new apartment. So when
we met in person, I didn’t ask him, “How are you?” Instead, I assumed a
level of intimacy and asked, “So how is your job search going?”
    We had a lovely conversation, but after we parted I felt like some¬
thing was missing. So I called him up and asked him what I hadn’t asked
the first time: “How are you, really?”
    It turned out that he’d been through a harder time than I realized. He
had been in the midst of buying a condo when he lost his job, causing his
mortgage to fall through. He had already committed to leaving his apart-
                                                              OPTING OUT   [161]

ment, so he had to scramble to find a place to live. He admitted that his
updates about the situation had been “oblique” and that he didn’t want to
burden people with too much information.
   I felt foolish and naive for being lulled into a sense of complacency by
digital small talk. I vowed from then on to ask my online friends, “How
are you, really?”
   Now that I had no more Facebook friends, I was even less likely to
succumb to the false intimacy of social media.



Removing my information from commercial data brokers was a different
kind of trust exercise: the kind of trust you place in a mob enforcer. You
hand over the bribe, but you’re never quite sure if it will get results.
   Many data brokers required me to submit sensitive information, such
as my driver’s license or social security number, to complete the opt-out.
One site even asked for a credit card number. So in each case, I had to
make a calculation: Did I trust this site not to abuse my information? Or
was it safer to leave my data in their hands and not give them additional
information?
   I had created a list of 212 data brokers during my audit. Of those, only
92 allowed opt-outs. Two sites demanded a fee to opt out—Mugshots
.com asked for $399 to remove a listing and SearchBug.com said it would
cost $27.95 to remove a listing from its “premium records” compiled from
online public records. I decided to skip those.
   The vast majority of the rest, sixty-five, required me to submit some
kind of personal information in order to process the opt-out. Thirty-five
required submitting a form of ID, social security number, or credit card
in order to opt out. Ten required submitting a phone number and twenty-
four required sending my home address. Twenty-four sites required the
opt-out forms to be sent by mail or fax.
   Overwhelmed by the magnitude of the task, I decided to turn to my
“pay for performance” guiding principle. I would buy some help.
   For the big data brokers, who sell information to the people-search
websites and others, I turned to TrustedID Catalog Choice—a company
that got its start fighting junk mail. For $35, Catalog Choice promised to
opt me out of nine of the biggest U.S. data brokers, such as Acxiom and
Experian.
[162]   DRAGNET NATION

    For the lookup sites, I signed up for a $209 two-year service called
DeleteMe, from Abine, the Boston privacy start-up that created the masked
phone numbers, e-mail accounts, and credit cards I was using. DeleteMe
said it would opt me out of the seventeen biggest people lookup websites,
such as Intelius and Spokeo.
    After a few weeks, it appeared that my data had mostly vanished from
the lookup websites. When I searched for my name on Spokeo, I saw that
the only results were in Idaho, Wyoming, and Utah—three states where
I have never lived. On WhitePages.com, there were no results for Julia
Angwin.
    But after two months, my data were still showing up on the largest
lookup sites—Intelius, US Search, and ZabaSearch. I called Jim Adler, the
chief privacy officer at Intelius, one of the few data broker executives who
attended privacy conferences and took calls from privacy advocates. (He
has since left Intelius to join a “big data” start-up.)
    He investigated and found out that Intelius hadn’t received an opt-out
request on my behalf from Abine. When I contacted Abine, I was told
that the company’s failure to send my opt-outs was due to a “bug” in the
process.
    Suspicious, I double-checked to see if my other Abine opt-outs had
worked. Sure enough, my data were still showing up on another site
Abine said it had opted me out of, USA People Search. It turned out that
USA People Search doesn’t accept opt-outs from Abine or anyone other
than the individual.
    Abine attorney Sarah Downey apologized and refunded my money.
But she said that the data brokers make it deliberately difficult to submit
opt-outs. “That’s one of the reasons why I’ve always pushed so hard for
legislative fixes to the data broker problem: it’s a legal issue, and services
addressing that issue can only go so far,” she said. “We do what we can,
but it’s not always enough.”
    It was more difficult to verify whether Catalog Choice had performed
its opt-outs. The commercial data brokers don’t display the data they have.
So I contacted each of them and asked if I had been opted out of their
databases.
    The results were shocking. Catalog Choice had failed to process more
than half of the opt-outs it promised to conduct on my behalf. It failed to
submit my opt-outs to LexisNexis and Datalogix. It sent my opt-but to
                                                              IIPIIHG Dill   [163]

Epsilon, but it was processed for only one of two databases there. And it
submitted opt-outs to two data brokers, I-Behavior and KBM Group, that
told me that they do not accept opt-outs from Catalog Choice.
   A spokeswoman for Catalog Choice said the problems at Lexis-
Nexis and Datalogix were due to “a technological issue” on the day
that my order was processed. When I asked for a refund, she agreed to
provide one.
   I had just learned the hard way that you can’t always buy privacy. Pri¬
vacy is an ephemeral good that is difficult to verify. Unfortunately, it’s all
too easy for companies to exploit that ambiguity for profit.

                                      +
Throwing money at the problem hadn’t worked. And I still had more
than fifty opt-outs to go.
   I decided to skip the shadier-looking sites that asked for extremely
personal information to process the opt-out. I didn’t feel comfortable giv¬
ing my name, e-mail address, and cell phone number to FreePhoneTracer.
com in order to opt out of its service, which offered “reverse lookup and
trace any phone number.”
   Similarly, I decided not to send my credit card number to MyLife.
com, which suggested that it needed the number for me to “claim my
profile.” It stated: “Following verification of profile ownership, we will try
to comply with your suppression or removal request as soon as reason¬
ably practicable.”
   But, for the rest, I dutifully sent in my driver’s license and filled out
the online forms. I spent nearly sixty hours submitting opt-outs and chas¬
ing down whether my data had truly been opted out. Courtney, my
researcher, spent another sixty hours putting together the spreadsheet of
more than two hundred data brokers.
   But one website—PeopleSmart.com—stumped me. I thought I had
opted out, but Courtney said I had not. I was in New York and she was in
Japan, where she was working for a few months while her husband com¬
pleted a fellowship.
   We e-mailed back and forth—and finally realized that we were seeing
different things on our computer screens. In Japan, Courtney was seeing
my data appear on PeopleSmart. In New York, my data appeared to be
suppressed. It appeared that PeopleSmart had opted me out of search
[164]   DRAGNET NATION

results only in the United States but kept my results in international
search results. “That is SO sneaky!” Courtney e-mailed me.
    It seemed particularly underhanded for a company that claimed to be
in the business of “privacy innovation.” On a section of its website called
“How we re different,” PeopleSmart listed its “free and easy opt-out as
the top difference between itself and other people-search websites where
it claimed, “Some don’t fully remove personal information, even when
requested.”
   A bit of Web sleuthing led me to the surprising conclusion that this
company was actually a hot Silicon Valley start-up called Inflection.
Its website describes the company as a “Big Data start-up” and adver¬
tises employee perks like sailing trips, meditation, yoga, and hiking
retreats. I fired off an angry e-mail demanding an explanation.
    To his credit, the company’s CEO, Matthew Monahan, replied
almost immediately, promising to look into it. One day later, he sent a
detailed response explaining that the company used different data
sources for its international site and had failed to opt me out of that data
set as well. “There’s no mal-intent here,” he told me on the phone a week
later. “We don’t make any money from international users. We don’t
even have any international payment options. For us, it was kind of a
comedy of errors.”
    Monahan told me that he and his younger brother Brian had founded
Inflection in 2006 with only a slight idea of what it would become. Mat¬
thew Monahan had dropped out of the University of Southern California
to run a start-up that sold e-books offering tips on how to get into col¬
lege. (This was before e-readers, so they were just downloadable PDF files.)
Brian was studying at Harvard. Their ideas were a bit vague: “We decided
we would move out to California, right next to Facebook, and tackle an
inefficient industry,” Matthew told me. They decided that their first goal
would be to digitize public records.
    They took the money that Matthew had made from the sale of his
e-book venture and invested it in building technology to digitize court
records and people’s public records. Their first product was something
called CallerlD that would let you enter a cell phone number and find the
owner of a phone.
    “We were pretty unsophisticated,” Matthew recalled. And soon after
they launched, reverse cell phone lookups faced a public backlash. In 2008,
                                                            OPTING OUT   [IG5]

Intelius launched a mobile phone lookup service that let people search
for cell phone numbers by user name. Intelius claimed to include ninety
million cell phone numbers. A few months later, Intelius shut down the
service, under pressure from Verizon and privacy advocates.
   The brothers decided to switch gears to focus on historical public rec¬
ords. In 2009, they launched GenealogyArchives.com, which later became
Archives.com, to provide access to digitized historical records. In
2012, Ancestry.com bought Archives.com for $100 million.
   After their windfall, the brothers could have retired. But instead
they decided to refocus on their people lookup services. They revamped
PeopleSmart.com, launched an employment-screening site called Good-
Hire.com, and began working on a new service, called Identity.com, that
would help people manage their personal information across the Web.
“I just feel like our work is not done,” said Matthew. “I wouldn’t feel
right about anything else other than to keep working on the products
right now.”
   Matthew told me that they tried to make their opt-out particularly
easy. PeopleSmart’s opt-out is an online form, unlike the opt-out at
other sites that force you to send in a driver’s license or send opt-outs by
mail. “We think that’s just an intentionally burdensome process,” Mat¬
thew told me.
   Matthew said he was disappointed when he got my e-mail stating that
the opt-out hadn’t worked. “We spent so much time getting this to work,”
he said.
   The problem, he said, was with their matching algorithm. Their com¬
puters failed to match the Julia Angwin who was opted out in the United
States with the Julia Angwin whose records were stored in a secondary
database for international usage.
   One reason the match didn’t work: “We didn’t ask you for your social
security number,” he said. “We’re not using that to match data sets. So we
have to use combinations of other things.” (Monahan later told me that
the company had improved the opt-out process so this mistake wouldn’t
happen again.)
   It may have been inadvertent but I couldn’t help thinking that, in the
personal data marketplace, being a bad actor pays off. If I opt out of all
the databases that are available, that only makes my data rarer and more
valuable for those who hang on to it.
[166]   DRAGNET NATION


                                     -<!►-



In the end, I felt that I had lost more than I gained in the opt-out process.
I experienced a feeling of loss when I closed my accounts. I worried
that I had shut off possible future job options. And I had reduced my
“authenticity”—I was less verifiable in the personal data economy.
    And for all that loss, I had not even fully succeeded in opting out. My
data were still on file with the worst actors—the ones who made it diffi¬
cult for me to opt out. And even those who let me opt out didn t promise
to delete my files, only to “suppress” them.
    Of all the dragnets I had confronted, this one was the most mislead¬
ing in its promise of offering users a choice about their data.
THE HALL OF MIRRORS


W   hen Rayne Puertos started a new job at a computer retailer in Tampa,
     Florida, she was not trying to hide her sexual orientation, but nei¬
     ther was she hoping to advertise it to her new colleagues. But her
cover was blown when she checked her Facebook profile on the shared
computer in the communal break room. One of her colleagues leaned over
and said, “Look—all the ads on your page are all gay ads. Why is that?”
   To her dismay, Facebook’s customized ads had outed her.
   Tm very out and very gay,” she told me. “But when I’m at work I’m
not there to talk about my personal life.” After that incident, she started
checking her Facebook profile on her phone rather than on the shared
work computer.
   Rayne was outed by one of the most supposedly innocent types of
dragnets—the Hall of Mirrors that advertisers create from personal data
they sweep up across the Internet.



The online ad-tracking industry has created one of the most comprehen¬
sive dragnets in the world.
   Most websites invite dozens of ad-tracking companies to spy on their
visitors and to follow them across the Web. In 2013, there were 328 sepa¬
rate companies tracking visitors to the top fifty content Web sites,
[160]   DRAGNET NATIDN

according to a study by Krux Digital, a company that monitors digital
tracking technology. That’s nearly double the 167 companies that Krux
found stalking visitors on the top fifty sites in 2011.
    The information collected by ad-tracking companies is extremely
detailed. Ashley Hayes-Beaty was shocked when she learned that an ad-
tracking company had placed a file on her computer containing a single
code—4c812db292272995e5416a323e79bd37—that                secretly   identified
her as a twenty-six-year-old female in Nashville, Tennessee. In addition,
the company had compiled a list of her favorite movies, including The
Princess Bride, 50 First Dates, and 10 Things I Hate About You. “Well, I
like to think I have some mystery left to me, but apparently not!” she said
when I told her what her profile contained. “The profile is eerily correct.”
    Seventeen-year-old Cate Reid didn’t know why she saw only weight-
loss ads online, until my Wall Street Journal colleague Emily Steel showed
her that Yahool’s advertising network had pegged her as a thirteen- to
eighteen-year-old female interested in weight loss.
    And Google accurately identified a dozen of ten-year-old Jenna Maas’s
likes, including pets, photography, “virtual worlds,” and online goodies
such as animated graphics. “I don’t like everyone knowing what I’m doing
and stuff,” Jenna told my Wall Street Journal colleague Steve Stecklow,
when he showed her what Google knew about her.
    The online tracking companies say that the information they obtain
is anonymous, and thus innocuous. A typical response: a Google spokes¬
man said its tracking of Jenna was “based on anonymous browser activ¬
ity. We don’t know if it’s one user or four using a particular browser, or
who those users are.”
    But there is increasing evidence that information about people’s Web
habits can uniquely identify them. In 2006, the New York Times combed
through anonymous search query records released by AOL and managed
to identify the searches conducted by a sixty-two-year-old woman
named Thelma Arnold. In 2008, researchers at the University of Texas
combed through anonymous movie rental records released by Netflix
and found that “an adversary who knows only a little bit about an indi¬
vidual can easily identify this subscriber’s record in the dataset.”
    In addition, many websites inadvertently share their visitors’ names
with ad-tracking companies. In 2012, my Wall Street Journal team logged
in to roughly seventy popular websites and found that more than a quar-
                                                       THE HALL OF MIRRORS   [163]

ter of the time, the sites transmitted a user’s real name, e-mail address, or
other personal details (such as username) to third-party companies. One
major dating site even sent a person’s self-reported sexual orientation and
drug-use habits to advertising companies.
    And all of those Facebook “Like” buttons and “Tweet this story” links
can identify users by name—even if users don’t click on the buttons. In
2012, my team at the Wall Street Journal found that 75 percent of the top
one thousand websites included code from social networks that could
match people’s names with their Web-browsing habits.
    Of course, the companies also say this identified tracking is anony¬
mous. “We will serve ads to you based on your identity,” said Erin Egan,
the chief privacy officer at Facebook, “but that doesn’t mean you’re iden¬
tifiable.”
    That’s a pretty thin line. After all, does Rayne really care whether Face-
book “identified” her before outing her?



The Hall of Mirrors that advertisers create with all these tracking data is
still rather crude. Gay people see gay ads. People who are interested in
cruises see cruise ads. When my husband and I were remodeling our
house, I shopped for bathtubs online and was followed around by bath¬
tub ads for a month.
   It all seems rather innocuous, the occasional outing notwithstanding.
   But Professor Ryan Calo of the University of Washington paints a
disturbing picture of how the Hall of Mirrors is likely to evolve. He points
to a Stanford University study showing that an individual will respond
more positively to a politician whose picture is subtly blended with his or
her own photo. The change in the photo is undetectable, but it makes the
viewer more receptive to the politician’s message.
   “It turns out we like people more who look like us,” Calo concluded.
“Now imagine if a social network were to offer a comparable service, per¬
mitting advertisers to blend their spokesperson with the user’s own profile
picture.” Calo doesn’t know of anyone using this technique. But he specu¬
lates that it is not a far leap from our current state of bathtub ads following
us around.
   After all, if food engineers can design junk food to specifically target
our taste buds in a way that makes us consume more and gambling
[IJO]      DRAGNET NATION

companies can build slot machines that encourage us to play more,
why won’t marketers design their online presence to manipulate us in new
ways?
   Already, my privacy team had uncovered companies changing their
prices based on a user’s location. And Calo speculates that companies will
soon find ways to tailor prices based on when people are the most
vulnerable—perhaps after a long day at work.
    People may also be manipulated into giving up more data than they
want to. Companies can use that data to find out more about how to tar¬
get that person. In one experiment, researchers at Carnegie Mellon Uni¬
versity found that people could be manipulated to give out more personal
data on a social network if they were given greater “perceived control”
over their data.
   Calo says that market manipulation is essentially “nudging for profit.”
Marketers are likely to use all available means to nudge us toward more
expensive products or to make ill-advised purchases. And they can do it
using the information we leave behind for them to analyze: our online
data trail.
    And there are real profits at stake. Benjamin Reed Shiller, an econom¬
ics professor at Brandeis University, analyzed data about a large panel
of computer users and found that Netflix could raise profits by 1.4 percent
if it adopted individually tailored prices based on customers’ Web¬
browsing histories. He found that Web-browsing data were more predic¬
tive than standard demographic data of users’ willingness to pay high
prices for a Netflix subscription. “This suggests that 1st degree price dis¬
crimination might evolve from merely theoretical to practical and widely
employed,” he concluded.



I wanted to block ad tracking. But first I had to sort through aft the mis¬
information about how to block tracking.
    Many people believe that they can use Google Chrome’s “Incognito”
mode or Microsoft Internet Explorer’s “InPrivate Browsing” mode to avoid
being monitored online. But that is not true.
        Incognito mode is privacy protection against one threat: the person
with whom you share a computer. It simply wipes away the tracking cook¬
ies that were generated during a Web-browsing session, once the session
                                                     IHE HALL Of MIRRORS   [1/1]

is completed. However, the websites that you visited while in Incognito
mode still receive information from you—and so do the trackers on
those sites.
    Not to put too fine a point on it, but Incognito mode is built for one
thing: browsing porn. It removes the cookies with porn names from your
computer so your spouse won’t see. The website and its advertisers on
those sites still know you were there.
    That is not my threat model. So I needed to look further.
    My next stop was the advertising industry’s own opt-out tool. But it
would have required me to install cookies on my computer to alert the
tracking companies that I didn’t want to be tracked. This seemed vaguely
Orwellian: I had to allow myself to be tracked in order not to be tracked.
    Even then, the industry’s list of tracking companies included only
ninety-six companies, while the latest studies showed more than three hun¬
dred tracking companies in the market. The ad industry says the compa¬
nies on its list account for the vast majority of ad tracking, but I wanted
comprehensive blocking of all companies that compile dossiers. So I
decided to skip the ad industry opt-outs.
   Then I turned on the “Do Not Track” button on my Web browser,
which broadcasts a signal to tracking companies that I do not want to be
monitored. But since the ad industry has not agreed to stop tracking users
who send that signal, turning it on was simply a political protest.
   Finally, I decided to go nuclear. One night, after the kids went to bed,
I sat down at my computer and installed the two most popular anti¬
tracking software extensions onto my Firefox Web browser.
   The first, Adblock Plus, blocked advertisements from displaying—
thus preventing advertisers from the opportunity of dropping tracking
cookies on my machine in the first place. Since my profession, journalism,
derives much of its revenue from advertising, I’m not in favor of blocking
ads, but I figured I’d give it a shot in the name of protecting myself from
being watched.
   The second, NoScript, blocked a type of computer code called Java¬
Script, as well as some other software such as Flash, from loading on
Web pages without my permission. JavaScript can be used to load all
sorts of tracking technology, including cookies, and can even be used to
monitor how you move your mouse on the page. But it also has a lot of
legitimate uses.
[172]    URAGNET NATION

    Immediately, Firefox sputtered and stalled. When I clicked on Apple s
page to set up a Genius bar appointment, nothing worked. I had to set
up an exception on NoScript to allow Apple’s JavaScript.
    The same thing happened at Amazon.com. At first, I thought that
everything I was trying to order was out of stock, but then I realized that
I had to set up an exception for Amazon’s JavaScript, as well.
    Within two days, I was ready to quit. Every Web page I visited required
a huge set of decisions about which scripts to allow. My daughter would
stand next to me and laugh while I tried to load a page and navigate
through all the permissions. And to top it all off, Adblock was conflict¬
ing with my password manager, 1 Password. I eventually had to uninstall
Adblock in order to get 1 Password to work.
    But I stuck with NoScript. And once I got the hang of it, I started to
get angry. Why did my online grocery, FreshDirect, want to load scripts
from five separate companies onto my computer while I shopped? I spend
a lot of money with them, and so I don’t expect them to be providing
peepholes to companies that want to watch me shop.
    The companies that FreshDirect was allowing to monitor me were:


    • Google’s online advertising company Doubleclick;
    • AddThis, a company that boasts that it tracks 1.3 billion users per
        month;
    • ConvergeTrack, which describes itself as “one of the most advanced
        tracking and reporting technologies”;
    • Bazaarvoice, which says it “connects hundreds of millions of con¬
        sumers to each other and to the brands they buy”; and
    • IBM’s Coremetrics, which offers customers the ability to “automati¬
        cally generate personalized product recommendations based on each
        customer’s current and historical shopping interests.”


    Talk about a recipe for financial manipulation. I imagine it won’t be
long before IBM will run the numbers and advise FreshDirect to charge
me more when I shop late at night because I’m tired, or that I seem will¬
ing to tolerate higher prices on peanut butter than on steak.
    I asked FreshDirect about the relationships, but a company spokes¬
woman refused to answer my questions. “Hi Julia—We’re not going to be
                                                       THE HALL OF MIRRORS   [1/3]

 participating in this story but appreciate you reaching out,” she e-mailed
 me with false cheerfulness.
    Reading FreshDirect’s privacy policy didn’t make me feel any better.
 It stated, “We share demographic information with our partners and
 advertisers on an anonymous and aggregate basis. This type of data is not
 readily linked to any personally identifiable information.” However, it did
 offer me the option of opting out of data sharing by e-mailing FreshDi-
 rect, so I did.
    The experience made me mad. In real life, a supermarket would not
 invite a half dozen other companies into the store to watch people as they
 shopped. Why was it okay in the digital world?



 If it s any consolation, the guy who invented ad tracking feels bad about
the vast extent of tracking in today’s world.
    In 1995, Daniel Jaye, a Harvard graduate, was looking for a way to get
in on the Internet mania. At the time, he was running the massive back¬
end databases at Fidelity, a job as dull as it was important.
    He wanted to do more exciting work. So he joined the founding team
of a Boston start-up called Engage Technologies, which was trying to
bring the tactics of direct marketing to the Internet—by developing “lists”
of potential buyers of products such as textbooks.
    His problem: how to identify potential buyers? He doubted that
people would fill out online forms indicating their interests. “Very quickly,
I came to the conclusion that a great source of information would be
people’s interests as evidenced by their browsing behaviors,” he told me.
   So Dan began using small text files called “cookies” to identify the
computers of people who had browsed a particular Web site. Previously,
cookies were used by websites to store data such as a user’s log-in or pass¬
word. His idea was that cookies could also be used to compile informa¬
tion about a user’s browsing habits.
   The beauty of his technique was that it was anonymous. A Web user
would be identified only by a cookie ID number, a long string of num¬
bers assigned to her computer. Dan believed his method was an improve¬
ment over traditional direct marketing, where advertisers bought and sold
lists of people’s names and addresses.
[174]      DRAGNET NATION

    But Dan’s timing was off. The Internet was brand-new, and the few
advertisers buying ads were not worried about targeting—anonymous or
not. Most Internet ad buyers were other dot-coms trying to generate buzz
for their initial public offerings.
    Meanwhile, Engage Technologies was at the center of the dot-com
hurricane that was about to make landfall. Engage was part of a con¬
glomerate of Internet companies—ranging from search engines AltaVista
and Lycos to websites Shopping.com and Furniture.com—that resulted
from a buying spree by the entrepreneur David Wetherell. In the fall of
1999, Wetherell appeared on the cover of BusinessWeek under the head¬
line “Internet Evangelist.” His conglomerate, CMGI, was a poster child
for the dot-com boom, with a massive stock market value of $10 billion,
despite the fact that it was losing $127 million a year on revenues of just
$176 million.
   By 2001, the dot-com stock market bubble had burst. CMGI’s losses
had reached $1 billion a quarter and its stock plummeted to less than $1.
Dan quit the company, which eventually folded. But the idea of using
cookies to track users survived.
   Meanwhile, Dan figured that privacy would be the next big thing. In
2001, he launched a privacy software company called Permissus. His idea
was to sell technology to businesses that could help them track their cus¬
tomers’ data as it traveled through their computer systems.
        But businesses had no incentive to crack down on their own internal
use of data. After a few years, the company folded and Dan returned to
his roots: the online advertising business. It was 2007 and the Internet
market was just starting to emerge from the dot-com bust. He joined a
 start-up called TACODA (which stood for Targeted Coordinated Data),
which aimed to build the same type of profiles that Engage had sought to
 create. “We started thinking about behavioral targeting—this person
 spends 30 percent of his time on international news and 20 percent on
 gadgets and 20 percent on football tickets,” Dan told me.
        To get a bird’s-eye view of people’s behavior, however, TACODA needed
 to track a wide swath of the Web. So TACODA started paying websites
 that agreed to place its cookies on their visitors’ computers.
        This was a huge change in the market. Previously, websites had tracked
 visitors only on behalf of their existing advertisers. Now they were essen¬
 tially selling their visitor data to anybody. It was wildly popular: websites
                                                       THE HALL OF MIRRORS   [175]

 were struggling to sell ads, and TACODA seemed to be offering free
 money.
    Soon, online tracking was the new hot business. In 2007, TACODA
 sold itself to AOL for $275 million, Google paid $3.1 billion for Double-
 Click, and Microsoft paid $6 billion for the online advertising company
 aQuantive.
    But widespread tracking arguably hurt big publishers like the Wall
 Street Journal and the New York Times. Advertisers no longer had to pay
 a premium to reach their readers on their websites; instead, advertisers
 could track those readers onto another website and buy cheaper ads on
 that site.
    Data about readers became a commodity. Online auction houses such
as BlueKai sprang up to broker real-time auctions of data. Each day, BlueKai
sells eighteen million pieces of information about specific individuals’
browsing habits, for as little as a tenth of a cent apiece.
    The auctions can happen instantly: when you arrive on a website, your
attributes are sold at auction to the highest bidder. The winner then dis¬
plays a customized advertisement to you. But the data rush spurred some
companies to use invasive tracking techniques.
    By 2010, Dan was worried about the implications of the Wild West
environment that he had helped create. He was particularly worried about
the growing trend of matching online Web-browsing data with people’s
real identities and off-line shopping habits. The way it works is as follows.
A user logs in to a website that requires a name, e-mail address, or other
identifier; a company on that website, such as Acxiom, pulls up its file on
that individual and drops a cookie on the user’s machine containing that
individual’s segments—information pulled from voting records, address,
income, mortgage, vehicle ownership, and so forth. The data are still
technically anonymous, but once again the line becomes rather thin. If
an advertiser knows everything about you except your name, does the
name really matter?
   Online-off-line matching is why Linda Twombly, a sixty-seven-year-
old resident of Nashua, New Hampshire, was peppered with online ads
for Republican candidates during the 2010 elections. A company called
Rapleaf had used this technique to identify her as a conservative who was
interested in Republican politics, had an interest in the Bible, and con¬
tributed to political and environmental causes.
   “Holy smokes,” Linda said after my Wall Street Journal colleague Emily
Steel decoded the information in Rapleaf’s file on her. “It is like a watch¬
dog is watching me, and it is not good.
   Dan worried that this development was destroying the anonymity he
had tried to build into the system initially. “When you’re in the business of
slinging data left and right, there’s no real way to control it,” Dan told me.
   In 2011, he launched a company called Korrelate, which he hoped
would introduce privacy back into Web tracking. Korrelate’s goal is to help
companies prove that their Web advertising translated into sales without
tossing the customer’s name and information around. In virtual clean
rooms,” his team uses sophisticated math techniques to try to anonymize
the data that they are using to match users’ online and off-line behaviors.
The goal is to let a Honda dealer know which of its online ads led to a pur¬
chase without breaching the anonymity of the individual s Web behavior.
   In Dan’s mind, pervasive tracking was inevitable. His goal was simply
to make sure it wasn’t identifiable.



In some ways, the people battling over tracking cookies are fighting the
last war. As people have become aware of cookie tracking, marketers
have started looking for new tracking technologies. Google is said to be
developing a new form of cookie-less tracking that would assign a unique
ID to each Web browser.
    Other marketers are moving toward “fingerprinting” techniques that
allow them to identify a user’s device even if she tried to block tracking
through other programs. “If you don’t want anybody to know anything
you’ve done online, don’t go online,” the CEO of one fingerprinting com¬
pany said.
    Even more disturbing: the next cookie is your face. As facial recogni¬
tion improves, it is becoming increasingly likely that the Hall of Mirrors
will not just be a Web phenomenon. When you enter a store, the sales
associates will likely be able to identify you and pull up the same “seg¬
ment” data that websites are currently accessing.
    A company called FaceFirst is offering technology that retailers can
install in their store to photograph and identify customers as they walk in
the door. “Instantly, when a person in your FaceFirst database steps into
one of your stores, you are sent an email, text, or SMS alert that includes
                                                      THE HALL DF MIRRORS   [177]

 their picture and all biographical information of the known individual,”
 the company states in a marketing brochure.
    A retail executive who requested anonymity described how he is
 using the technology to LP Magazine, a trade publication for the loss-
 prevention industry. This retail executive, who was given the pseudonym
 “Tom Smith, vice president of loss prevention at Store-Mart,” said that
 his retail chain, which was given the pseudonym “Store-Mart,” is using it
 to identify known shoplifters.
    It works like this: a shoplifter is detained at a Store-Mart branch. He
 is photographed and asked to sign a notice agreeing not to return to the
store. If the shoplifter shows up again at a Store-Mart, the cameras will
have captured his photo and identified him within five seconds. An alert
is sent to a store employee who approaches the shoplifter and asks him to
leave the store.
    Of course, there is the problem of making the wrong match and
alienating a customer. “That’s a scary part for me,” Smith told the maga¬
zine, the false alert; the boy who cried wolf. But so far it’s low enough—
about six out of a hundred alerts—that it hasn’t gotten to that stage.”
    FaceFirst is already envisioning a future in which retailers could use
the technology for marketing. The company’s marketing brochure states:
“Build a database of good customers, recognize them when they come
through the door, and make them feel more welcome.” Left unsaid is
how retailers will treat customers they don’t like as much, people who
shop only sales and discounts, or those who try on a lot of clothes but
don’t buy anything.
   I am pretty sure that this facial-recognition-based Hall of Mirrors
will not benefit me. Once retailers figure out that I am a harried working
mom who values convenience over thrift, I will likely be steered toward
more expensive products.
   And there was not much I could do about it. I tried to remove most
pictures of myself from the Web, in an effort to not contribute to any
facial recognition databases being built. I paid an artist to draw a stencil
of my photograph that I began using on Twitter and Facebook. And I
hired a photographer to shoot a photo of me that I hoped I could use to
promote my writing but would obscure my features enough that it wouldn’t
be usable for facial recognition purposes.
   But I drew the line at donning stealth wear. I wasn’t going to wear a
[178]      DRAGNET NATION

baseball cap with LED lights on it to foil cameras, or an anti-drone
hoodie that thwarts thermal imaging, which was created by Adam Har¬
vey, the designer who made the Faraday bag for my cell phone.

                                       +
Still, I kept fighting the last war. After a month of using NoScript, I wanted
to test its effectiveness. So I called Ashkan Soltani, the leading technical
expert on ad-tracking technology.
   I first met Ashkan when he had just graduated from the masters pro¬
gram at the University of California at Berkeley’s School of Information.
There he had led a comprehensive study of different types of Web tracking
being conducted by advertisers. After graduation, I convinced him to con¬
duct a similar study for me at the Journal, and he soon became a technical
adviser on many of our privacy investigations. Since then, Ashkan had
testified twice about online privacy in Congress (wearing his one and only
suit) and had become the definitive technical source on ad tracking.
        Ashkan agreed to check if my techniques were effective at blocking
tracking. Following his instructions, I changed a few settings in my Web
browser, and poof, all my Internet traffic was funneled through his com¬
puter in Washington, D.C.
   “Okay, go to a website,” he said. I clicked on to my employer’s website,
WSJ.com.
  Ashkan started reading off the names of the tracking companies that
he saw in the traffic. “Twitter, BlueKai, Doubleclick.”
        “What?!” I said. I thought I had blocked all that.
        Ashkan explained: WSJ.com was sending my information to BlueKai,
 an online ad auction company, which was sending it to Google and Yahoo!.
 Even though NoScript was blocking JavaScript, it couldn’t prevent back¬
 end coordination among tracking companies.
        As for Twitter, I had forgotten that I had previously logged in to the
 Twitter site, which allowed it to set a cookie. That allowed Twitter to see
 that I had visited WSJ.com.
        That’s the problem with Web tracking: if you let someone into the
 tent once, they often get a free pass for future tracking.
        “This is much worse than I thought,” I said.
        Ashkan laughed. “That’s exactly what you said to me three years ago
 when we first talked.”
                                                       THE HALL OF MIRRORS   [179]

    Ashkan showed me the setting—buried deep in Firefox’s “custom his¬
 tory” section—that let me turn off third-party cookies, such as Twitter, from
 tracking me on other sites just because I had once logged in to their site.
 But there was no setting to block the Journal's behind-the-scenes sharing.
    So then we tried Adblock Plus, but BlueKai was still making it through
 those filters. After all, Adblock Plus is designed to block ads, not to block
 tracking. BlueKai isn’t an advertiser, it’s just a company that scoops up
 user data and sells it at auction. Similarly, a bunch of analytics companies,
 such as Omniture, were now getting through. They don’t sell ads, but they
 do build user profiles.
    This was a threat model problem. Adblock Plus was built for people
 who view advertisements as the threat. NoScript was built for people who
view a certain technology—JavaScript—as the threat.
    But my view of the threat was different: I wanted to block tracking,
whether or not it was related to ads or a certain technology. So that led
me to a different kind of blocking technology: companies that compile
lists of trackers.
    Ashkan and I tried a few companies that manage lists of trackers. Sur¬
prisingly, we found the best results from a tracker-blocker called Ghostery.
    I d always been a bit skeptical of Ghostery, ever since it was purchased
by a company that is a consultant to the advertising industry. Also, Ghostery
allows tracking by default. But once I found the setting to turn off all
tracking, I realized it was more powerful than any of the others.
    Ashkan watched my traffic as I cruised from WSJ.com to Huffington-
Post.com to Gawker.com. No analytics companies appeared. No BlueKai
appeared. In fact, I soon realized that only a few ads were appearing.
“This is the cleanest I’ve seen so far,” Ashkan said. “But nothing will pro¬
tect you totally.”

                                     +
I was intrigued by Ghostery. Why would the advertising industry pro¬
vide me with the best way to protect myself against itself?
 . In 2009, an entrepreneur named David Cancel founded Ghostery as a
bit of free software to show people the trackers on each site. In 2010, he
sold it to an advertising services company that is now called Evidon, which
promised to keep the service free and the data private and not to use it
for advertising purposes. Evidon kept its promise, but it did begin selling
[180]     DRAGNET NATION

analysis of the data gathered by Ghostery to websites and advertisers. To
its credit, Evidon asked users to opt in to its anonymous Ghostery usage
panel rather than turn it on by default. About eight million people joined.
(I did not.)
    Andy Kahl, the director of data analysis at Evidon, told me that buy¬
ers of the data were often tracking companies that wanted to keep tabs
on their competitors. In effect, Evidon had built a clearinghouse for track¬
ers to track each other.
    This game of competitive intelligence benefited me. By the time I
started using it, Ghostery had compiled one of the most comprehensive
lists of tracking technologies used by more than sixteen hundred compa¬
nies. During the first month that I began using it, Ghostery added one
hundred new trackers to the list.
   But Ghostery’s pro-tracking bias also hurt me. Ghostery was set to
allow tracking by default, which meant I had to fiddle with the settings
to block all tracking. And after a month of using Ghostery, I noticed that
some tracking was still getting through. Kahl explained to me that Ghostery
 does not automatically block new trackers that are added to the list. He
 showed me the setting that allowed me to force Ghostery to block new
 trackers as well. It seemed a little bit sneaky to me, but Kahl assured me
 it was just part of Ghostery’s attempt to put me in control. We are incen-
 tivized to make sure we are doing right by our users, because only if we
 are really doing our job can we collect the data that the industry is inter¬
 ested in,” he told me.
     But I still felt a bit uneasy about Ghostery’s motives. It was run for the
 benefit of the tracking industry, not the people using it.



 A tracking blocker with better motives was software called Disconnect—
 founded by a defector from the world of tracking.
        Brian Kennish, an engineer at Google, built his first tracking blocker
 after reading an article by my colleague Emily Steel in the Wall Street Jour¬
 nal in 2010 that detailed how Facebook had inadvertently sent its users’
 names to ad-tracking companies. Kennish couldn’t believe that Facebook
 had violated the anonymity promised by Web tracking companies. He had
 worked on Google’s advertising side for nearly six years—and he knew
 that Google was committed to keep Web tracking data anonymous.
                                                     THE HALL OF MIRRORS   [101]

    At that time, Ghostery did not block tracking from social networks
 such as Facebook. So that evening, Kennish went home and wrote a small
 program called Facebook Disconnect that would disable Facebook from
 tracking users across the Web. Within two weeks, his free software had
 caused a minor sensation in the technology community and had been
 downloaded fifty thousand times.
    But as his software became more popular, he started thinking about
 Google’s own tracking. “Your search history on Google, Yahoo!, and Bing
 says as much about you as your browsing history,” Kennish told me. “I
 realized I would have to leave Google to address that.”
    He left Google in November 2010. In December, he launched a free
program called Disconnect, which blocked Google from collecting search
queries when a user was logged in to Gmail or other Google services and
also blocked tracking by social networks such as Facebook, Twitter,
Google, Yahoo!, and Digg.
    Disconnect was immediately popular. But Kennish wasn’t sure it was
a business. All the other tracker blockers were free, so he couldn’t charge
a subscription fee. But it was an arms race trying to keep up with all the
new tracking techniques. He needed funds for the arms race.
    At first, he worked at home and lived off of his savings. In October
2011, he raised $600,000 from investors (including Ghostery founder David
Cancel) and got serious about the business.
    I went to visit Kennish in August 2012. He and his team of four engi¬
neers were crammed in a small conference room in Silicon Valley, in the
offices of one of their financial backers, Highland Capital. The shades
were drawn and the only light came from the computer screens. They
had a basketball hoop on the wall, but it had fallen down and only the
tape was left. They had a bunch of snacks from Costco piled up on a table.
And they had a dashboard of statistics about usage of their software,
which they said was a necessary prop in case a financial backer stopped
by for an update.
   Kennish doesn’t drive, so I drove him in my rental car to the house he
had rented with a few colleagues. It was the ugliest house on a very nice
block. Inside, it was clean but spare, decorated with a single table and a
couch.
   “I only have five things,” he warned me before opening the door to his
bedroom. Inside was a twin futon mattress on the floor. In the closet
[102]      DRAGNET NATION

were three pairs of pants, four pairs of shoes, and a few shirts stacked on
the floor. Other than his computer, this was all he owned.
    “I think that might be why I’m into data,” he told me. I don t have
anything. All I have is data.
   Over lunch in Palo Alto, I told Brian that I found his motives confus¬
ing. Living like a monk was something that entrepreneurs did when they
were betting on future riches. But was he really expecting to cash in on
the measly market for privacy-protecting software?
    He said that he still had hope for the market for privacy. First, he said,
users will “disconnect” from the trackers. Then, he said, users can get
paid to “reconnect” with select businesses. Eventually, he said, there will
be money to be made.
   “I’m a capitalist,” he told me. “And I want to change the world.”
        I wanted to support Brian’s approach. It fit with my guiding principle
of pay for performance. But his tracker blocked only social networks and
I wanted to block everything. By the time Ashkan and I ran our tests,
Ghostery was blocking social networks, too, so there was no need for
Disconnect.
   Finally, in April 2013, Kennish’s new software came out. The list of
trackers it blocked was longer than Ghostery’s. It was a bit buggy. When
 I tried to buy groceries online from FreshDirect, Disconnect blocked all
 the trackers but also blocked the “order” button from appearing on the
 checkout page.
    Still, I switched to Disconnect and made a donation using my masked
 disposable credit card number.
        I decided that in the arms race on tracking, I needed to fund the insur¬
 gents. Otherwise, without competition, benevolent services like Ghostery
 provided by the tracking industry weren’t likely to remain on my side for
 very long.
    The choice reminded me of the early days of the organic food move¬
 ment. Often, the organic aisles of the supermarket were filled with shriv¬
 eled, spotted produce. But slowly, over time, as more people bought the
 organic apples, quality improved. Now, organic vegetables are often just
 as good-looking or better than the conventional produce.
        For me, using Disconnect was similar to buying organic produce in
 the early days. I was choosing to support the privacy-software market-
 even if its product wasn’t always as shiny as the competition’s.
 13
LONELY CODES


T hree days before my birthday dinner party, I realized that nobody was
    going to show up if I kept trying to communicate with my guests in
    code.
    A month before the party, I mailed each of my guests a book, Secret
New York: An Unusual Guide. A week later, I mailed them a “key” that
described how to locate words and characters in the book. For example
(12,2,3,1) meant Page #12, Line #2, Word #3, Character #1.
    Running out of time, I sent the final invitation, written in code, via
e-mail. It said:


       (377,23,7) (197,136)
       (61,4,3) (29,27,4,1) (23,3,8,1) (23,4,10,1)
      (87,26,25) (25,27,3) (25,27,4)
      (393,1,2) (123,2)
      (95,30,11) (389,26,12) (159,41,4) (179,16,13) (113, 14,14)


    Decoded, the invitations said:


      Privacy Dinner
      Day 9/26
      Time 6 o’clock
[104]    DRAGNET NATION

        Place 41V2 2nd Avenue
        Purchase subway ticket in cash


   A week before the party, I started getting nervous. I had invited a
half dozen of my closest girlfriends. But so far only one friend had men¬
tioned to me that she had decoded the invitation. I started to doubt that
my other friends had even tried to decode it.
   I tried gently probing another friend: “So what are you doing next
week?” “Oh, I’m on a business trip,” she said. If she had known she was
missing my party, she would have mentioned it. I knew then that she
hadn’t decoded the invitation.
   Unfortunately, codes don’t lend themselves to the constant calendar
syncing that is a precursor to dinner parties these days.
   Another friend, who has a PhD and MD, finally confessed that she
had tried to decode it and failed. “Darling, I am terribly fond of you....
[Of] this I am not,” she wrote. “I just don’t have the sufficient patience or
 native intelligence to make it to your party!”
     Three days before the party, I realized that nobody was going to
 show up except one friend who had called to tell me she had decoded
 the message. So I canceled my restaurant reservation—under Idas name,
 of course—and called my friend to let her know it was canceled.
     The date came and went. None of my other guests mentioned the pri¬
 vacy dinner party. Two weeks later, I arranged another dinner party using
 regular noncoded e-mail, and it was quite a success.
    But the lesson of the privacy dinner party was to hold true through¬
 out my experiments with code: communicating in code was often a lonely
 business.



 I couldn’t blame my friends for failing the encryption challenge.
     The book cipher I sent them was difficult for two reasons: (1) the
 invitation arrived separately from the codebook, requiring them to keep
 track of both; and (2) using the codebook to decrypt the code was not
 trivial.
     Modern computerized encryption was supposed to solve both prob¬
 lems.
    Today, computers magically do all the encrypting and decrypting. And
                                                               LONELY CODES   [105]

 even more amazingly, there are no more codebooks. I have a key stored
 on my computer that is secret and known only to me. And I have a public
 key that I post on my website for anyone to download. Together, those
 two keys allow me to encrypt and decrypt messages without consulting a
 codebook.
      But I had just as difficult a time recruiting people to use e-mail encryp¬
 tion. Even many of my hacker friends declined to use encryption with
 me     some claimed it was because they didn’t trust me to do encryption
 correctly, and some said they didn’t trust themselves to use the extremely
 complicated system.
      Consider what it took for me to set up my e-mail encryption system.
      First, I
 to help me manage my keys. To generate a key, I had to move my mouse
 around to help the random number generator develop my key. Once I had
 a key, I uploaded it to the public key server so people could search for me.
      Then I downloaded a program called Enigmail, which was supposed
to work with Postbox, the software I use to manage my e-mail. (GPG is
designed to run with e-mail software that you install on your computer,
not e-mail you access on the Web.)
    But I couldn’t get Postbox and Enigmail to work together. The Post-
box support page said to contact Enigmail with any issues. The Enigmail
support forums said Postbox had created its own version of Enigmail
that wasn’t supported by Enigmail.
    I was trapped in the gap between two pieces of software that were
supposed to work together but weren’t cooperating. I was left feeling vaguely
nauseous. I went downstairs and poured myself a glass of wine and
thought about why I struggle with debugging tech problems. I have no
problem writing and rewriting, which should be similar. But debugging
has always made me feel ill. I remember spending hours in the computer
lab in college, trying to debug my programs—and feeling the same sense
of nausea and the same desperate need to escape.
   I decided that the problem was the uncertainty. I read a lot, so I know
the landscape of writing. When I revise my writing, I often refer to tech¬
niques used by other authors. But with tech debugging, I don’t know the
landscape as well. As a result, I feel like I am stumbling around in the
dark without any reference points.
   Of course, there are tech instruction manuals out there. I had eagerly
[106]     DRAGNET NATION

downloaded the CryptoParty handbook, which contained helpful step-
by-step illustrations for installing e-mail encryption. But the instructions
were for the e-mail program Thunderbird, not the Postbox program I was
using. In a world of rapidly changing tech tools, it is hard for manuals to
stay up to date.
    After a glass of wine and some reflection, I steeled myself and went
back upstairs to try again. But I still couldn’t do it. After another round
of attempts, I gave up. Eventually, I convinced a more technically savvy
colleague to help. Within an hour, she found the instructions (there were
some) and got the two pieces of software to play nicely with each other.
    Now I just needed to find some people with whom to exchange
encrypted e-mail. I could find lots of people listed on the GPG keyserver,
but it wasn’t always clear if the person listed was the same person that I
knew in real life.
   For instance, after the Snowden revelations, I found three public keys
listed for Edward Snowden on the GPG public keyserver. One was for a
Lavabit e-mail address. One was a Booz Allen e-mail address. And one
was for the e-mail address ItAllGoesToTheSamePlaceAnyway@any-
domain.com. Presumably, the third one was somebody’s idea of a joke.
But whether the first two were authentic are anybody’s guess (although it
turned out that Snowden apparently used the Lavabit address to reach
 out to Russian human rights workers). That’s why some people have key
 signing” parties, where they get together and verify each other s identi¬
 ties before downloading that person’s keys.
        But key signing seemed a bit too much like Facebook friending for
 me. The whole point of cryptography is to be secret, so why would I estab¬
 lish yet another publicly viewable list of people with whom I communi¬
 cate and how much I trust them? Instead, I posted my key “fingerprint”—a
 forty-digit string of letters and numbers—on my website for anyone who
 wanted proof that it was me.
        Once I had my system up and running, it was fun to exchange
 encrypted e-mails with a few colleagues and tech-savvy friends. Mes¬
 sages showed up in my inbox looking like huge long blocks of random
 numbers, letters, and symbols. But once I entered my password, the ran¬
 dom text magically transformed into plaintext e-mail.
        I was just starting to enjoy my encrypted e-mail existence when I ran
 into the ACLU technologist Christopher Soghoian at a conference. The
                                                              LONELY COOES   [107]

 first of the Snowden revelations had just come out and we were discuss¬
 ing the need for encrypted e-mail.
     I really dislike using GPGSoghoian told me. “It is so complex that
 there is a good chance someone is going to mess up when using it. My
 fear is that users will be lulled into a false sense of security, and put some¬
 thing in writing that could get them into trouble.”
    He told me that he keeps his master key on an encrypted hard drive
 in a locked drawer in his office. He keeps his subkeys, which last for one
 year, on a smart card in his wallet. To read or write encrypted e-mail, he
 inserts the smart card into a smart card reader attached to his laptop and
 then enters an additional password.
    I was immediately deflated. I didn’t have a master key or a subkey, nor
did I even know I needed a master key and subkey. My key wasn’t in a
locked drawer or on a smart card; it was on my laptop computer.
    Later, at a conference after-party, I lamented my GPG incompetence
to David Robinson, a law and technology consultant who helped found
Princeton University’s Center for Information Technology Policy. Rob¬
inson showed me a website that made me feel better. It was the personal
website of Karl Fogel, a leading software developer. It displayed his pub¬
lic key and this disclaimer: “I don’t trust my ability to use GnuPG....
Guarding against [possible attacks on GPG] would require constant vig¬
ilance, and I’m not up to the task. Therefore, if it’s important that your
message to me be truly secret, please contact me before you send it, and
we’ll work something out.”



The fatal flaw of public key encryption is that it relies on individuals to
protect their keys.
   Back in the days of physical codebooks, specially trained messengers
ferried codebooks between spies and military operatives. But now we must
guard the private keys stored on our computers as effectively as those
operatives guarded their codebooks.
   That is basically an impossible task. Our computers and smartphones
are promiscuous, spewing data as they connect to the Internet. And our
codebooks can also be intercepted at the border, where the government
regularly seizes computing devices and copies their entire contents without
a warrant. In 2010, Immigration and Customs Enforcement investigators
[188]   DRAGNET NATION

set up an alert for future travel by David House, a supporter of Bradley
Manning, the army private who passed U.S. government communica¬
tions to WikiLeaks. When House returned from a trip to Mexico, he was
pulled aside for questioning and his devices were seized. (House sued the
Department of Homeland Security and eventually reached a legal settle¬
ment, in which the government agreed to destroy the data it obtained
from his electronics.)
   The more I learned about border searches, the more worried I was
that my data—my contacts, my codes, and my passwords—were at risk.
So I decided to start carrying zero data across borders. On a business trip
to Europe, I brought my husband’s old laptop and no phone. The laptop
contained no files or e-mail. Instead, I accessed my files from my Spi-
derOak encrypted cloud and retrieved my e-mail from the Web.
    But my keys were a problem. I wanted to use encryption while abroad.
So I brought my secret key on a thumb drive and planned to destroy the
thumb drive before returning to the United States. But I hadn’t planned
how to destroy the drive, and when it came time to depart I didn’t have
the heart to start smashing the thumb drive with a lamp in my hotel
room. Instead, I deleted the contents of the thumb drive and hoped for
the best. Luckily, when I arrived in New York, I breezed through customs
without any problems.
    Traveling without data was surprisingly relaxing. I logged in to e-mail
each evening at the hotel and, voila, I hadn’t missed anything. And I was
much more able to focus on my work without the distraction of the phone
and its siren song of constant communication.
    I decided that zero data border crossings not only were good for pri¬
vacy but they were also good for my mental health.



But I was still at risk of having my codebook compromised by malicious
software on my computer—which is the cutting edge of cyber espionage.
    Consider the story of Husain Abdulla, a U.S. citizen who is director
of the Americans for Democracy and Human Rights in Bahrain. In April
2012, he was walking to a meeting on Capitol Hill to discuss the brutal
crackdown on pro-democracy protesters in Bahrain. As he walked, he
clicked on an e-mail from a journalist on his BlackBerry titled “Exis¬
tence of a new dialogue—Al-Wefaq & Government authority,” referring
                                                           LONELY CODES   [189]

 to the Al-Wefaq political party in Bahrain that had been supportive of
 the protest movements. Husain tried to download the e-mail attachment
 but it didn’t work. Suspicious, he and other Bahraini activists who
 received similar attachments turned over these e-mails to an intrepid
 reporter at Bloomberg News, who arranged for computer security research¬
 ers to analyze the files.
    After months of painstaking examination, the researchers found that
 the attachments contained malicious software that, once opened, could
 log all of the activists’ keystrokes, take screen shots, turn on their cam¬
 eras and microphones, and listen in on their calls. The software—created
 by UK-based Gamma Group—appeared to send the information back to
 computers in Bahrain. Gamma told Bloomberg that it didn’t sell the soft¬
ware to Bahrain and that possibly its software had been stolen.
    Gamma is a leader in the fast-growing world of cyber-espionage.
These companies make software that circumvents encryption. Their tools
can turn on a microphone in your pocket and capture each word as you
type.
    In October 2011, my colleague Jennifer Valentino-DeVries and I went
to Washington, D.C., to visit ISS World, a conference where governments
from around the world buy cyber-espionage tools from companies like
Gamma. It is sometimes called the Wiretapper’s Ball.
    Not surprisingly, we couldn’t get in, but Jennifer managed to obtain
more than two hundred marketing documents for thirty-six companies,
including Gamma. The brochures advertised hacking tools that enable
governments to break into people’s computers and cell phones, and “mas¬
sive intercept” gear that can gather all Internet communications in a
country. We published much of the literature online in a database called
“The Surveillance Catalog: Where governments get their tools.”
   The brochure for Gamma Group’s FinSpy, the tool used to monitor
the Bahraini activists, touted its capability of “monitoring of encrypted
communications.” The brochure also stated that it had been used in an
Internet cafe to monitor Skype communications, and even to take pic¬
tures of people as they use Skype. “FinSpy is a field-proven Remote Moni¬
toring Solution that enables Governments to face the current challenges
of monitoring Mobile and Security-Aware Targets that regularly change
location, use encrypted and anonymous communication channels and
reside in foreign countries,” the brochure stated.
[ISO]     DRAGNET NATION

    “Monitor a hundred thousand targets,” was the headline for the bro¬
chure from an Italian company called Hacking Team. “Remote Control
Systerftan monitor from a few up to hundreds of thousands of targets.
    Jerry Lucas, the organizer of the Wiretapper’s Ball, told us that the
off-the-shelf surveillance market had grown from “nearly zero before
the 2001 terrorist attacks to about $5 billion a year.
    “We don’t really get into asking, ‘Is this in the public interest?   Lucas
said.



I hoped I didn’t need to worry about the U.S. government installing moni¬
toring software on my computer or phone.
    After all, in the United States, law enforcement agents appear to have
obtained a search warrant to install monitoring software on a suspect s
computer or phone. In June 2007, for instance, the FBI obtained a search
warrant that allowed it to send spyware to the MySpace account of a per¬
son sending bomb threats to a high school near Olympia, Washington.
(In a separate case, Judge Stephen Smith, the Texas magistrate judge who
initially rejected a cell phone location surveillance order, turned down a
search warrant request to install spyware because, in part, he believed it
was closer to video surveillance than a traditional search. Like wiretaps,
video surveillance can require additional justification to the court.)
        However, I did worry about my encrypted communications ending
up in the National Security Agency’s dragnets. The NSA has established
taps at domestic telecommunications companies that have the capacity
to pull in roughly 75 percent of U.S. Internet traffic, according to report¬
ing by my colleagues Siobhan Gorman and Jennifer Valentino-DeVries.
        The NSA is supposed to destroy purely domestic communications that
it pulls in through its dragnets. But the NSA appears to have carved out
an exception for encrypted communications. In a 2009 memo revealed by
 Edward Snowden, the NSA said that it retains “all communications that
 are enciphered or reasonably believed to contain secret meaning”—even
 if they are entirely domestic communications.
        That means that by using encryption I am likely raising a red flag
 that sweeps me into the NSA dragnet.
        I had been warned. Even before Snowden’s revelations came out, the
 NSA whistle-blower Bill Binney told me that encryption, or “crypto,” was
                                                             LONELY COOES   [131]

 a red flag. “I don’t trust any crypto in the public realm. If they can’t break
it, they 11 come across the Net and get it,” he told me. Binney said^fie sent
all his e-mail unencrypted, knowing it would be monitored'!* send
everything in the clear because I want them to know everything,” he told
me. I call them the Gestapo and White House brown shirts.”
    One night I met the three NSA whistle-blowers Binney, Kirk Wiebe,
and Thomas Drake for dinner at a Bethesda diner. Wiebe advised me
to use GMRS (General Mobile Radio Service) walkie-talkie radios.
Binney suggested returning to actual codebooks, distributed through
the postal mail.
    Drake told me that he learned that lesson back in his days when he
was a supervisor on an airplane specially designed to intercept and jam
enemy communications. During exercises in Nevada, his team was able
to evade an F-15 fighter jet by executing maneuvers that broke the lock
on the F-15’s pulse-doppler radars, allowing them to fly to a very low
altitude and merge into the ground clutter.
    “That’s how you defeat high-tech,” Drake told me, “with low-tech.”



I still wanted a technological solution. And the one that most of my
hacker friends used was an encrypted instant messaging protocol known
as Off-the-Record Messaging.
   Off-the-Record was created in 2004 by Nikita Borisov and Ian Gold¬
berg, under the guidance of Eric Brewer, a professor of computer science
at the University of California at Berkeley. It is a free encryption protocol
that can be used on top of existing instant messaging programs.
   Off-the-Record helps solve the problem of users needing to guard their
keys by automatically making new keys frequently throughout a chat. That
means a person monitoring the conversation would have to seize the keys
during the conversation.
   Theoretically, that makes Off-the-Record more secure than encrypted
e-mail. But it certainly wasn’t much easier to use.
   To use Off-the-Record, I had to download three different software
programs and then convince them to cooperate with one another. First,
I used Tor’s anonymizing software to connect to the Internet. Then
I signed up for a Jabber instant messaging account. Then I down¬
loaded an instant messaging program called Adium that contains the
[192]   DRAGNET NATION

OfF-the-Record messaging protocol. Then I configured Adium to work
with Tqr and Jabber.
   The only reason I was able to do any of this is because the computer
security researcher Jacob Appelbaum walked me through each step and
told me where to click and what to type in the settings.
    And yet this cobbled-together mash of free software was actually the
state of the art for encrypted communications. I found that many of my
sensitive journalistic sources would talk to me only over the combina¬
tion of Tor, Jabber, and OfF-the-Record messaging. For the most sensitive
sources, actually, I sometimes used Tor, Jabber, and OfF-the-Record on a
clean computer that I had booted using a thumb drive containing The
Amnesic Incognito Live System (Tails) operating system. Tails is free, open
source software that was surprisingly easy to use once a hacker friend
installed it on a thumb drive for me. The amazing thing about Tails is that
it is designed from the ground up for privacy, so there are no settings to
jiggle or opt-outs required. Using Tails was my only and best glimpse into
an alternate universe where privacy could be the default.
    At his military court proceedings, Bradley Manning, the U.S. Army
private who leaked documents to WikiLeaks, described how he connected
with WikiLeaks using Tor and Jabber for encrypted chats. “The anonym¬
ity provided by TOR and the Jabber client and the WLO’s [WikiLeaks
Organization’s] policy allowed me to feel I could just be myself, free of the
concerns of social labeling and perceptions that are often placed upon me
in real life,” Manning said in his statement to the court.
    Of course, encryption ultimately didn’t save Manning. He was
betrayed by a friend—a hacker named Adrian Lamo, who turned Man¬
ning in to the FBI. Government investigators later found traces of Man¬
ning’s correspondence on his computer; Julian Assange was on Manning’s
“buddy list” in Jabber.
    And so, even this ungainly setup that is designed to conceal can reveal
too much. And the trio of services working together is extremely delicate.
Any change in one service can domino into the others. For example, a
year after I set it up, Tor changed its proxy settings, and it took weeks for
me to figure out why Jabber had stopped working.
    I couldn’t blame the software developers. Tor is the only one among
them that has any paid staff. Jabber is run by volunteers who struggle to
defend it against repeated hack attacks while running on donated com-
                                                         LONELY CODES   [193]

puters. Off-the-Record is a volunteer project led by founder Ian Gold¬
berg, who is now a professor at the University of Waterloo.
    Adium is an open source project led by Evan Schoenberg. There wasn’t
much information about him on the website, so I called him up. It turned
out he was an ophthalmologist finishing his fourth year of medical
residency. He started Adium in college and had been trying to keep it
up. “I thought when I went to medical school I was going to make the
transition—I would hand the reins over to someone else,” Schoenberg
told me. (He had time to talk because it was a quiet day at the hospital.)
 But there was never anyone with programming experience who seemed
to want to get involved in leadership.” And so Adium languished. “I sim¬
ply haven’t had time and a lot of our core development team has moved
on to jobs that pay,” Schoenberg told me.
   On this fragile foundation rested my most robust hope of encryption.



This is not how it was supposed to turn out.
   When the antinuclear activist Philip Zimmermann released the first
mass-market encryption program called Pretty Good Privacy in 1991, it
seemed for a brief time that encryption could liberate humanity from
oppression.
   PGP was the first program to offer access to military-grade encryp¬
tion to ordinary people. Until then, powerful computerized encryption
was available only to the government and to large companies willing to
pay huge licensing fees. (The software I was using for encryption, GPG, is
a free software version of PGP.)
   The widespread availability of powerful encryption helped spur a
movement called Cypherpunks. On March 9,1993, Eric Hughes published
A Cypherpunks Manifesto. “Privacy is the power to selectively reveal one¬
self to the world,” Hughes wrote. “When I purchase a magazine at a store
and hand cash to the clerk, there is no need to know who I am.... When
my identity is revealed by the underlying mechanism of the transaction,
I have no privacy. I cannot here selectively reveal myself; I must always
reveal myself.” He called on the Cypherpunks to build systems that allow
people to remain anonymous. “We must defend our own privacy if we
expect to have any,” he wrote. “People have been defending their own
privacy for centuries with whispers, darkness, envelopes, closed doors,
[134]      DRAGNET NATION

secret handshakes, and couriers. The technologies of the past did not
allow for strong privacy, but electronic technologies do.”
    Not surprisingly, the U.S. government was not thrilled with the Cypher-
punk uprising. The U.S. Customs Service began investigating whether
Zimmermann had violated arms trafficking laws, since high-powered
encryption was considered a munition subject to export restrictions. In
1996, however, the government dropped the investigation without pressing
any charges. And in 1999, the United States dropped the ban on export¬
ing encryption products.
   The National Security Agency attempted to co-opt the movement in a
different way. It developed the “Clipper chip” to encrypt voice transmis¬
sions. The catch: copies of the encryption keys would be stored with the
government, meaning that the government could potentially decrypt
everything.
   In 1994, Matt Blaze at AT&T Bell Labs revealed a basic flaw in the
Clipper chip that the spymasters overlooked—it was possible to send a
spoofed useless key to the government and then continue using encryp¬
tion. Embarrassed, the NSA sidelined the project soon after, giving the
Cypherpunks a big win. Flush with victory, a leading Cypherpunk, Bruce
Schneier, wrote in his book Applied Cryptography in 1996: “It is insuffi¬
cient to protect ourselves with laws; we need to protect ourselves with
mathematics.”
    But it turned out that cryptography could not protect against the law.
The Cypherpunks built “remailers”—services that would let users send
encrypted anonymous messages, back in the day when disposable e-mail
accounts were not as easy to come by as they are today. But in 1996, the
largest remailer, based in Finland, shut down rather than comply with a
court order to unmask the identity of a user who had used the remailer
to distribute material critical of the Church of Scientology.
    Nor could cryptography overcome the challenges of bad passwords,
insecure computers, and sloppy computer programming.
        By 2000, Bruce Schneier issued a correction to his earlier enthusiasm.
In his book Secrets & Lies, he declared that he had been wrong to lead
readers to believe that “cryptography was a kind of magic security dust
that they could sprinkle over their software and make it secure.” Schneier
wrote that he had come to believe the problem wasn’t cryptography; it
                                                           LOIELY CODES   [195]

was the people using it. “Mathematics is logical; people are erratic, capri¬
cious and barely comprehensible,” he concluded.
    The National Security Agency has long exploited the capriciousness
of humans to circumvent cryptography. In 2013, documents revealed by
Edward Snowden outlined the NSA’s “aggressive, multipronged effort to
break widely used Internet encryption technologies” by persuading tech¬
nology companies to provide access to the NSA, using malicious soft¬
ware in targeted attacks, and using its influence to weaken encryption
standards.
   Yet lost in the hue and cry about the NSA’s attacks on encryption was
the fact that the NSA’s use of circumvention tactics seemed to imply that
the agency has still not cracked the mathematical formulas that under¬
pin public key cryptography.
   Schneier, who reviewed the Snowden documents for the Guardian,
declared: “Trust the math. Encryption is your friend. Use it well, and do
your best to ensure that nothing can compromise it. That’s how you can
remain secure even in the face of the NSA.”



In some ways, the Cypherpunk movement is coming back to life.
   Julian Assange, a longtime Cypherpunk, transformed the relationship
between journalists and their sources with his 2006 launch of the
WikiLeaks encrypted drop box that promised complete anonymity to
people who wanted to leak information.
   Other Cypherpunks focused on building “liberation technology” to
help liberate people from oppressive regimes. Moxie Marlinspike in San
Francisco built encryption apps—RedPhone and TextSecure—for Android
phones. Nathan Freitas and the Guardian Project in New York built apps
to bring encrypted calls and Tor to cell phones.
   The U.S. government funded some projects, such as Tor, in the
name of Internet freedom, while at the same time the Justice Department
was investigating Tor developer Jacob Appelbaum for his involvement in
WikiLeaks.
   And Phil Zimmermann, the founder of Pretty Good Privacy, went
the capitalist route. He sold PGP to Network Associates in 1997 for
$36 million. And in 2012, he joined with the cryptographer Jon Callas
[136]     DRAGNET NATION

and the former navy SEAL Mike Janke to build a paid cryptography
service called Silent Circle, which sold apps for encrypted texts and
phone calls.



Silent Circle was the easiest encryption program I had ever used. All I
had to do was download two apps onto my iPhone, Silent Text and Silent
Phone, and, presto, I was encrypted.
   But I needed someone to talk to. The service cost $9.95 a month, and
I had a hard time finding anyone willing to sign up.
    Eventually, I convinced a sensitive source to install Silent Text and
Silent Phone as well. We sat at a bar and spent an hour installing the apps
on our phones and making sure they worked. I set myself up as Ida and
my source set up a fake name.
  We successfully texted a few times, and even had a long phone call on
Silent Phone. The call was painful—with three-second delays between
 speech and transmission, but it mostly worked. Silent Circle CEO and
 cofounder Mike Janke told me that the delays were because I was using it
 on the cell phone network instead of Wi-Fi. (I had turned off Wi-Fi to
 evade commercial location tracking.) In addition, he pointed out that my
 source and I had not pressed the “verify” button at the start of the call, an
 omission that can also cause interference on a call.
        But when my source and I tried to arrange an in-person meeting, I
 suddenly stopped receiving replies to my Silent Texts. All I saw was a
 message that said “Establishing keys.”
   Later, when I asked Silent Circle about this mishap, chief technologist
 Jon Callas explained to me that with every text, Silent Text exchanged a
 new set of keys. This meant passing key information back and forth at
 least three times before the texting was initiated. This allowed Silent Cir¬
 cle to dispose of my keys after each session, in a similar fashion as Off-
 the-Record instant messaging.
        But both parties needed to be online at the same time for the dynamic
 key exchange to work. I found that if I or my Silent Text partner were in
  an elevator or in a zone without cell signals, the key exchange might not
 be completed.
     In this case, one of us—either my source or myself—had dropped a
  key in the midst of our exchange. As a result, our texts weren’t going
                                                             LONELY CODES   [ID/]

 through. We were supposed to meet in the evening, but we hadn’t yet
 specified a time and location.
    As the day wore on, I became increasingly desperate. I texted my source
 in the morning to ask where and when we should meet. I got no reply. By
 the afternoon, I was starting to worry.
    At 3:13 p.m., I wrote, “Feel free to call or to text a place to meet. Flope
we can make it work!” Still no reply. I was starting to worry that my
 source had gotten cold feet.
    At 5:07 p.m., I tried again: “Hmm—I got a notification of a text but no
text.” Still no reply.
    Finally, at 6:24 p.m., my source called me on my cell phone to check
in. So much for encryption. We were back in the dragnet.
    This is the conundrum of using encryption in today’s world. When it
works, it’s magical. When it doesn’t work, it’s the worst kind of false prom¬
ise, the kind that can betray sensitive relationships.



I kept using Silent Circle. For all its flaws, it was much less painful than
the other encryption programs I was using.
    I persuaded a few people to join me on Silent Circle: a close friend
who was living in Paris; my book researcher, who was living in Japan;
and a professional colleague.
   And I learned to live with dropped keys. My friend in Paris—whose
Silent Circle name was Hedy Lamarr—and I dropped keys so often that
we set up a weekly phone call during which we would both press “reset
key” at the same time over and over until our keys finally reset.
   Eventually, we both came to view Silent Text as closer to instant mes¬
saging than to texting. We both had to be online at the same time. If one
of us was off-line, our keys would often drop and our messages would
disappear in the ether.
   Silent Text also brought out Hedy’s inner pyromaniac. She fell in love
with a feature that let her set her messages to “burn.” They would dis¬
solve before my eyes twenty-four hours after I received them. Occasion¬
ally, her messages burned before I even got to read them. I complained
that I needed to document our exchanges for my book research, but that
just spurred her to burn more.
   During one of her visits to New York, Hedy told me that she finally
[198]   DRAGNET NATION

had begun to have doubts about burning all of the messages. I read one
of your messages and you had a very witty reply,” she told me. “But I had
already burned my message so I couldn’t remember what you were wit¬
tily replying to.”
    She briefly considered not burning the messages but ultimately decided
to keep tossing our data into the virtual flames.
    “It’s bittersweet,” she said. “But that’s life.”
M   y job is to surveil my children. It is a nonstop occupation—every
     waking and sleeping minute of my life I am supposed to know where
     my children are, what they are doing, and how they are staying safe.
   As every parent knows, it is an exhausting job. Not only is it physi¬
cally exhausting to chase little children around, but it is also mentally
taxing to know that you are on the hook for anything that happens—
whether or not it is your fault. If I happen to be looking at my cell phone
while one of my kids runs out into the street and gets hit by a car (God
forbid), not only would I blame myself, but every single person in the
world would blame me, too.
   It’s the kind of pressure that can drive a person to take extreme mea¬
sures: to put children on leashes, or to secretly monitor children using
spyware, or to set up nanny cams to watch a babysitter.
   And, in fact, much of the expert advice about protecting kids’ privacy
boils down to “surveil your kids.”


   • The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends that parents
supervise their kids whenever they use a computer, use software to track
which websites their kids visit, and consider using censorship software to
block access to objectionable websites.
   • The FBI recommends that parents use blocking software and “always
[200]   DRAGNET NATION

maintain access to your child’s on-line account and randomly check his/
her e-mail.”
    . The Department of Homeland Security suggests using software to
monitor websites that kids visit. Monitoring tools can be used with or
without a kid’s knowledge.”


    I can understand why many parents follow this advice. After all, it
comes from legitimate sources. Parents are scared of a terrifying world.
And they hope surveillance will help them prevent a catastrophe.
    I imagine that same parental feeling motivates the executives at the
National Security Agency. Their job is to protect the nation, and they
know they will be blamed if there is a terrorist event. So they decide to
monitor everything—just in case.
  But I couldn’t justify setting up dragnets to snare my children’s every
move while trying to evade dragnet surveillance of myself. If nothing
else, it was entirely hypocritical.



Why not succumb? Why not just embed a GPS chip in my children’s back¬
packs? Why not install spyware on their computers monitoring their
every mouse click? Wouldn’t my kids be safer?
    Maybe. But it’s worth remembering that my kids are pretty safe already.
Crime has plummeted in the United States during the past twenty
years. The rate of violent crime declined by about 40 percent from 1990
to 2009. Property crimes are down nearly 40 percent. Auto thefts have
fallen by more than 50 percent.
    In New York City, where I live, the numbers are even more dramatic.
Murders are down 83 percent since 1993. Robberies are down 78 percent.
Burglary is down 83 percent. The city had the second-lowest murder rate
among large cities, with a rate of 5.05 homicides per 100,000 people in
2012. Only San Diego’s rate was lower among cities with more than a
million residents, with a homicide rate of 3.51 per 100,000 people.
    Crimes against children are also down. Sexual abuse of children plum¬
meted in the United States between 1992 and 2010, according to a compi¬
lation of studies analyzed by the Crimes Against Children Research
Center. Other studies show that bullying is on the decline, although the
rates are still higher than they should be. Teen suicide and teen preg-
                                                          FIGHTING FEAR   [201]

nancy rates have declined in the past twenty years. And research consis¬
tently shows that crimes against children are mostly perpetrated by
people they know.
    So why is there this perception that our digitally saturated world is so
dangerous that kids need to be monitored? David Finkelhor, the director
of the Crimes Against Children Research Center, calls the paranoia about
children and the Internet “juvenoia.” He speculates that juvenoia results
from the fact that modern parents feel they are pitted against popular
culture. In the past, families lived in smaller societies and tribes where
they shared values with other families. Today, modern parents often feel
that they are holding back a tide of popular culture with its celebration of
sexuality, junk food, violence, and consumerism. “It is ironic, but parents
in the most elite environments in America feel as desperate as everyone
else to shield their children from much mainstream cultural influence,”
Finkelhor writes.
   And so it is not only crime that parents are afraid of, it is also the
influence of corrupting ideas from outside the home. Is that enough of a
reason to conduct surveillance?
   It’s a particularly poignant question now that I understand the psy¬
chological effects of surveillance. Research shows that covert surveillance
can cause anxiety and self-repression in adults. In children, surveillance
appears to do something particularly depressing: it undermines their
enthusiasm to learn.
   A landmark 1975 study concluded that adult surveillance of children
had the effect of “turning play into work,” dampening the children’s enthu¬
siasm for playing with an interesting puzzle. In the study, children were
left alone in a room with a camera pointed at them and told that an adult
would be watching them through the camera as they played with the puz¬
zle. The next time the surveilled children were presented with the puzzle in
a normal classroom setting, they had far less interest in playing with it
than the control group. “The knowledge that one’s performance at a task
is being observed and evaluated by someone else ... appears sufficient to
decrease later interest in the task,” wrote the study’s authors, Mark R.
Lepper and David Greene.
   The children’s enthusiasm for the puzzle declined even further when
they were given explicit rewards for playing with the puzzle. Children
were shown enticing toys and told that they could play with them if they
[202]     DRAGNET NATIDN

did a good job on the puzzles. The next time that they were presented
with the puzzle in a normal classroom setting, their interest in the puzzle
fell even further. Lepper and Greene concluded that the best way to inter¬
est children in an activity is to “employ the minimal amount of pressure
sufficient to elicit or maintain the desired behavior.”



Even before I got interested in privacy, I had decided that it wasn t fair to
post any pictures of my children online. I didn’t think it was fair for me
to build a digital trail for them that they would later have to manage.
    Ever since our kids were born, my husband and I have always shared
pictures of the kids privately. At first, we used the now-defunct website
Kodak Gallery to send our family and friends links to slide shows. For
the grandparents, we regularly printed out pictures and sent them hard
copies. But we stopped using Kodak Gallery when it began threatening
to delete our photos if we didn’t buy photos often enough.
    After leaving Kodak Gallery, we briefly used another photo-sharing
service, Shutterfly. But eventually we realized that we weren’t that into
“sharing.” Only a few people really wanted to see endless baby photos.
So we just started e-mailing photos to the grandparents and a few other
close relatives.
    Even so, we’ve had a few lapses where a photo escapes into the public
domain. When my son was born, in 2008,1 was so exhausted and had so
many people to notify that I posted a picture of him on Facebook. That
photo is still there—and it bothers me. I’ve deleted it, but it’s still in the
data I downloaded from Facebook.
    My husband once mistakenly uploaded family photos onto Google+
when he thought he was just logging in to his Gmail account. Fie was
able to delete them, but it took a while for them to disappear from Google
search results.
        Another time, my mother posted a photo of my daughter and me in
 our pajamas (!) on her blog without asking. My daughter noticed it and
 told Grandma to take down the photo. Grandma took it down and, once
 again, it took a while to disappear from search results. But now it’s gone.
        But policing my children’s digital images is not easy. Every summer
 camp and after-school activity comes with a form asking me to allow
 them to take pictures of my children and use them for whatever purpose
                                                            FIGHTING FEAR   [ 2 03 ]

 they like. I decline to sign, but I dislike being an annoying parent who
 causes problems.
    I know that it’s a losing battle. Just as I can’t prevent myself from being
photographed in public, I can’t prevent my children from living in a world
that is saturated with cameras. But it seems unfair that I have no rights
over images of my kids. If someone were to videotape my kids in public
and post the video online, I would have no legal right to have it removed.
But if that video contained copyrighted music, the copyright owner would
be able to get it taken down in a flash.
    I briefly—and mostly in jest—asked a few lawyers if I could copyright
my kids’ images. They said I couldn’t.
    And so I continue to try to keep their images off-line, knowing that I
will eventually fail.



There are two laws that are supposed to protect children’s privacy: the
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act and the Family Educational
Rights and Privacy Act. However, neither of them is particularly
effective.
   In fact, before even starting my privacy experiments, I had already
violated the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act of 1998. The law
required websites to get parental permission before collecting personal
information from children under the age of thirteen. In 2013, the law
was updated to expand the type of information that requires parental
consent to include online behavioral tracking, photos, videos, and
location.
   The goal of COPPA is to prevent websites from exploiting kids. But,
unfortunately, the law also discourages companies from building web¬
sites aimed at kids under thirteen, because once they have “actual knowl¬
edge” that kids are using their site, they need to find a way to get parental
permission.
   As a result, COPPA encourages lying. I set up my daughter with a
Gmail account when she was seven years old—-even though Gmail requires
users to be thirteen. We wanted her to be able to send e-mails to her
grandparents who live in India.
   In my defense, I am not the only parent lying about my kids’ age
online. In 2011, researchers led by Microsoft’s Danah Boyd surveyed more
[iu]   DRAGNET NATION

than one thousand parents of kids aged ten to fourteen and found that
one-third of them reported that their kids had Facebook accounts before
age thirteen and that two-thirds of the parents helped their kids set up
the Facebook accounts. The researchers concluded that the laws age
restrictions are “neither a solution to privacy and online safety concerns
nor a way of empowering parents.”
   The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974 was designed
to give parents the right to access their children s education records and
to require parental consent before those records are turned over to a third
party. However, FERPA is filled with loopholes. Schools can hand over
records to “school officials” or to organizations conducting studies on
behalf of the school” without parental consent. And information about a
student’s name, address, e-mail address, telephone, weight, height, and
photograph are considered “directory information that can also be dis¬
closed without parental permission.
   In New York, where I live, the public schools send student data to an
outside data storage center, inBloom, which says it aims to help schools
develop technology that promotes “personalized learning.” Apparently,
personalized learning will let “teachers take on the role of coaches, stu¬
dents learn at their own pace, technology tracks student progress, and
schools are judged based on the outcomes they produce.” For this dream,
New York could start paying $2 to $5 per kid to inBloom in 2015.
    I would rather they spent that money on salaries and textbooks
instead of donating my children’s data to a Hall of Mirrors database of
dubious, unproven value. But I can’t remove my children’s information
from the database. There is no opt-out provision in FERPA if a school
wants to share data with “organizations conducting studies,” although
school districts can establish their own opt-outs if they wish. InBloom,
which is a nonprofit, says it doesn’t view, use, analyze, or sell kids’
data.
   Sadly, I must conclude that neither of the two children’s privacy laws
 is serving me very well.



 Conventional wisdom states that kids don’t care about privacy. Adults are
 constantly telling me that privacy is a generational issue and that kids
 are perfectly happy living a completely public life.
                                                         FIGHTING FEAR   [285]

    And it’s true that kids have made terrible mistakes in posting dumb
 things online—sometimes with severe consequences.
    Consider, as just one extreme example, eighteen-year-old Justin Carter
 of Texas, who was arrested for writing a sarcastic comment on his Face-
 book page. Carter and a friend were arguing about an online video game
 League of Legends, and Carter’s friend called him crazy. Carter wrote
 back: I think I’ma [sic] shoot up a kindergarten and watch the blood of
 the innocent rain down and eat the beating heart of one of them.” He
 was arrested and charged with making a terroristic threat. Carter was
jailed from February to July 2013 before an anonymous donor posted the
 $500,000 bail that his family could not afford.
    But it’s worth remembering that adults write just as many stupid
things online, which have resulted in outsize consequences. Consider
these two stories.


    • In January 2012, two British tourists were detained for twelve hours
and denied entry to the United States after one of them tweeted about the
upcoming trip: “Free this week, for quick gossip/prep before I go and
destroy America,” in a reference to “partying” in the United States.
    • On September 9, 2009, Joe Lipari had a bad experience at an Apple
Store in New York. When he got home, he paraphrased a Fight Club
quote on his Facebook wall. It read, “Joe Lipari might walk into an Apple
store on Fifth Avenue with an Armalite AR-10 gas powered semi-automatic
weapon and pump round after round into one of those smug, fruity little
concierges.” Less than two hours later, New York Police Department offi¬
cers were at his door. They searched his house for explosives, arrested
him, and charged him with making terroristic threats. He fought the
charges for one year, refusing to take a plea bargain, until finally the
charges were dropped.


   Research shows that kids do care about privacy. A 2012 survey of teens
who used apps on their smartphones found that 46 percent of them had
turned off location tracking features on their phones, and 26 percent had
uninstalled an app because of privacy concerns. The study also found that
70 percent of teens had sought advice on how to manage their online
privacy.
   Even kids who don’t appear to care about their privacy often engage
[286]      DRAGNET NATION

in tricks to protect themselves on social networks, according to inter¬
views with 163 teens analyzed by Microsoft researchers Danah Boyd and
Alice Marwick. The researchers describe a ploy used by a seventeen-
year-old girl named Carmen who struggled to communicate with her
friends on Facebook, even though her mother was also a Facebook
friend.
    Carmen was sad over a breakup, so she posted song lyrics on Face-
book from “Always Look on the Bright Side of Life.” Carmens mother
took the lyrics literally, and commented that Carmen seemed to be doing
really well. But Carmen’s friends understood the hidden meaning of the
song lyrics: the song appeared in the Monty Python movie Life of Brian
as the main character faced crucifixion.
    Carmen’s hidden messages resonated with me. Back in my high school
years, we didn’t have Facebook. Our Facebook wall was the yearbook.
At the end of the year, each senior got to decorate a page in the year¬
book. My page—and many others’ pages—was a mixture of inside jokes
and lyrics designed to be obscure.
   I dug up my yearbook page and inspected my messages. I couldn t
decode most of them. Why did I shout out “Liquid Paper” to my friend
Heidi? And what did I mean by telling my friend Suzy to “take a walk on
the mild side”? What happened on “Aug. 15” that I wanted to recall with
my friend Sheryl? It is all lost in the sands of time.
        At the time, however, the hidden messages were effective. My friends
knew what I meant, and my parents were most likely just as mystified as
 I am now.
    In fact, I had always cared about privacy, even as a teenager. As a kid,
 I was concerned about parental surveillance. Now I am concerned about
 corporate and governmental surveillance.
        Over time, my threat model had simply changed.

                                       +
 When I started my privacy experiments, my children saw privacy as a
 challenge to be overcome.
        I nicknamed my daughter Harriet the Spy because she was so good
 at spying on me. Once, I was working at home and my daughter was
 home from school with pink eye. I was in my room on the phone with
                                                            FIGHTING FEAR   [20/]

 a girlfriend complaining about how I couldn’t get my Mac laptop to
 work with my Hewlett-Packard monitor when this e-mail arrived in
 my in-box:


        I’ve been hearing every word you said about how your mac doesn’t
        go with the HP you have. Heard over 10 curse words and most of
        them were the F word.


     I opened the door to my bedroom and there was my daughter, hold¬
 ing the iPad and giggling at her successful eavesdropping. She also loved
 to sneak up on me as I was typing in passwords.
    My kids also thought I was mean for not letting them post videos to
YouTube. My daughter is nine; my son is five. They love the Internet,
particularly YouTube. My daughter taught herself to play piano by watch¬
ing YouTube. My son fell in love with Woody Guthrie’s music when he
found it on YouTube. (He would like me to call him Woody in this book,
so I will.)
    Harriet and Woody dream of posting their own videos to YouTube.
After all, in the world of YouTube, that’s how you have a conversation.
One person posts a video, and then another person posts a video that
builds on the first, or responds to it. My kids are right that this is how art
evolves, through artists sharing their work. YouTube is the Paris coffee¬
house of their time. And I feel terrible about denying them the pleasure
of such creative exchanges.
    But I can’t promise them that those videos—or some other online
activity—won’t end up coming back to haunt them someday. It could be
used to deny them a job or a passport or simply to deny them the right to
shape the way they are viewed by the world.
    When I think of my own childhood, I feel blessed that my life was
barely documented. Without digital footprints, I was able to reinvent
myself completely whenever I wanted. In junior high school, for example,
I wore only pink and turquoise. But when I moved across town for high
school, I changed my wardrobe entirely and wore only preppy clothes
with penny loafers. Nobody knew about my transformation because there
was no trail, except for a few dusty photographs in a shoe box in my par¬
ents’ closet.
[ZOO]   DRAGNET NATION

   I want my children to have the same freedom to reinvent themselves.
But I realize that saying no all the time was only causing them to hate
privacy and try to circumvent me.



I decided to take a new approach. Taking a page from the study about
turning “play into work,” I would attempt to turn privacy into play.
    I decided to treat privacy tools as attractive toys that my kids had an
opportunity to play with, without any explicit rewards or surveillance of
their actions.
    The password business was a great start. My daughter loved all the
money she was making rolling dice and selling strong passwords. And
she loved that it was a grown-up activity; adults were impressed when
she told them about the password business, and adults were her biggest
customers.
    As an added bonus for me, after Harriet started her password busi¬
ness, she stopped trying to sneak peeks at my passwords. She knew that
they were either stored in 1 Password or salted versions of the passwords
she had made for me. The game had changed for her: now the game was
to build better passwords, not to break mine.
    Harriet soon became curious about my other privacy experiments.
She loved my fake identity of Ida Tarbell. Harriet decided she would use
her fake name for her online accounts as well. Neither kid is old enough
for a social media profile, but Harriet changed her e-mail address to her
fake name. After all, her friends and family would still know it was she.
It was an innocuous bit of social steganography.
    I also realized that there was no reason not to get Harriet into encryp¬
tion. So I set up a Silent Circle account for her on the iPad. Soon, Harriet
and Ida were exchanging encrypted texts and phone calls.
    Harriet also got interested in my attempts to block online tracking.
She stood by my computer and laughed with me while I tried to browse
the Web using the cumbersome NoScript, which made it difficult for my
pages to load correctly. She cheered when I switched to Ghostery and
fewer pages were breaking. She particularly liked Ghostery’s logo—a cute
little blue ghost that sits at the top right corner of the Web browser. Soon,
she wanted to use Ghostery, too.
    So I installed Ghostery on her computer, an old netbook that we got
                                                          FIGHTING FEAR   [ 203 ]

 for free when setting up our high-speed Internet connection. She began
 to view Ghostery as a video game, with the goal being to find websites
 with the most trackers. “Mommy, I found one with forty-one trackers!”
 she told me, running into my room with her computer.
    Harriet even started to like DuckDuckGo, with its cheerful duck in a
 bow tie. I set it up as her default search engine and she enjoyed showing
 off the duck to her friends.
    But she complained that the Ghostery app—which uses DuckDuck¬
 Go s search engine—on the iPad was too slow. After a month of com¬
plaints, I finally got out a stopwatch and we timed it. Searching for the
 Grammy awards on the Ghostery app took 6.7 seconds. The same search
of Apple’s Safari Web browser took 1.7 seconds. She was right. The
Ghostery app was too slow on the iPad.
    So we gave up on Ghostery on the iPad. Together, we installed Dis¬
connect Kids, an iPad app from Brian Kennish, the Google engineer
who launched Disconnect in 2010. Disconnect Kids was basically the same
technology that I had used when I allowed Ashkan Soltani to route my
Web traffic through his computers to check for trackers. Disconnect
Kids did the same thing—it captured all the traffic leaving the iPad and
blocked any contact with a list of known mobile tracking companies.
    I thought it was quite clever. But Harriet was disappointed that there
was no video game aspect. She couldn’t see how many trackers were being
blocked because its work was invisible.
    After she had used it for a while, and none of her apps broke, I decided
to install Disconnect Kids on my iPhone. After all, I had been struggling
to find a way to block ad tracking on my phone—and it was the best solu¬
tion I’d seen so far.
    Now, whenever I glance at Disconnect Kids’ dancing green robot on
my phone, I am reminded that my kids and I face the same challenges in
protecting ourselves from dragnets.
   There is really no need for a distinction between “kids” and “adult”
privacy-protecting software when we are all being swept up indiscrimi¬
nately.
AN UNFAIRNESS CDCTRINE


A  t the end of my year of trying to evade surveillance, I felt surprisingly
    hopeful.
        On one level, my efforts to evade the dragnets were not very suc¬
cessful. I hadn’t found a way to use my cell phone—or my burner
phone—in a way that protected my location and calling patterns, short
of leaving the phone at home or putting it in a metal-shielded cage, ren¬
dering it useless. I hadn’t extricated myself entirely from the clutches of
Google and Facebook. My name and address were still on file at more
than one hundred data brokers that didn’t provide me with a way to opt
out. And I wasn’t going to be able to avoid facial recognition cameras.
    But, on another level, I had exceeded my expectations.
    I had avoided the vast majority of online ad tracking. My passwords—
made by my daughter by rolling dice and picking words out of a
dictionary—were pretty good. My fake identity as Ida Tarbell had allowed
me to disassociate my true identity from sensitive purchases and some
phone calls and in-person meetings. And I had managed to convince
some of my friends and sources to exchange encrypted texts, instant
messages, and e-mails.
    My biggest success, surprisingly, was with my kids. They started out
thinking that privacy was another word for “no.” But over time, they came
to embrace privacy-protecting technology, from blocking online track-
                                                    AN UNFAIRNESS DOCTRINE   [211]

 ing to encryption. I even wondered if I had gone too far when my daugh¬
 ter reprimanded me for entering her social security number on a school
 form.
    Of course, my successes were only temporary. New technology will
 make it easier to break my new twenty-character passwords. The more
 that my kids and I use fake identities, the easier it will be to link those
 identities back to us. My encrypted conversations are likely being stored
 by the NSA for later analysis. And the online ad trackers are already devel¬
 oping new technology to circumvent my blocking techniques.
    But I realized there was value in trying. My opt-outs were one more
bit of evidence to undermine the data brokers’ argument that few people
 care enough about privacy to opt out. My use of encryption and anony¬
mizing software put the NSA and Internet companies on notice that I
didn t want them to read my messages, and I had encouraged some of my
friends and associates to join me in embracing cryptography. My use of
fake identities had encouraged my kids to develop their own pseudonym
strategies, which we hoped would serve them well in their teenage years.
    In short, I came to believe that my actions were likely more effective
at changing the conversation about privacy than at countering surveil¬
lance. They reminded me of the lunch-counter sit-ins of the 1960s,
when black students in Greensboro, North Carolina, sat at a “whites
only” lunch counter in an F. W. Woolworth store, in order to protest the
company’s policy of racial segregation. The sit-ins did not immediately
destroy segregation, but they led to a national conversation that ultimately
unraveled it.
    My hope is that if enough people join me in refusing to consent to
ubiquitous indiscriminate surveillance, we might also prompt a conver¬
sation that could unravel it.



However, I wasn’t happy with the toll that my countersurveillance tech¬
niques had taken on my psyche. The more I learned about who was watch¬
ing me, the more paranoid I became. By the end of my experiment, I was
refusing to have digital conversations with my close friends without
encryption. I began using my fake name for increasingly trivial transac¬
tions; a friend was shocked when we took a yoga class together and I casu¬
ally registered as Ida Tarbell.
[212]   DRAGNET HAIIDN

    I didn’t want to live in the world that I was building—a world of sub¬
terfuge and disinformation and covert actions. It was a world based on
fear. It was a world devoid of trust. It was not a world that I wanted leave
to my children.
   I remember my parents expressing the same feeling about the two
big threats of their generation—environmental damage and the prolif¬
eration of nuclear weapons. They didn’t want to leave their children a
world that was destroyed by those threats. Of course, we have not totally
solved either one of those problems, but we have contained the threat of
nuclear weapons through international treaties, and we have mitigated
pollution through laws and social pressure.
    The lessons of the environmental cleanup are particularly relevant to
the problem of privacy. Of course, there is more to do, but it’s worth remem¬
bering how polluted the United States was not that long ago. In 1969, a
chocolate-brown oil slick on the Cuyahoga River in Cleveland, Ohio,
caught fire. It was not the first time that debris on the heavily polluted
river near the city’s steel mills had caught fire, nor was it even the worst
fire on the river. But Time magazine’s coverage of the 1969 river fire (com¬
plete with a dramatic and misleading picture from a much more devastat¬
ing 1952 river fire) was a wake-up call for the nation. We spent the next
decades reconsidering the unfairness of asking the public to clean up
after industrial polluters.
    By almost any measure, our rebalancing of the burden of pollution has
been a success. The air is cleaner. The water is cleaner. Endangered species
have been saved. The Cuyahoga River had no fish in the late 1960s. Now
there are more than forty fish species in the river, and even a few freshwa¬
ter mussels, which are a sign of improving water quality. (Of course, we
did overlook a big environmental problem—the accumulation of carbon
dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere and the subse¬
quent warming of the earth—that hopefully we will address soon.)
    Privacy and pollution are similar problems. Both cause harm that is
invisible and pervasive. Both result from exploitation of a resource—
whether it is land, water, or information. Both suffer from difficult attri¬
bution. It is not easy to identify a single pollutant or a single piece of data
that caused harm. Rather, the harm often comes from an accumulation
of pollutants, or an assemblage of data. And the harm of both pollution
                                                    AN UNFAIRNESS DOCTRINE   [213]

 and privacy is collective. No one person bears the burden of pollution; all
 of society suffers when the air is dirty and the water undrinkable. Simi¬
 larly, we all suffer when we live in fear that our data will be used against
 us by companies trying to exploit us or police officers sweeping us into a
 lineup.
    To understand the links between privacy and pollution, I called Den¬
 nis Hirsch, a professor of environmental law at the Capital University
 Law School in Ohio, who has been studying privacy and environmental
 law for a decade. Hirsch compared institutions that mine individuals’
 personal data to ranchers who overgraze their cattle on commonly owned
 grasslands, as portrayed in Garrett Hardin’s seminal 1968 essay in Sci¬
 ence magazine, “Tragedy of the Commons.” Hardin described how each
 rancher seeks to increase profits by adding cattle to his herd, even though
 too many cattle will overgraze and ruin the pasture for all. “Freedom in
a commons brings ruin to all,” Hardin wrote.
    Hirsch described excessive data mining as a similar tragedy of the
commons. Like the cattle herders, he said, companies that mine data have
an incentive to use more and more data to gain a competitive advantage.
But each time they do so, they undermine users’ trust that their data will
be appropriately cared for and protected. Eventually, he said, individuals
will no longer trust companies to protect their data and will no longer
disclose it. “The risk here is that eventually our trust will be so abused
that we will pull back from the Web,” he told me.
    That was certainly a good description of my own behavior. In my
investigation of dragnets, I had lost my trust in the institutions that stored
my data. I had become a data survivalist, pulling my data back from the
Web and stockpiling it at home. I had also become a disinformation spe¬
cialist, overcoming my fear of lying to spread lies about my habits and
myself.
   By fighting to protect my data, I had polluted the public square and
sowed distrust. There had to be a better way to fight back against unfair
dragnets.

                                     +
One way to even the playing field would be for everyone to be in the sur¬
veillance business.
[214]   DRAGNET NATION

    This is the argument put forth by some technologists, including David
Brin, the author who described the inevitable rise of ubiquitous surveil¬
lance in his book The Transparent Society. Brin argues that the only thing
that will blunt the rise of the surveillance state is the rise of what he calls
“sousveillance,” in which citizens monitor the government from below as
aggressively as the government monitors them from above.
    Certainly, the fact that every citizen is now carrying a cell phone
camera has made the police more accountable for their actions. For
instance, a police officer who pepper-sprayed nonviolent student pro¬
testers at the University of California at Davis in 2011 was fired after a
video of his actions was made public.
    Sousveillance has also become an antiwar activity. In 2010, the actor
George Clooney and the human rights activist John Prendergast launched
a satellite surveillance program to monitor the civil war in Sudan. In May
2013, Clooney and Prendergast’s Satellite Sentinel Project released evi¬
dence that Sudan and South Sudan had failed to meet their obligations to
withdraw troops from the demilitarized zone along the border.
    But, unfortunately, there is much government action that citizens can’t
police with cameras or satellites. We might never have known about the
NS As dragnets of innocent Americans if Edward Snowden hadn’t exposed
them. Nor would we likely have known how much taxpayer money was
being spent to fund those dragnets without Snowden’s revelations of the
intelligence agencies’ “black budget.”
    We may not have seen the chilling video of U.S. soldiers shooting
innocent journalists and children from their aircraft in Baghdad if
Private Bradley Manning hadn’t exposed it. Nor would we likely have
received an accurate count of the civilians killed in the Iraq and Afghan¬
istan wars if Manning had not revealed hundreds of thousands of war
records.
    The revelations by Snowden and Manning, however, were also indis¬
criminate. Both obtained troves of documents that, in total, painted a
more comprehensive picture than any one document might have. In a
sense, they were conducting “sousveillance” of the government using their
own information dragnets.
    But it turns out the government doesn’t like being caught in dragnets
any more than I do. The Obama administration has thrown the book at
both Manning and Snowden, charging them with a range of crimes
                                                   AN UNFAIRNESS DOCTRINE   [215]

 including espionage. In 2013, Manning was sentenced to thirty-five
 years in prison, and Snowden obtained temporary political asylum in
 Russia.
    And it s not just Snowden and Manning whose efforts to unmask
 government behavior are being prosecuted. Traditional journalists—who
 are the front lines of surveilling the government—are increasingly being
 targeted in criminal investigations. In 2013, the Justice Department
 informed the Associated Press—after the fact—that it had obtained two
 months’ worth of phone records of several AP journalists, as part of an
investigation into a leak of information about a CIA operation in Yemen.
Gary Pruitt, the AP’s president and chief executive, protested the intru¬
sion, saying, “We regard this action by the Department of Justice as a
serious interference with AP’s constitutional rights to gather and report
the news.”
    And the Department of Justice is pushing for the New York Times
reporter James Risen to reveal his sources for a book that exposed a
botched CIA operation to provide Iranian scientists with error-ridden
blueprints for a nuclear device. Risen has said that he will go to prison
rather than testify about his sources.
    Mutual surveillance is not likely to level the playing field if the gov¬
ernment uses its power to prosecute those who seek to hold the govern¬
ment accountable for its actions.



Another possible way to make dragnet operators more accountable for
their actions is simply to charge them for access to our personal data.
   This idea is seductive in its simplicity. I would reclaim my personal
data, store it in a virtual locker, and sell some of it on the open market—
rather than having it “taken” from me. A few start-ups have popped up
in the hopes of privatizing the personal data market. And in 2011, the
World Economic Forum declared that personal data was emerging as a
“New Asset Class.”
   But so far, personal data are an underperforming asset. The reason is
simple supply and demand: I don’t have the only copy of my data, since
there is no law requiring data brokers to give it back to me. Therefore, no
one is going to pay me much to use my copy of the data when they can
get it somewhere else cheaper.
[216]   DRAGNET NATION

    An analysis by the Financial Times found that the ubiquity of
personal data has driven prices down so that an average person’s age,
gender, and location is worth only a fraction of a cent. And the sum total
of information about most people sells for less than a dollar. I entered my
information into the Financial Times s data calculator and found that my
information was worth only 28 cents.
    Laws that give people ownership—or partial ownership—of their
data might help boost the price for data. But it would also get compli¬
cated really fast. After all, how do I share ownership of my phone calling
data with AT&T? And how do I prevent the government from taking my
partially owned data from AT&T?
    And I’m not sure that selling data would end up limiting the chilling
effects of surveillance. Before we had a minimum wage and limited work
hours, people were willing to “sell” their labor at extremely low prices for
very long hours.
    Carnegie Mellon professor Alessandro Acquisti, who studies the eco¬
nomics of privacy, has found that people are less willing to pay for pri¬
vacy when they don’t already have it. In one experiment, Acquisti and
his fellow researchers offered one group of people a free $10 Visa gift card
and told them their spending would be anonymous. They offered another
group a $12 gift card and told them that their spending would be identi¬
fied. Then they offered members of each group the opportunity to trade
their card for the other group’s card. Fifty-two percent of the $10 card¬
holders kept their card—in effect agreeing to pay $2 to keep their privacy.
But over 90 percent of the $12 cardholders refused to trade—meaning
that they refused to give up $2 to protect their privacy. “What this tells us
is that people value some things more when they have them than when
they do not have them,” Acquisti told me.
    In essence, when you don’t have privacy, you feel less pain from losing
it. Instead, you feel the pain of having to “buy back” privacy. This inabil¬
ity to accurately assign value to our data is one reason that most products
that are sold to protect privacy fail. And it’s one reason that turning per¬
sonal data into a currency—without any enabling legislation to make
personal data scarce, and thus more valuable—could just enable and
legitimize ubiquitous surveillance.
                                                  AN UNFAIRNESS DOCTRINE   [217]

And so I return, reluctantly, to laws to limit dragnet surveillance. My
reluctance is due to the fact that privacy laws have a poor track record in
the United States. Unlike most Western nations, the United States has no
comprehensive privacy law requiring all data collectors to meet some min¬
imum standards. Instead, there are privacy laws covering certain sectors—
health, finance, children, and government records. Most of those sectoral
laws require the data collectors to disclose their data practices and to
seek user consent to the use of their personal information. It sounds like
a good idea. But in practice, notice and consent turn out to be easy to
circumvent.
    The Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act is a good example.
Rather than get parental consent for collecting children’s e-mail
addresses, companies prefer to remain ignorant that there are any chil¬
dren on their websites.
    Or consider the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
of 1996, which is supposed to give people access to their medical rec¬
ords, allowing them to bring records to their next provider. It also pro¬
hibits the sale of identifiable health data for marketing purposes, but
“de-identified” data is largely exempt from the restrictions. As a result,
many pharmacies do a lucrative business selling de-identified prescrip¬
tion records to giant national databases. (Vermont tried to ban the sale of
pharmacy records, but the Supreme Court struck down its law, stating
that its restrictions on pharmaceutical manufacturers’ ability to conduct
marketing violated the First Amendment.)
   Or consider the Federal Privacy Act, which is supposed to force fed¬
eral agencies to obtain consent before sharing a citizen’s information with
other agencies for purposes that aren’t “compatible” with the reason the
data were originally collected. But, instead of seeking consent, agencies
simply describe their interagency data sharing as a “routine use,” which
is exempted under the act. As a result, the Privacy Act failed to prevent
the National Counterterrorism Center from downloading entire data¬
bases of citizen files from other government agencies to look for terror¬
ism clues.
   Privacy laws based on consent inevitably seem to end up creating
manufactured consent.
[218]   DRAGNET NATION

Privacy laws that give people the right to see the data that is used against
them, however, seem like a good idea.
    Consider the injustice of the terrorist watch list. In 2009, Gulet
Mohamed, a U.S. citizen who was born in Somalia and had immigrated
to the United States when he was three years old, went to visit relatives in
Somalia for several months and then moved to Kuwait to study Arabic
and live with an uncle.
    On December 20,2010, Mohamed went to the Kuwait airport to renew
his visa, as he had done every three months since his arrival. While he
was at the airport, two men approached him, handcuffed him, blind¬
folded him, and drove him to an undisclosed location. Mohamed, who
was only eighteen years old at the time, says he was tortured for more
than a week, whipped with sticks, and forced to stand for long periods; at
one time his arms were tied to a ceiling beam until he passed out. He was
questioned about the militant leader Anwar al-Awlaki.
    On December 28, he was transferred to a deportation facility, where
he was visited by FBI agents. He refused to answer questions without a
lawyer, and they said he would be detained indefinitely if he didn’t answer
questions. On January 12, he was again visited by the FBI and again he
refused to answer their questions. Finally, on January 16, 2011, Kuwaiti
officials took him to the airport and gave him an airline ticket to the
United States, which his family had purchased. However, Mohamed was
not allowed onto the plane because he was on the no-fly list. Eventually,
he was allowed to fly home on January 21. But he has not been able to fly
since then.
   Mohamed’s ordeal was likely triggered by some piece of personal data
gathered about him. But he has not been allowed to see that data. Instead,
the government argues that he should seek redress by filing a claim with
the Department of Homeland Security’s Traveler Redress Inquiry Pro¬
gram (TRIP). Travelers who are denied boarding can submit their infor¬
mation to the department, which will assess whether they have been
improperly targeted because they share a name with someone on the watch
list or because of some other misunderstanding. However, the department
is not required to offer individuals who are on the watch list an opportu¬
nity to challenge their inclusion; in fact, the department does not ever
confirm or deny if they are on the list. Mohamed claims that by denying
him a “constitutionally sufficient legal mechanism” to challenge his
                                                   AH UNFAIRNESS DOCTRINE   [213]

inclusion on the no-fly list, he is being denied his constitutional right to
due process of law.
    This is the worst kind of abuse of personal data: Mohamed was tor¬
tured and to this day cannot board an airplane, for reasons that he does
not know, and he is told that he cannot challenge those reasons in a court
of law. Not all data abuses are as dreadful as in Mohamed’s case, but his
plight reminds me how important it is to have a mechanism to allow
people to see the data that are used against them.
    There is already a growing movement to hold companies accountable
for the data they hold about individuals. The European Union requires
companies to provide citizens access to the data that are held about them.
In 2011, Senators John McCain and John Kerry proposed commercial
privacy legislation that would have required data collectors to provide
individuals with access to their data, a chance to opt out, and an oppor¬
tunity to decline having their data shared with some third parties. How¬
ever, the legislation was opposed by both privacy advocates and data brokers
and failed to make progress. In 2012, the Obama administration declared
that it wouldn’t wait for Congress to act on privacy, and instead launched
an effort to get the commercial data industry to develop voluntary com¬
pliance with a set of privacy standards, including offering individuals
access to their data.
   One of the most successful methods of holding data brokers account¬
able is the Fair Credit Reporting Act, which allows people to access, cor¬
rect, and dispute the commercial data that are used to evaluate them for
financial decisions. As a result, even though my credit report contained
inaccuracies, it was easy for me to fix them. The law also requires anyone
who uses my credit report to deny me a loan, insurance, or employment
to notify me of the underlying reason for the rejection and give me an
opportunity to dispute the information.
   Of course, the credit-reporting law has its flaws. It can be too difficult
to dispute the data contained in credit reports. It covers only certain kinds
of financial decisions. And it’s too easy for big data brokers that have
detailed dossiers about individuals to claim their data is not covered by
the law. The credit-scoring company eBureau, which pegged me as a high
school dropout, for instance, says its scores are used to “evaluate” people
for marketing purposes, but not to approve people for credit, loans, or
insurance—which could mean that its scores are not covered by the law.
 [2211]   DRAGNET NATION

     Federal Trade commissioner Julie Brill has advocated for the law to
 be expanded to cover a wider swath of data usage, particularly if per¬
 sonal data are used to decide “whether we are too risky to do business
 with or aren’t right for certain clubs, dating services, schools or other
 programs.” She has asked data brokers to voluntarily give individuals
 access to their data, an opportunity to correct their data, and to opt out
 of its use for marketing. But since the Federal Trade Commission is not
 empowered to easily write rules—unlike the Environmental Protection
Agency—all Brill can do is encourage the data industry to regulate itself,
 unless the industry’s activities cross the line and violate more general
laws, such as the FTC’s ban on “unfair and deceptive” practices.
     In an information economy, we probably need an Information Pro¬
tection Agency that is empowered to police the information economy,
with a particular focus on bringing transparency and accountability to
data handling and usage.



But just creating an Information Protection Agency is not going to be
enough to police government surveillance or to remedy the plight of people
like Gulet Mohamed.
    When it comes to government surveillance, we have tended to allow
dragnets when the benefits to society appear to outweigh the intrusive¬
ness of the search. We tolerate surprise workplace visits from govern¬
ment inspectors. We allow police to set up dragnet roadblocks to search
for drunk drivers. We endure drug testing in certain workplaces.
    But we don’t accept dragnets that are too intrusive for their purpose.
We rejected airport body scanners that revealed the contours of indi¬
viduals naked bodies. We do not embed tracking microchips under our
childrens skin, the way that we do with pet dogs. We do not place sur¬
veillance cameras in bathroom stalls.
    And we demand that government dragnets not be racially discrimi¬
natory. In 2013, Judge Shira Scheindlin of the federal district court ruled
that the New York Police Department’s “stop and frisk” dragnet violated
the Constitution by targeting otherwise suspicionless young black and
Hispanic men. “No one should live in fear of being stopped whenever he
leaves his home to go about the activities of daily life,” she wrote.
    Of course, sometimes, in the heat of wartime, we have allowed gov-
                                                    AN UNFAIRNESS DDCTRINE   [221]

 ernment dragnets to go too far. In 1944, the Supreme Court ruled that
 the detention of more than one hundred thousand Japanese Ameri¬
 cans during World War II was lawful because “it was impossible to bring
 about an immediate segregation of the disloyal from the loyal.” In an
impassioned dissent, Justice Frank Murphy wrote that the ruling “goes
over ‘the very brink of constitutional power’ and falls into the ugly abyss
of racism.”
    Still, despite its missteps, in recent years the court seems to have set
out a compelling set of questions to ask when judging the fairness of a
dragnet:


    • Is the dragnet too intrusive for its purpose?
    • Does it benefit society?
    • Does it fall into the ugly abyss of racism (or other prejudices)?


    These admittedly fuzzy criteria reminded me of the publicity test that
I had used to evaluate whether I could justify lying about my identity. In
that situation, I decided that a reasonable person would support my lies
because they were limited in scope, not intended to harm, and were my
attempt to remedy an unfair situation. Now, in the wake of Edward
Snowden’s revelations, the public was evaluating whether the NSA’s
dragnets passed the publicity test.
    The publicity test is also reminiscent of one of the most effective
tactics of the environmental movement. Every year, the Environmental
Protection Agency publishes a list of the companies that store the most
toxic pollutants in its Toxics Release Inventory. The publicity of the list
caused companies to compete to hold fewer toxins, which then resulted
in fewer spills. “Everybody wants to avoid being high on that list,” said Lisa
Heinzerling, a Georgetown University environmental law professor.
“That’s been a big success story.”
   I wondered if maybe the solution for government dragnets was a simi¬
lar push for transparency. This is the essence of an argument raised by
Christopher Slobogin, a Vanderbilt University law professor who has
extensively studied government dragnets. Fie suggests that courts should
ban government dragnets that are not specifically authorized by legisla¬
tures. “While leaving courts in control of search and seizure law in indi¬
vidual cases, it reinforces democratic values ... when the search or seizure
[222]     DRAGNET NATION

is of a group,” he wrote. In addition, he suggests that courts could still
curb dragnets if they are too intrusive or biased against a particular
group.
   In short, he argues that the government dragnets must not be covert.
They must be scrutinized by either a legislative body or a court.



Surveillance dragnets are inherently unfair. By definition, they capture
the innocent and the guilty indiscriminately. In doing so, they create a
culture of fear—in which people like Sharon Gill and Bilal Ahmed are
afraid to talk online about their mental issues, in which Yasir Afifi cuts
off his friendship with his friend who says dumb things online.
   Okay, so life is unfair. The question becomes: How unfair is accept¬
able?
   We tolerate a lot of unfairness in society. Some people are rich; some
are poor. Some children go to good public schools; some children go to
terrible public schools. Some people live near nice parks and greenery;
other people live in places with no green space.
   But there is some unfairness we don’t tolerate. We don’t tolerate people
stealing and getting away with it. We don’t tolerate bribery. We don’t
tolerate companies that sell goods that injure people.
   Our sense of fairness changes over time. We used to think it was fair
for children to work long hours on assembly lines. Then we didn’t. We
used to think it was fair for companies to pollute our rivers and skies.
Then we didn’t. We used to think it was fair to leave our dog’s poop on
the sidewalk. Then we didn’t.
   As citizens of a democracy, we get to make these decisions.
   For data dragnets, we have already seen that transparency and account¬
ability work with credit reports. And we have witnessed the criteria that
judges use to assess dragnets. Putting those together with the publicity
test, I believe that we can assemble a list of six questions that should be
asked of every dragnet:


   • Does the dragnet provide individuals with legal right to access,
        correct, and dispute the data?
   • Are the dragnet operators held accountable for the way the data are
        used?
                                                   AN UNFAIRNESS DOCTRINE   [223]

    • Is the dragnet too intrusive for its purpose?
    • Does it benefit society?
    • Does it fall into the ugly abyss of racism (or other prejudices)?
    • Can it withstand public scrutiny?


    By asking these questions of every dragnet, I hope that we can distin¬
guish the intolerably unfair dragnets from those that we can tolerate.
    Some of today’s technological dragnets would not survive the test.
 Consider online and retail tracking. By following our every click online
or tracking our cell phones in a shopping mall, they are too intrusive for
their frivolous purpose of marketing. Nor do they provide any opportu¬
nity for redress.
    Or consider the NSA’s dragnets. The agency has yet to provide con¬
vincing evidence that its dragnets of innocent Americans have benefited
society enough to overcome their intrusiveness. Individuals have no access
to their data, and the legality of the sweeping dragnets is judged by a
secret court.
    Or consider the New York City Police Department’s infiltration of
Muslim mosques and community groups, a racially targeted dragnet that
appears to have fallen into the ugly abyss of racism.
    But other dragnets might survive the test. Police use of surveillance
and license plate cameras might be beneficial enough to society to justify
their intrusiveness, particularly if alleged criminals have an opportunity
to challenge the footage in court. Data brokers that are accountable for
their data—the same way that credit-rating agencies are—could also pass
the test.
   Even Freestylers such as Google and Facebook could perhaps pass the
fairness test if they limited the intrusiveness of their tracking, provided
more meaningful and real access to their data, and were held account¬
able for data they shared with others.
   My unfairness checklist is almost certainly not perfect. But it is an
attempt to carve a middle path between those who ask us to hand over all
our data and “get over it,” and those who suggest that we throw our body
on the tracks in front of the speeding train that is our data economy.
Nobody, including me, wants to give up on all the benefits of our infor¬
mation economy—with its magical maps and facts at our fingerprints
and the ability to connect with anyone in the world in an instant. But nor
[IU]    DRAGNET NATION

should any of us1 simply give up all of our data without any assurances
that it will not come back to bite us.
   We didn’t shut down the industrial economy to stop pollution. We
simply asked the polluters to be more accountable for their actions. We
passed laws and created a new governmental agency and forced pollut¬
ers to be transparent. Similarly, we don’t need to shut down the data
economy. We just need to make the data handlers let us see what they
have about us and be accountable for any harm caused by their use of
our data.
   If we succeed at finding this middle path, we might find ourselves in
a shiny new world where privacy is not a goal in and of itself. We might
find that privacy was just a shield we had been holding up to protect
ourselves from harm. If the harm is contained, we might be able to
lower the shield enough that my children could post their own videos
on YouTube, Sharon and Bilal could renew their conversations on the
PatientsLikeMe medical forum, and Yasir and Khaled could reclaim
their childhood friendship.
   That would be a world I would want to leave to my children.
 NOTES




1. HACKED
   1 Sharon is a forty-two-year-old single mother: Sharon Gill, in discussion with author,
     July 12, 2013.
   2 Bilal Ahmed, thirty-six years old: Bilal Ahmed, in discussion with author, January
     27, 2013.
   2 “I live in a small town”: Sharon Gill, in discussion with author, July 12, 2013.
   2 On May 7, 2010, PatientsLikeMe noticed: Julia Angwin and Steve Stecklow,
     “‘Scrapers’ Dig Deep for Data on Web,” Wall Street Journal, October 12, 2010,
      http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703358504575544381288117888
      .html.
  2 The website was also selling data: Ben Heywood, “Transparency, Openness and Pri¬
    vacy,” The Value of Openness Blog, May 20, 2010, http://blog.patientslikeme.com/2010
    /05/20/bentransparencymessage/.
  2 “Ifelt totally violated”: Angwin and Stecklow, “‘Scrapers’ Dig Deep.”
  2 Nielsen was operating in a gray area: Kim Zetter, “Prosecutors Drop Plans to Appeal
    Lori Drew Case,” Wired, Threat Level (blog), November 20, 2009, http://www.wired
    .com/threatlevel/2009/ll/lori-drew-appeal/.
  3 Privacy is often defined: Merriam-Webster Online, accessed June 5, 2013, http://www
    .merriam-webster.com/dictionary/privacy.
  3 Dragnets that indiscriminately sweep: For an in-depth look at the gap between legal
    and socially acceptable tracking, please consult: Helen Nissenbaum, Privacy in Con¬
    text: Technology, Policy, and the Integrity of Social Life (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford
    Law School, 2010).
  3 We are living in a Dragnet Nation: For a deeper discussion of why indiscriminate
    tracking is so problematic: Susan Freiwald, “First Principles of Communications
    Privacy,” Stanford Technology Law Review 3 (2007), http://stlr.stanford.edu/pdf
    /freiwald-first-principles.pdf; and Christopher Slobogin, “Government Dragnets,”
[22G]   NOTES

    Vanderbilt Law and Economics Research Paper No. 10-25 (2010), http://ssrn.com/
    abstract=1640108.
  3 Computer processing power has doubled: “Moore’s Law at 40: Happy Birthday,” Econ¬
    omist, March 23, 2005, http://www.economist.com/node/3798505.
  3 recently, the cost to store data: Julia Angwin and Jennifer Valentino-DeVries, “New
    Tracking Frontier: Your License Plates,” Wall Street Journal, September 29, 2012,
    http://online.wsj.eom/article/SB10000872396390443995604578004723603576296
    .html.
 4 In addition to its scooping up vast amounts of foreign communications: “NSA Inspec¬
   tor General Report on Email and Internet Data Collection Under Stellar Wind—Full
   Document,” Guardian, June 27, 2013, http://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive
   /2013/jun/27/nsa-inspector-general-report-document-data-collection.
 4 But the NSA is not alone: “Which Governments Are in the Market,” The Surveillance
   Catalog (blog), Wall Street Journal, February 7, 2012, http://projects.wsj.com/sur
   veillance-catalog/attendees/.
 4 ranging from “massive intercept” equipment: Jennifer Valentino-Devries, Julia Ang¬
   win, and Steve Stecklow, “Document Trove Exposes Surveillance Methods,” Wall
   Street Journal, November 19, 2011, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970
   203611404577044192607407780.html.
 4 Even local and state governments: Andy Pasztor and John Emshwiller, “Drone Use
   Takes Off on the Home Front,” Wall Street Journal, April 21, 2012, http://online.wsj
   ,com/article/SB10001424052702304331204577354331959335276.html.
 4 to automated license plate readers: Angwin and Valentino-DeVries, “New Tracking
   Frontier: Your License Plates.”
 4 Local police are increasingly: Julia Angwin and Scott Thurm, “Judges Weigh Phone
   Tracking,” Wall Street Journal, November 9, 2011, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10
   001424052970203733504577024092345458210.html.
 4 AT&T and Verizon are selling: Mike Dano, “The Sale of (Anonymous) Wireless
   Users’ Location and Behavior Is Already Big Business,” FierceWireless (online news¬
   letter), May 23, 2013, www.fiercewireless.com/story/sale-anonymous-wireless-users
   -location-and-behavior-already-big-business/2013-05-23.
 4 Mall owners have started: Euclid Analytics, “Euclid Analytics—How It Works,”
    accessed March 2, 2013, http://euclidanalytics.com/product/how; and Stephanie Clif¬
    ford and Quentin Hardy, “Attention, Shoppers: Store Is Tracking Your Cell,” New York
   Times, July 14, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/07/15/business/attention-shop
   per-stores-are-tracking-your-cell.html?hp.
 4 Retailers such as Whole Foods: Pam Dixon, “Privacy Implications of the New Digital
   Signage Networks,” World Privacy Forum, January 27, 2010, http://www.ftc.gov/os/
   comments/privacyroundtable/544506-00112.pdf.
 4 Some car dealerships: Jennifer Valentino-DeVries and Jeremy Singer-Vine, “They Know
   What You’re Shopping For,” Wall Street Journal, December 7, 2012, http://online.wsj
   .com/article/SB10001424127887324784404578143144132736214.html.
 4 Searching for a bra: Julia Angwin, “The Web’s New Gold Mine: Your Secrets,” Wall
   Street Journal, July 30, 2010, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748703940
   904575395073512989404.html.
 4 companies are building facial recognition technology into phones and cameras: Emily
   Steel and Julia Angwin, “Device Raises Fear of Facial Profiling,” Wall Street Journal,
   July 13, 2011, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303678704576440253
   307985070.html.
                                                                         NOTES    [227]

 5 technology to monitor your location: Keith Barry, “Insurance Company Telematics
   Trade Perks for Privacy,” Wired, August 19, 2011, http://www.wired.com/autopia
   /2011/08/insurance-company-telematics-trade-perks-for-privacy/.
 5 wireless “smart” meters: Jim Marston and Joshua Hart, “Should Consumers Partici¬
   pate in Their Utility’s Smart-Meter Program?,” Wall Street Journal, April 12, 2013,
   http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887323415304578368683701371280
   .html.
 5 Google has developed Glass: “Glass,” Google Inc., accessed July 22, 2013, http://www
   .google.com/glass/start/.
5 The confidentiality of personal information: “Protecting Your Answers,” United States
  Census, 2010, https://www.census.gov/2010census/about/protect.php.
5 During World War I: William Seltzer and Margo Anderson, “Government Statistics
  and Individual Safety: Revisiting the Historical Record of Disclosure, Harm, and
  Risk.” Paper prepared for presentation at a workshop, “Access to Research Data:
  Assessing Risks and Opportunities,” organized by the Panel on Confidential Data
  Access for Research Purposes, Committee on National Statistics (CNSTAT), the
  National Academies, Washington, D.C., October 16-17,2003, https://pantherfile.uwm
  .edu/margo/www/govstat/WS-MAcnstat.pdf
5 During World War II: J. R. Minkel, “Confirmed: The U.S. Census Bureau Gave Up
  Names of Japanese-Americans in WW II,” Scientific American, March 30, 2007,
  https://www. scientificamerican. com/article. cfm?id=confirmed-the-us-census-b8c
  sc=I100322.
5 And in 2002 and 2003, the Census Bureau: Lynette Clemetson, “Homeland Secu¬
  rity Given Data on Arab-Americans,” New York Times, July 30, 2004, http://www
   .nytimes.com/2004/07/30/us/homeland-security-given-data-on-arab-americans
   .html.
5 After bad publicity, it revised its policies: Robert C. Bonner, Commissioner, United
  States Customs and Border Protection, “Policy for Requesting Information of a Sen¬
  sitive Nature from the Census Bureau” (memo), August 9, 2004, https://epic.org/pri
  vacy/census/foia/policy.pdf.
5 The United States is not alone: William Seltzer, “On the Use of Population Data Sys¬
  tems to Target Vulnerable Population Subgroups for Human Rights Abuses,” Coyun-
  tura Social, no. 32 (June 2005): pp. 31-44, https://pantherfile.uwm.edu/margo/www
  /govstat/CoyunturaSocialpaper2005.pdf.
5 Australia used population registration: Ellen Percy Kraly and John McQuilton, “The
  ‘Protection’ of Aborigines in Colonial and Early Federation Australia: The Role of
  Population Data Systems,” Population, Space and Place 11 (2005): 225-50, http://ro
  .uow.edu.au/era/172/.
5 In South Africa, the census: A. J. Christopher, ‘“To Define the Indefinable’: Popula¬
  tion Classification and the Census in South Africa,” Area 34, no. 4 (2002): 401-8.
5 During the Rwandan genocide of 1994: Prosecutor v. Jean-Paul Akayesu, Case No.
  ICTR-96-4, Judgement of 2 September 1998, http://www.humanrights.is/the-human
  -rights-project/humanrightscasesandmaterials/cases/internationalcases/tribunal
  forrawanda/.
5 During the Holocaust: William Seltzer, “Population Statistics, the Holocaust, and the
  Nuremberg Trials,” Population and Development Review 24, no. 3 (September 1998):
  511-52, https://pantherfile.uwm.edu/margo/www/govstat/seltzer.pdf.
6 One of the most infamous cases was a program: “Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Case
  Study,” Final Report of the Select Committee to Study Governmental Operations with
[ 22 0 ]   NOTES

       Respect to Intelligence Activities United States Senate, April 23, 1976, http://www
       .aarclibrary.org/publib/church/reports/book3/pdf/ChurchB3_2_MLK.pdf.
   6 Consider how Chinese hackers: RSA, “Anatomy of an Attack,” Speaking of Security:
     The Official RSA Blog and Podcast, April 1,2011, http://blogs.rsa.com/anatomy-of-an
     -attack/.
   7 In 1999, a deranged man named Liam Youens: Helen Remsburg, Administratrix of
     the Estate of Amy Lynn Boyer v. Docusearch, Inc., No. CV-00-211-B (N.H. 2002),
     http://www.courts.state.nh.us/supreme/opinions/2003/remsb017.htm.
   7 Boyer’s parents got very little: Holly Ramer, “Mother of Slain Woman Settles Lawsuit
     Against Info-Broker,” USA Today, March 10, 2004, http://usatoday30.usatoday.com
     /tech/news/internetprivacy/2004-03-10-boyer-suit-settled_x.htm?POE=TECISVA.
   7 Docusearch is still in business: the website of Docusearch, docusearch.com.
   7 Since then, the price of buying people’s addresses: Boyer, CV-00-211-B.
   7 to as low as 95 cents for a full report: Intelius.com.
   7 Consider just one example: In 2010: Andy Furillo, “Wife of Slain Officer Satisfied
     with Murder Verdict Against Vue,” Sacto 9-1-1 (blog), Sacramento Bee, September
     29, 2010, http://blogs.sacbee.com/crime/archives/2010/09/chu-vue-found-g.html.
   7 During the trial it came out that Vue: Kim Minugh, “Former Deputy Sought Data on
     Slain Man, Trial Is Told,” Sacramento Bee, August 17, 2010.
   7 had asked a colleague to look up: Ibid.
   7 and had searched for Lo’s address: Andy Furillo, “Cell Phone Calls Place Vues near
     Slaying Victim,” Sacramento Bee, August 24, 2010.
   7 Vue was sentenced: Andy Furillo, “Ex-Deputy Gets Life for Arranging Correctional
     Officer’s Murder,” Sacramento Bee, November 29, 2010, http://blogs.sacbee.com/crime
     /archives/2010/ll/ex-deputy-gets.html.
   7 In 2007, a Commerce Department employee: United States Department of Justice,
     “Former Department of Commerce Agent Indicted for Making a False Statement
     and Exceeding Authorized Access to a Government Database” (press release), Sep¬
     tember 19, 2007, http://www.justice.gov/criminal/cybercrime/press-releases/2007/
     robinsonIndict.htm.
   7 After a breakup with a woman: U.S. v. Benjamin Robinson, CR-07-00596 (N.D.
     Cal., 2001), http://ia600500.us.archive.org/ll/items/gov.uscourts.cand.195976/gov
     .uscourts.cand.l95976.L0.pdf.
   8 In 2009, Robinson pleaded guilty to unlawfully: Ibid.
   8 radio-frequency identification (RFID) chips: “FAQ on RFID and RFID Privacy,” RSA
     Laboratories, accessed September 8, 2013, http://www.emc.com/emc-plus/rsa-labs
     /research-areas/faq- on-rfid-and-r fid-privacy.htm#4.
   8 in passports: “The U.S. Electronic Passport Frequently Asked Questions,” Travel.
     State.Gov, A Service of the Bureau of Consular Affairs, accessed July 21, 2013, http://
     travel.state.gov/passport/passport_2788.html.
   8 In 2013, a federal judge in Texas: Steve Hernandez v. Northside Independent School
     District, SA-12-Ca-1113-OG (W.D. Tex. 2013), https://www.rutherford.org/files
     _images/general/01-08-2013_Hernandez_Ruling.pdf.
   8 California to outlaw: Mandalit Del Barco, “California Law Outlaws RFID Implant
     Mandate,” National Public Radio, January 1, 2008, http://www.npr.org/templates
     /transcript/transcript.php?storyId=17762244.
   8 Cell phone tracking has already become routine: Angwin and Thurm, “Judges Weigh
     Phone Tracking.”
   8 Eight agencies produced at least summary statistics: Scott Thurm and Justin Scheck,
                                                                          MIES     [223]

     Police Respond to WSJ Survey,” Wall Street Journal, November 8, 2011, http://
    online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970203733504577024283882878896.html.
  8 It is as routine: Angwin and Thurm, "Judges Weigh Phone Tracking.”
  8 In 2013, Verizon said it would: Anton Troianovski, “Phone Firms Sell Data on Cus¬
    tomers, Wall Street Journal, May 21,2013, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424
    127887323463704578497153556847658.html.
  8 In 2009, fifteen-year-old high school student Blake Robbins: William Bender, “Web¬
    cam Uproar Figure Decries ‘Unjust’ Rumors,” Philadelphia Inquirer, February 25,
    2010,   http://articles.philly.com/2010-02-25/news/24956642_l_webcam-blake-rob
    bins-laptops.
  9 Blake and his family said they were Mike and Ike candies: Mary T. Moore, “Pa. School
    District’s Webcam Surveillance Focus of Suit,” USA Today, May 5, 2010, http://usa
    today30.usatoday.com/tech/news/surveillance/2010-05-02-school-spy_N.htm
    ?loc=interstitialskip.
  9 However, the school did not notify students: Warren Richey, “Did School Use Laptops
    to Spy on Students? Feds Won’t Press Charges,” Christian Science Monitor, August
   17, 2010, http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Justice/2010/0817/Did-school-use-laptops
   -to-spy-on-students-Feds-won-t-press-charges.
 9 An internal investigation revealed: John P. Martin, “Lower Merion Schools Hit with
   New Webcam Spying Suit,” Philadelphia Inquirer, June 9, 2011, http://articles.philly
   .com/2011-06-09/news/29638824_l_blake-robbins-jalil-hasan-new-webcam.
 9 Some students were photographed thousands of times: Ibid.
 9 A former student, Joshua Levin: Levin v. Lower Merion School District, no. 11:3642
   (E.D. Pa. 2011).
 9 Levin, Robbins, and one other student sued: John P. Martin, “Lower Merion Settles
   Another Webcam Lawsuit,” Philadelphia Inquirer, December 28, 2011, http://articles
    .philly.com/2011-12-28/news/30565544_l_blake-robbins-lower-merion-school-dis
    trict-school-issued-laptop.
 9 The school board banned: Minutes of the Lower Merion School Board Business Meet¬
   ing, August 16, 2010, http://www.lmsd.org/data/files/gallery/BoardMeetingMinutes
   /BOSD_Minutes_100816.pdf.
 9 It is estimated that there are more than four thousand surveillance: “Who’s Watching:
   Video Camera Surveillance in New York City and the Need for Public Oversight,”
   New York Civil Liberties Union, Fall 2006, http://www.nyclu.org/pdfs/surveillance
   _cams_report_121306.pdf.
 9 London is famous for: Brian Palmer, “Big Apple Is Watching You,” Slate, May 3,2010,
   http://www.slate.com/articles/news_and_politics/explainer/2010/05/big_apple_is
   _watching_you.html.
 9 In May 2013, a Seattle woman complained: CHS X-Files, “Capitol Hill Drone Pilot
   Spotted, Glowing Orbs, Phone Thief on Wheels,” Capitol Hill Seattle (blog), posted
   by jseattle, May 8, 2013, http://www.capitolhillseattle.com/2013/05/chs-x-files-capi
   tol-hill-drone-pilot-spotted-glowing-orbs-phone-thief-on-wheels/.
10 In 2013, the journalist Nate Anderson: Nate Anderson, “Meet the Men Who Spy on
   Women Through Their Webcams,” Ars Technica (blog), March 10, 2013, http://
   arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2013/03/rat-breeders-meet-the-men-who-spy-on
   -women-through-their-webcams/.
10 In 2011, a Santa Ana man named Luis Mijangos: Federal Bureau of Investigation,
   “Orange County Man Who Admitted Hacking into Personal Computers Sentenced
   to Six Years in Federal Prison for ‘Sextortion’ of Women and Teenage Girls” (press
[ 230 ]     NOTES

      release), September 1, 2011, https://www.fbi.gov/losangeles/press-releases/2011
      /orange-county-man-who-admitted-hacking-into-personal-computers-sentenced
      -to-six-years-in-federal-prison-for-sextortion-of-women-and-teenage-girls.
 10 The New York Times columnist Nick Bilton: Nick Bilton, “At Google Conference,
    Cameras Even in the Bathroom,” Bits (blog), New York Times, May 17, 2013, http://
    bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/05/17/at-google-conference-even-cameras-in-the
    -bathroom/.
 10 “1 will never live a day.. . without it”: Robert Scoble, “My Two-Week Review of
    Google Glass,” Google-l- post, April 27, 2013, https://plus.google.com/+Scobleizer
    /posts/ZLV9GdmkRzS.
 10 Bobbi Duncan, a twenty-two-year-old lesbian student: Geoffrey A. Fowler, “When
    the Most Personal Secrets Get Outed on Facebook,” Wall Street Journal, October 13,
    2012, http://online.wsj.eom/artide/SB10000872396390444165804578008740578200
    224.html.
 11 The most notable example is CIA director David Petraeus: Scott Shane and Sheryl
    Gay Stolberg, “A Brilliant Career with a Meteoric Rise and an Abrupt Fall,” New
    York Times, November 10, 2012, https://www.nytimes.com/2012/ll/ll/us/david
    -petraeus- seen- as- an- invincible-cia-director-s elf-destructs.ht ml
     ?ref=davidhpetraeus&_r=0.
 11 In 2012, former CIA analyst John Kiriakou: U.S. v. John Kiriakou, 1:12-CR-127 (E.D.
    Virg. 2012), https://www.fas.org/sgp/jud/kiriakou/indict.pdf.
 11 He pleaded guilty: U.S. v. John Kiriakou, L12-CR-127 (E.D. Virg. 2012), https://www
    .fas.org/sgp/jud/kiriakou/012513-judgment.pdf.
 11 People who download porn movies: “Copyright Trolls,” Electronic Frontier Founda¬
    tion, https://www.eff.org/issues/copyright-trolls.
 11 In July 2012, the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit: Matt Zimmerman, “Fifth
    Circuit Upholds Sanctions Against Copyright Troll Attorney,” Deeplinks Blog, Elec¬
    tronic Frontier Foundation, July 12, 2012, https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2012/07
    /fifth-circuit-upholds-sanctions-award-against-copyright-troll-attorney.
 11 The court described the attorney’s “violations”: Mick Haig Productions v. Does 1-670
    v. Evan Stone, No. 11-10977 (appeal denied) (2nd Cir. 2012).
 11 In May 2013, a California judge: Mitch Stoltz, “Prenda Law Is the Tip of the Iceberg,”
    Deeplinks Blog, Electronic Frontier Foundation, May 7, 2013, https://www.eff.org
    /deeplinks/2013/05/prenda-law-tip-iceberg.
 12 Jaleesa Suell was taken away from her mother: Jaleesa Suell, Identity Theft
      911   (podcast), http://www.idt911.com/KnowledgeCenter/VideoAndAudio/Video
    AndAudioDetail.aspx?a={498D6632-lD69-4FAA-8060-3BD63105D8E2}.
 12 I prefer to call the crime “impersonation”: Julia Angwin, “The Fallacy of Identity
    Theft,” Decoder (blog), Wall Street Journal, October 13, 2009, http://online.wsj.com/
    article/SB125537784669480983.html.
 12 In response to the rising problem of impersonation among foster children: Child and
    Family Services Improvement and Innovation Act, Pub. L. No. 112-34, 125 Stat. 369
    (2011), http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-112publ34/pdf/PLAW-112publ34.pdf.
 12 Complaints of identity theft increased: Federal Trade Commission, “Consumer Sen¬
    tinel Network Data Book,” February 2013.
 12 Credit card fraud used to be the most common complaint: Steve Toporoff, in discus¬
    sion with author, March 18, 2013.
 13 In 2013, two Florida women were convicted of defrauding: U.S. Attorney’s Office,
    Southern District of Florida, “South Florida Women Sentenced in Identity Theft Tax
                                                                             NOTES   [231]

    Refund Fraud Scheme Involving the Filing of Approximately 2,000 Fraudulent Tax
    Returns Seeking $11 Million Dollars in Refunds” (press release), April 25, 2013,
    http://www.justice.gov/usao/fls/PressReleases/130425-01.html.
 13 The hospital, Baptist Health South Florida: Myriam Masihy, “Hospital Identity Theft
    Found at Some South Florida Hospitals,” NBC 6 South Florida, March 14, 2013,
    http://www.nbcmiami.com/investigations/Hospital-Identity-Theft-Growing-Amid
    -South-Florida-Hospitals-197866811.html.
 13 Public reports of data breaches: “Data Loss Statistics,” DataLoss DB, Open Security
    Foundation, accessed June 24, 2013, http://datalossdb.org/statistics.
 13 Through that network, the hackers gained access: Federal Trade Commission, “FTC
    Files Complaint Against Wyndham Hotels for Failure to Protect Consumers’ Per¬
    sonal Information,” press release, June 6, 2012, http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2012/06
    /wyndham.shtm.
 13 The hackers allegedly racked up: FTC v. Wyndham, No. CV 12-1365-PHX- PGR
    (2012), http://ftc.gov/os/caselist/1023142/120809wyndhamcmpt.pdf.
13 It claimed the FTC was unfairly penalizing: Brent Kendall, “FTC Fires Back in Cyber¬
    security Case, ’ Wall Street Journal, Law Blog, May 24,2013, http://blogs.wsj.com/law
    /2013/05/24/ftc-fires-back-in-cybersecurity-case/.
14 I call this type of mass customization: Internet activist Eli Pariser calls this phenom¬
    enon the “filter bubble.” Eli Pariser, The Filter Bubble: What the Internet Is Hiding
   from You (New York: Penguin Press, 2011).
14 Consider this: searching for a traditionally black-sounding name: Latanya Sweeney,
    “Discrimination in Online Ad Delivery” (Working Paper Series, Harvard Univer¬
   sity, Cambridge, Massachusetts, January 28, 2013), https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3
   /papers.cfm?abstract_id=2208240.
14 In the months leading up to the November 2012 presidential election: Julia Angwin,
   “On Google, a Political Mystery That’s All Numbers,” Wall Street Journal, November
    4, 2012, http://online.wsj.eom/artide/SB1000142405297020334710457809912253008
    0836.html.
 15 Or is Martin Abrams, a leading privacy expert: Martin Abrams, “Guest Headnote:
    Boxing and Concepts of Harm,” Privacy and Data Security Law Journal (September
    2009): 674, http://theprivacyprojects.org/wp-content/uploads/2009/08/PDSLJ-arti
    cle.pdf.
 15 Ryan Calo, a law professor at the University of Washington: Ryan Calo, Digital Mar¬
    ket Manipulation (University of Washington School of Law Research Paper No.
    2013-27, August 15, 2013), http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfnftabstract
    _id=2309703.
15 In 2010, my colleagues at the Wall Street Journal and I: Emily Steel and Julia Angwin,
    “On the Web’s Cutting Edge, Anonymity in Name Only,” Wall Street Journal,
    August 3, 2010, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014240527487032949045753855
    32109190198.html.
16 By 2012, when my team again tested for market manipulation: Jennifer Valentino-
    DeVries, Jeremy Singer-Vine, and Ashkan Soltani, “Websites Vary Prices, Deals Based
    on Users’ Information,” Wall Street Journal, December 24, 2012, http://online.wsj.
    com/article/SB10001424127887323777204578189391813881534.html.
16 Consider the so-called sucker lists: Karen Blumenthal, “How Banks, Marketers Aid
    Scams,” Wall Street Journal, July 15, 2009, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424
    052970204556804574260062522686326.html.
17 In October 2012, the Federal Trade Commission: Federal Trade Commission, “FTC
[232]       iiHS

      Settlements Require Equifax to Forfeit Money Made by Allegedly Improperly Sell¬
      ing Information About Millions of Consumers Who Were Late on Their Mortgages”
      (press release), October 10, 2012, http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2012/10/equifaxdirect
     .shtm.
  17 The lists were marketed with names-. U.S. v. Direct Lending Source, no. 12:2441 (S.D.
     Cal. 2012), http://www.ftc.gov/os/caselist/1023000/121010directlendingcmpt.pdf.
  17 One of the buyers was a particularly seedy Southern California boiler room operation:
     United States of America v. Direct Lending Source Inc., CV-2441DMS BLM and Cali¬
     fornia Department of Justice, Office of the Attorney General, “Four Arrested, Five
     Wanted for Fleecing Hundreds of Homeowners Seeking Foreclosure Relief” (press
     release), May 20, 2010, http://oag.ca.gov/news/press-releases/four-arrested-five
     -wanted-fleecing-hundreds-homeowners-seeking-foreclosure.
  17 When I asked an official at the Direct Marketing Association: “Direct Marketing
     Association’s Guidelines for Ethical Business Practices,” revised May 2011, http://
     www.dmaresponsibility.org/Guidelines/.
  17 On April 5, 2011, John Gass: John Gass, in discussion with author, February 18, 2013.
  18 John Gass luckily was given: Ibid.
  18 “Although Gass’s pique at having to defend his identity is understandable”: John H.
     Gass v. Registrar of Motor Vehicles, Appeals Court of Massachusetts, No. 12-P-205,
     January 7, 2013.
  18 “There are no checks and balances”: John Gass, in discussion with author, February
     18,2013.

2. A SHORT HISTORY OF TRACKING
 21 Seven weeks after the terrorist attacks: William Binney, in discussion with author,
    May 24, 2012.
 21 Lower Manhattan was still smoldering: “World Trade Center Fires Out,” ABCNews
    .com, December 19, 2001, http://abcnews.go.com/US/story?id=920668cpage=l.
 21 Letters containing anthrax: Edward Jay Epstein, “The Anthrax Attacks Remain
    Unsolved,” Wall Street Journal, January 24, 2010, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10
    001424052748704541004575011421223515284.html.
 21 But Bill Binney, a code breaker: Tim Shorrock, “Obama’s Crackdown on Whistle¬
    blowers,” Nation, March 26, 2013, http://www.thenation.com/article/173521/obamas
    -crackdown-whistleblowers?page=0,1.
 21 As he reached the bottom of the steps: William Binney, in discussion with author,
    May 24, 2012.
 22 “I could not stay after the NSA”: Jewel, Hepting, Hicks Knutzen and Walton v. National
    Security Agency, CV-08-04373-JSW (N.D. Cal. 2012), Declaration of William Bin¬
    ney, September 28, 2012.
 22 Not only was it the year of the devastating: Jason Zweig, “When Bubble Burst: Com¬
    panies Won, Investors Lost,” Wall Street Journal, The Intelligent Investor, March 10,
      2010, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014240527487041459045751119520826919
      26.html.
 22 To combat the smuggling epidemic: Christopher Slobogin, “Government Dragnets”
    (Public Law & Legal Theory Working Paper 10-37, Vanderbilt University Law
    School, Nashville, Tennessee, 2010).
 23 “It appears to me the worst instrument”: James Otis, “Against Writs of Assistance,”
      transcript of speech, Boston, February 24, 1761, http://www.constitution.org/bor
      /otis_against_writs.htm.
                                                                             NOTES   [233]

 23 Outrage over the general warrants: U.S. Const, amend. IV.
 23 The Supreme Court has interpreted this language: One example of the Court’s line of
    reasoning: Florida v. Riley, 488 U.S. 445 (1989), http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/scripts
    /getcase.pl?navby=CASE8i:court=US&vol=488&page=445.
 23 The Supreme Court has established the “Third-Party Doctrine": United States v. Miller,
    425 U.S. 435 (1976) and Smith v. Maryland, 442 U.S. 735 (1979).
 23 As a result, even sensitive information: Jennifer Valentino-DeVries, “How Technol¬
    ogy Is Testing the Fourth Amendment,” Wall Street Journal, Digits (blog), Septem¬
    ber 21, 2011, http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2011/09/21/how-technology-is-testing-the
    -fourth-amendment/.
23 Metadata is data about data: “A Guardian Guide to Your Metadata,” Guardian, June
   12, 2013, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/interactive/2013/jun/12/what-is
   -metadata-nsa-surveillance#meta=0000000.
23 In the digital era, metadata: Evan Perez and Siobhan Gorman, “Phones Leave a Tell¬
   tale Trail,” Wall Street Journal, June 15,2013, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014
   24127887324049504578545352803220058.html.
24 Courts have largely supported a “border search exception” to the Fourth Amendment:
   Susan Stellin, “The Border Is a Back Door for U.S. Device Searches,” New York
   Times, September 9, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/10/business/the-bor
   der-is-a-back-door-for-us-device-searches.html?pagewanted=l&_r=2&hp.
24 In 1981, when President Ronald Reagan: Exec. Order No. 12,333, 3 C.F.R. (1981),
   http://www.archives.gov/federal-register/codification/executive-order/12333.html.
24 Documents revealed by the former NSA contractor Edward Snowden: “NSA
   Inspector General Report on Email and Internet Data Collection Under Stellar
   Wind—Full Document,” Guardian, June 27, 2013, http://www.guardian.co.uk/world
    /interactive/2013/jun/27/nsa-inspector-general-report-document-data-collec
    tion; or ST-09-0002 (working draft), Office of the Inspector General, NSA, March
    24, 2009.
25 In 2005, the New York Times broke the story: James Risen and Eric Lichtblau, “Bush
   Lets U.S. Spy on Callers Without Courts,” New York Times, December 16, 2005,
   http://www.nytimes.com/2005/12/16/politics/16program.html?pagewanted=all&
   _r=0.
26 The broad sweep of the program: Ryan Singel, “Whistle-Blower Outs NSA Spy Room,”
   Wired, April 7, 2006, http://www.wired.com/science/discoveries/news/2006/04
   /70619.
26 “This is the infrastructure for an Orwellian”: Mark Klein, “Whistle-Blower’s Evi¬
   dence, Uncut,” Wired, May 22, 2006, http://www.wired.com/science/discoveries/
   news/2006/05/70944.
26 Then in May 2006, USA Today published: Leslie Cauley, “NSA Has Massive Database
   of Americans’ Phone Calls,” USA Today, May 11, 2006, http://usatoday30.usatoday
   .com/news/washington/2006-05-10-nsa_x.htm?csp=34.
26 Under pressure, President Bush briefly shut: Eric Lichtblau, “Deal Reached in Con¬
   gress to Rewrite Rules on Wiretapping,” New York Times, June 20, 2008, http://www
   .nytimes.com/2008/06/20/washington/20fisacnd.html?_r=0.
26 The PRISM program, disclosed by Snowden: “NSA Slides Explain the PRISM Data-
   Collection Program,” Washington Post, June 6, 2013, last updated July 10, 2013,
   http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/special/politics/prism-collection-docu
   ments/.
26 Yahoo! apparently fought to declare: Kim Zetter, “Yahoo Supplied Data to PRISM
[234]   NOTES

    Only After Losing Scrappy FISA Fight,” Wired, Threat Level (blog), June 14, 2013,
    http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2013/06/yahoo-failed-fisa-fight/.
 26 Far more sweeping were the vast amounts: Robert S. Litt, “Privacy, Technology and
    National Security: An Overview of Intelligence Collection,” Remarks at Brookings
    Institution, Washington, D.C., July 19, 2013, http://www.dni.gov/index.php/news
    room/speeches-and-interviews/195-speeches-interviews-2013/896-privacy,-tech
    nology-and-national-security-an-overview-of-intelligence-collection.
 26 Snowden revealed a secret court order: “Verizon Forced to Hand over Telephone
    Data—Full Court Ruling,” Guardian, June 5, 2013, http://www.guardian.co.uk
    /world/interactive/2013/jun/06/verizon-telephone-data-court-order.
 26 Soon after, Senator Dianne Feinstein of California: Ed O’Keefe, “Transcript: Dianne
    Feinstein, Saxby Chambliss Explain, Defend NS A Phone Records Program,” Wash¬
    ington Post, Post Politics (blog), June 6, 2013, http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs
    /post-politics/wp/2013/06/06/transcript-dianne-feinstein-saxby-chambliss-explain
    -defend-nsa-phone-records-program/.
 27 Snowden also revealed a 2007 memo: Kenneth L. Wainstein, Memorandum for the
    Attorney General, November 20, 2007, http://s3.documentcloud.org/documents
    /717974/nsa-memo.pdf.
 27 The Obama administration said that the Internet: Glenn Greenwald and Spencer
    Ackerman, “How the NSA Is Still Harvesting Your Online Data,” Guardian, June 27,
    2013,   http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2013/jun/27/nsa-online-metadata-collec
    tion.
 27 After 9/11, a massive rush of counterterrorism spending: Intelligence Budget Data,
    Federation of American Scientists, https://www.fas.org/irp/budget/index.html.
 27 Since 9/11, the department has doled: Budget-in-Brief, Department of Homeland
    Security, Fiscal Year 2012.
 27 and respond to terrorism: Homeland Security Grant Program, Department of Home¬
    land Security, Fiscal Year 2012, http://www.fema.gov/fy-2012-homeland-security
    -grant-program.
 27 More than $50 million of DHS’s grants: Julia Angwin and Jennifer Valentino-
    DeVries, “New Tracking Frontier: Your License Plates,” Wall Street Journal, Septem¬
    ber 29, 2012, http://online.wsj.eom/artide/SB10000872396390443995604578004723
    603576296.html.
 27 The department also helped fund the creation: “Federal Support for and Involvement
    in State and Local Fusion Centers,” Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
    Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations, October 3, 2012, www.hsgac.senate.
    gov/subcommittees/investigations/media/investigative-report-criticizes-counter
    terrorism-reporting-waste-at-state-and-local-intelligence-fusion-centers.
 27 And local police increasingly began tracking people: Julia Angwin and Scott Thurm,
    “Judges Weigh Phone Tracking,” Wall Street Journal, November 9, 2011. http://
    online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970203733504577024092345458210.html.
 27 In 2008, the attorney general issued: The Attorney General’s Guidelines for Domestic
    FBI Operations, September 28, 2008, http://www.justice.gov/ag/readingroom/guide
    lines.pdf.
 28 And in 2012, the Justice Department authorized: Julia Angwin, “U.S. Terrorism
    Agency to Tap a Vast Database of Citizens,” Wall Street Journal, December 13, 2012,
    http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324478304578171623040640006
    .html.
 28 Its stock price shot up: Steve Hamm, “The Education of Marc Andreessen,” Business-
                                                                              NOTES    [235]

    Week, April 2, 1998, http://www.businessweek.coni/1998/15/topstory.htm; L. A.
    Lorek, Investors Not Just Browsing: Netscape Navigator Stock Goes Public in One
    of Wall Street’s Most Impressive Debuts,” Fort Lauderdale Sun-Sentinel, August 10,
    1995; and Kathy M. Kristof, “Why Individual Investors Lose on IPOs,” Los Angeles
    Times, August 10, 1995, http://articles.latimes.com/1995-08-10/business/fi-33617_l
    _individual-investors.
28 The following year, Andreessen was pictured: “The Golden Geeks,” Time, February
   19, 1996, http://www.time.eom/time/covers/0,16641,19960219,00.html.
28 In 1998, the Department of Justice: United States v. Microsoft, 253 F.3d 34 (D.C. 2001),
   https://law.justia.com/cases/federal/appellate-courts/F3/253/34/576095/.
29 But by the time that Microsoft: “Microsoft Consent Decree Compliance Advisory,”
   August 1, 2003, http://www.justice.gov/atr/cases/f201200/201205a.htm.
29 In 1998, Internet Explorer surpassed Netscape: Michael Calore, “Internet Explorer
   Leaves Netscape in Its Wake,” Wired, This Day in Tech (blog), September 28, 1998,
   http://www.wired.com/thisdayintech/2009/09/0928ie-beats-netscape.
29 and by 2008 Netscape’s software: Tom Drapeau, “End of Support for Netscape Web
   Browsers,” Netscape Blog, December 28, 2007, http://blog.netscape.com/2007/12/28
   /end-of-support-for-netscape-web-browsers/.
29 Yahoo!, whose revenue came mostly from online advertising: Joelle Tessler, “Tech Sec¬
   tor Mirrors Downfall of Silicon Valley General Economy,” San Jose Mercury News,
   April 16, 2001.
29 “Two years ago, nearly all advertisers were saying”: Vanessa O’Connell, “The Best Way
   to ... Advertise,” Wall Street Journal, November 12, 2001.
29 Wendy Taylor, the editor of Ziff Davis Smart Business: Wendy Taylor, “Online Ads
   Need to Get a Clue,” ZDWire Small Business Advisor, September 19, 2001.
29 In 2000, a federal class action suit: “In re Doubleclick Inc. Privacy Litigation,” 154 F.
   Supp. 2d 497 (S.D. N.Y. 2001), http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/is02/readings/double
   click.html.
30 Gupta, a recent immigrant from India: Mike Mclntire, “Clinton Backer’s Ties to
    Powerful Cut Both Ways,” New York Times, July 14, 2007, http://www.nytimes.com
   /2007/07/14/us/politics/14gupta.html.
30 “Just about every list is available”: Vinod Gupta, interview with Scott Pelley, 60 Min¬
    utes II, CBS, April 30, 2003.
30 In 1969, Charles Ward, a local businessman: Robert Evatt, “Large Corporation Begins
   with Small-Town Staff,” Associated Press Newswires, August 18, 2002.
30 Between 1993 and 1998, Acxiom’s revenue: Robert O’Harrow Jr., “Are Data Firms
   Getting Too Personal?” Washington Post, March 8, 1998, http://www.washington
   post.com/wp-srv/frompost/march98/privacy8.htm.
31 The credit card companies Capital One and Discover: Bruce Biegel (senior managing
   director, Winterberry Group) and Jonathan Margulies (managing director, Winter-
   berry Group), in discussion with author, April 17, 2013.
31 The state of Florida alone: Michael George, “State Made $62 Million by Selling Flor¬
   ida Drivers’ License Information,” ABC Action News, June 21, 2011, http://www
   .abcactionnews.com/dpp/news/local_news/investigations/i-team%3A-state-made
   -$62-million-by-selling-florida-drivers%27-license-information.
31 The U.S. Postal Service generates $9.5 million: Spokesperson for the Postal Regula¬
   tory Commission, in discussion with researcher Lauren Kirchner, April 30, 2013.
31 In the 2000s, as the Internet became pervasive: Bruce and Jonathan Margulies, in
   discussion with author, April 17, 2013.
[236]     KITES

 31 AOL bought the behavioral targeting firm Tacoda: Kate Kaye, “Tacoda Buy Could
    Bolster AOL’s Relevance in Web Ad Arena,” Clickz Marketing News, July 24, 2007,
    http://www.clickz.com/clickz/news/1712324/tacoda-buy-could-bolster-aols-rele
    vance-web-ad-arena.
 31 Google paid $3.1 billion: Paul R. La Monica, “Google to Buy Doubleclick for $3.1 Bil¬
    lion,” CNNMoney.com, April 13, 2007, http://money.cnn.com/2007/04/13/technol
    ogy/google-doubleclick/index.htm.
 31 Microsoft paid $6 billion: Chris Isidore, “Microsoft Buys aQuantive for $6 Billion,”
    CNNMoney.com, May 18, 2007, http://money.cnn.com/2007/05/18/technology
    /microsoff_aquantive/.
 31 Acxiom, along with others, began: Kevin J. Delaney and Emily Steel, Firm Mines
    Offline Data to Target Online Ads,” Wall Street Journal, October 17, 2007, http://
    online.wsj.com/article/SBl 19258320189661423.html.
 31 At the same time, Acxiom started selling: Evelyn M. Rusli, “Buy Signal: Facebook
    Widens Data Targeting,” Wall Street Journal, April 9, 2013, http://online.wsj.com
    /article/SB10001424127887324504704578412960951909032.html.
 31 When you look at a digital camera on eBay: Julia Angwin, “The Web’s New Gold
    Mine: Your Secrets,” Wall Street Journal, July 30, 2010, http://online.wsj.com/article
    /SB10001424052748703940904575395073512989404.html.
 31 Due in large part to tracking, online advertising: Interactive Advertising Bureau,
    Internet Advertising Revenue Report, April 2013, https://www.iab.net/media/
    file/IABInternet AdvertisingRevenueReportFY2012POSTED.pdf.
 31 Tracking is so crucial to the industry that in 2013: Randall Rothenberg, “Has Mozilla
    Lost Its Values?” Interactive Advertising Bureau, lABlog, July 16, 2013, https://www
    .iab.net/iablog/2013/07/has-mozilla-lost-its-values.html.
 32 Meglena Kuneva, a member of the European Commission: Meglena Kuneva, “Round
    Table on Online Data Collection, Targeting and Profiling” (keynote speech, Brus¬
    sels, March 31, 2009), http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-09-156_en.htm.
 33 To register to vote, citizens: “Voter Privacy in the Digital Age,” California Voter Foun¬
    dation, 2002, http://www.calvoter.org/issues/votprivacy/pub/0504voterprivacy.pdf.
 33 A 2011 study found that a statewide voter list: Ibid.
 33 For instance, the data broker Aristotle Inc.: “Political Date: Learn More,” Aristotle,
    accessed September 11, 2013, http://www.aristotle.com/political-data/political-data
    -learn-more/.
 33 such as their credit rating: “Premium Enhancement for Your Political Data,” Aristo¬
    tle, accessed September 13, 2013, http://www.aristotle.com/political-data/premium
    -enhancements/.
 33 Aristotle crows that: “About Us,” Aristotle, accessed September 13, 2013, http://www
    .aristotle.com/about-us/.
 33 In fact, an intrepid 2012 thesis: Melissa Carrie Oppenheim, “The Dark Data Cycle:
    How the U.S. Government Has Gone Rogue in Trading Personal Data from an
    Unsuspecting Public,” Harvard University, March 2012.
 33 allowing them to identify their constituents: “Premium Enhancement for Your Politi¬
    cal Data.”
 33 And thus, the data come full circle: Oppenheim, “The Dark Data Cycle.”
 33 State auto vehicle records are swept: “Prime Award Service Data: Search Term:
    LEXIS-NEXIS; Department: Homeland Security,” USAspending.gov, http://www
        .usaspending.gov/search?form_fields={%22search_term%22%3A%22LEXIS
        -NEXIS%22%2C%22dept%22%3A[%227000%22]}&sort_by=dollars&per_page=25.
                                                                            NOTES    [237]

  34 Foreclosure records are compiled in state courts: “CoreLogic Reports 55,000 Com¬
     pleted Foreclosures in June,” CoreLogic.com, July 30, 2013, http.V/www.corelogic
     .com/about-us/news/corelogic-reports-55,000-completed-foreclosures-in-june.aspx.
  34 which sells packages of real estate data-. “Our Company,” CoreLogic, accessed Sep¬
       tember 15, 2013, http://www.corelogic.com/about-us/news/asset_upload_file856
       _22101.pdf.
  34 While at the NSA, Binney had developed: William Binney, in discussion with author,
     May 24,2012.
  34 NSA’s lawyers worried: Jane Mayer, “The Secret Sharer,” New Yorker, May 23, 2011,
     http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2011/05/23/110523fa_fact_mayer.
  34 Another reason: Siobhan Gorman, “Scuttled NSA Program Had Privacy Safe¬
     guards,’ Baltimore Sun-Sentinel, May 18, 2006, http://articles.sun-sentinel.com
       /2006-05-18/news/0605171528_l_warrantless-surveillance -nsa-communications
       -data.
  34 In 2002, Binney’s colleague: William Binney, Kirk Wiebe, and Thomas Drake, in
     discussion with author, May 18, 2012.
  34 The inspector general’s report, issued in 2005: Inspector General, “Audit of the
     Requirements for the TRAILBLAZER and THINTHREAD Systems” (memo),
     December 15, 2004, https://www.fas.org/irp/agency/dod/ig-thinthread.pdf.
  34 In 2006, the Baltimore Sun published an article: Siobhan Gorman, “NSA Rejected
     System That Sifted Phone Data Legally,” Baltimore Sun, May 18, 2006, http://articles
     .bait imoresun.com/2006-05-18/news/0605180094_l_surveillance-national-secu
     rity-agency-well-informed.
 35 On July 26, 2007, the FBI: William Binney, in discussion with author, May 24, 2012.
 35 “The guy came in and pointed a gun at me”: Laura Poitras, “Surveillance Teach-In,”
    April 20, 2012, http://whitney.org/WatchAndListen/Exhibitions?play_id=722.
 35 Wiebe, who had retired: William Binney, Kirk Wiebe, and Thomas Drake, in discus¬
    sion with author, May 24, 2012.
 35 On November 28, 2007: Thomas Drake, in discussion with author, May 24, 2012.
 35 Two and a half years later, Drake was indicted: United States v. Thomas Andrews
    Drake, Cr. No 10-cr-0181-RDB (N.D. Md. 2010).
 35 Drake was financially devastated: Thomas Drake, in discussion with author, May
    24,2012.
 35 After spending $82,000: USA vs. Drake, Sentencing (transcript), July 15, 2011 (U.S.
    District Court District of Maryland).
 35 In 2011, after a wave of publicity about Drake’s plight: David Wise, “Leaks and the
    Law: The Story of Thomas Drake,” Smithsonian Magazine, July-August 2011, http://
    www.smithsonianmag.com/history-archaeology/Leaks-and-the-Law-The-Story-of
    -Thomas-Drake.html.
 35 During the sentencing, the U.S. District Court judge: USA vs. Drake, Sentencing
    (transcript), July 15, 2011.
 36 When I first met Binney, the first thing: Binney, in discussion with author, March 18,
    2012.
 36 “It’s a real danger when a government assembles”: Binney, in discussion with author,
      May 24, 2012.

3. STATE OF SURVEILLANCE
 37 The Stasi was the largest secret police operation: Gary Bruce, The Firm: The Inside
    Story of the Stasi (New York: Oxford University Press, 2010), 11.
[238]    liltS

 37 Famously repressive, it kept files on 4 million: Ibid.
 37 a total population of: Statistisches Jahrbuch der Deutschen Demokratischen Republik,
    1998 (translated by Gary Bruce in e-mail message to author, February 27, 2013).
 37 In 1989, roughly one in fifty East Germans: Bruce, The Firm, 10.
 38 Social network mapping, he told me: Gunter Bormann, in discussion with author,
    September 19, 2011.
f39 “Their main surveillance technology”: Gary Bruce, in discussion with author, Febru¬
    ary 6, 2013.
 39 In this case, the Stasi watched a rather boring: Gary Bruce, translation for author,
    February 6, 2013.
 39 The second file documented a surveillance operation known as an OPK: Bruce, The
    Firm, 4.
 39 It was a medium-size operation: Bruce, translation.
 39 Stasi officers received bonuses when they launched OPKs: Bruce, The Firm, 111.
 39 Ultimately, however, the OPK of the poet was fruitless: Bruce, translation.
 40 In one file: David Burnett, translation for author, March 10, 2013.
 40 The second file was simply a hand-drawn: Ibid.
 40 The Stasi would likely have conducted surveillance of everybody: Gary Bruce, in dis¬
     cussion with author, February 6, 2013.
 40 The problem was that a Stasi file: Bruce, The Firm, 156.
 41 In a study of psychological effects of Stasi surveillance: Babett Bauer, Kontrolle
     und Repression: individuelle Erfahrungen in der DDR (1971-1989), described in
    Bruce, The Firm, 158. Original: http://nypl.bibliocommons.com/item/show
    /16455058052907_kontrolle_und_repression.
 41 The power of observation to be repressive: Jeremy Bentham, The Panopticon Writings
     (Brooklyn, N.Y.: Verso, 2010).
 41 In 1975, the French philosopher Michel Foucault: Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish:
     The Birth of the Prison (New York: Vintage, 1995).
 41 In 2011, Finnish researchers installed: Antti Oulasvirta et al., “Long-Term Effects of
    Ubiquitous Surveillance in the Flome,” Helsinki Institute for Information Technol¬
    ogy, Helsinki, 2012.
 42 The lead author of the paper: Aalto University, “Study Exposes the Negative Effects
    of Increasing Computerized Surveillance” (press release), April 10,2012, http://www
    .aalto.fi/en/current/news/view/2012-10-04/.
 42 Another way to cope with ubiquitous surveillance: David Brin, The Transparent Soci¬
    ety: Will Technology Force Us to Choose Between Privacy and Freedom? (Cambridge,
    Mass.: Perseus Books, 1998).
 43 In 1958, Senator John F. Kennedy claimed: Christopher A. Preble, “Who Ever
    Believed in the ‘Missile Gap’? John F. Kennedy and the Politics of National Security,”
    Presidential Studies Quarterly 33, no. 4 (December 2003): 805-6.
 43 the United States successfully launched photoreconnaissance: Corona Fact Sheet,
    National Reconnaissance Office, accessed July 19, 2013, http://www.nro.gov/history
    /csnr/corona/factsheet.html.
43 The images captured by the satellite: Dwayne A. Day, “Of Myths and Missiles: The
   Truth About John F. Kennedy and the Missile Gap,” Space Review, January 3, 2006,
   http://www.thespacereview.eom/artide/523/l.
43 in 1961, the Soviets had just four: John T. Correll, “Airpower and the Cuban Missile
   Crisis,” Air Force Magazine 88, no. 8 (August 2005), http://www.airforcemag.com
    /MagazineArchive/Pages/2005/August%202005/0805u2.aspx.
                                                                        NOTES   [239]

43 In 1972, the United States and the Soviet Union: Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-
   Ballistic Missile Systems, U.S.-U.S.S.R., May 26, 1972, 23 U.S.T. 3435, https://www
   .fas.org/nuke/control/abmt/text/abm2.htm.
43 Six years later, President Jimmy Carter: Jimmy Carter, “Remarks at the Congres¬
   sional Space Medal of Honor Awards Ceremony,” Kennedy Space Center, Florida,
   October 1, 1978, Weekly Compilation of Presidential Documents 14, no. 40 (Octo¬
   ber 9, 1978): 1671-1727, http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/NSAEBB/NSAEBB23i
   /doc32.pdf.
44 The belief that another person is present: Ryan Calo, “The Boundaries of Privacy
   Harm,” Consumer Privacy Project, Center for Internet and Society, Stanford Law
   School, 2010.
44 In one study, people who stared at a photo: Vanessa Woods, “Pay Up, You Are Being
   Watched,” New Scientist, March 18, 2005.
44 In 2011, researchers at Newcastle University in Britain: Max Ernest-Jones, Daniel
   Nettle, and Melissa Bateson, “Effects of Eye Images on Everyday Cooperative Behav¬
   ior: A Field Experiment,” Evolution and Human Behavior 32 (2011): 172-78, http://
   www.staff.ncl.ac.uk/daniel.nettle/ernestjonesnettlebateson.pdf.
44 The following year, a similar group of researchers: David Nettle, Kenneth Nott, and
   Melissa Bateson, “‘Cycle Thieves, We Are Watching You’: Impact of a Simple Sign¬
   age Intervention Against Bicycle Theft,” PLoS ONE 7, no. 12 (December 12, 2012).
44 A 2008 analysis by the California Research Bureau: Aundreia Cameron, Elke Kolo-
   dinski, Heather May, and Nicholas Williams, Measuring the Effects of Video Surveil¬
   lance on Crime, report prepared for the California Research Bureau, May 5, 2008,
   http://www.library.ca.gov/crb/08/08-007.pdf.
44 In 2011, the Urban Institute analyzed: Nancy G. La Vigne, Samantha S. Lowry,
   Joshua A. Markman, and Allison M. Dwyer, “Evaluating the Use of Public Surveil¬
   lance Cameras for Crime Control and Prevention,” Urban Institute, September 2011,
   http://www.urban.org/publications/412403.html.
45 In 2004, Leon Hempel and Eric Topfer: Leon Hempel and Eric Topfer, “On the
   Threshold to Urban Panopticon?: Analysing the Employment of CCTV in European
   Cities and Assessing Its Social and Political Implications” (Working Paper No. 1:
   Inception Report, Urban Eye, January 2002), 23, http://www.urbaneye.net/results
   /ue_wpl.pdf.
45 Another Urban Institute study from 2011: Nancy G. La Vigne and Samantha S.
   Lowry, “Evaluation of Camera Use to Prevent Crime in Commuter Parking Facili¬
   ties: A Randomized Controlled Trial,” Urban Institute, September 2011, http://www
   .urban.org/publications/412451.html.
45 In 2004, the criminologists Brandon Welsh and David Farrington: Brandon C. Welsh
   and David Farrington, “Surveillance for Crime Prevention in Public Space: Results
   and Policy Changes,” Criminology and Public Policy 3, no. 3 (July 2004): 497.
46 The authors of the Urban Institute study: La Vigne and Lowry, “Evaluation of Cam¬
   era Use.”
46 The Shoe Bomber. In 2001, Richard Colvin Reid: Christopher Cooper, “Reid’s Shoe
   Bomb Was Sophisticated, Like an Explosive Used by Palestinians,” Wall Street Jour¬
   nal, January 9, 2002, http://online.wsj.eom/artide/SB1010533661808003000.html.
46 The LAX Shooter. In 2002, Hesham Mohamed Hadayet: Barbara Whitaker, “Immi¬
   gration Unit Almost Deported Airport Gunman in 1996,” New York Times, July 7,
   2002, http://www.nytimes.com/2002/07/07/us/immigration-unit-almost-deported
   -airport-gunman-in-1996.html.
[2411]   ions

 46 The Fort Hood Shooter. In 2009, U.S. Army major Nidal Malik Hasan: Final Report of
    the William H. Webster Commission on the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Counter-
    terrorism Intelligence, and the Events at Fort Hood, Texas, on November 5, 2009,
    https:IPvww.fbi.gov/news/pressrel/press-releases/final-report-of-the-william-h.
    -webster-commission.
 46 The Underwear Bomber. On Christmas Day 2009, Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab: The
    White House, “White House Review Summary Regarding 12/25/2009 Attempted
    Terrorist Attack,” January 7, 2010, http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-ofhce
    /white-house-review-summary-regarding-12252009-attempted-terrorist-attack.
 46 The Times Square Bomber. In 2010, Faisal Shahzad: Andrea Elliott, “Militant’s Path
    from Pakistan to Times Square,” New York Times, June 22,2010, http://www.nytimes
    .com/2010/06/23/world/23terror.html?pagewanted=all.
 46 The Boston Marathon Bombers. In 2013, Tamerlan and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev: Marc
    Arsenault, “Dead Suspect Broke Angrily with Muslim Speakers,” Boston Globe,
    April 21, 2013, http://www.boston.com/news/nation/2013/04/21/bombing-suspect
    -tamerlan-tsarnaev-had-broken-angrily-with-muslim-speakers-mosque/XCBP
    dDswOKxaa4AJOmkuVL/singlepage.html.
 47 In the wake of the Snowden leaks, General Keith Alexander: General Keith Alexan¬
    der, “Remarks at the AFCEA International Cyber Symposium,” Baltimore, Maryland,
    June 27, 2013.
 47 In 2009, Zazi was arrested: U.S. v. Najibullah Zazi, No. 10-60 (E.D. N.Y. 2011), http://
    www.justice.gov/opa/documents/zazi-indictment.pdf.
 47 According to Alexander, Zazi was swept up: General Keith Alexander, “Remarks at
    the AFCEA International Cyber Symposium.”
 47 Once the FBI was alerted, its agents: “House Permanent Select Committee on Intelli¬
    gence Holds a Hearing on Surveillance Programs,” Washington, D.C., June 18, 2013.
 47 A few days later, he flew back to Denver: Newsweek, “Inside the Zazi Takedown,”
    Daily Beast, September 25, 2009, http://www.thedailybeast.com/newsweek/2009/09
    /26/inside-the-zazi-takedown.html.
 47 Zazi was arrested in Colorado: United States of America v. Najibullah Zazi, 09 CR 663
    (E.D. N.Y. 2010).
 48 When closely questioned by the Senate: General Keith Alexander, testimony before
    the House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, June 18, 2013.
 48 And even President Obama was lukewarm: President Barack Obama, interviewed by
    Charlie Rose, June 16, 2013, http://www.charlierose.com/watch/60230424.
 48 In their book: Matt Apuzzo and Adam Goldman, Enemies Within: Inside the NYPD’s
    Secret Spying Unit and Bin Laden’s Final Plot Against America (New York: Simon
    and Schuster, 2013), p. 89.
 48 The father of Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab: Eric Lipton and Scott Shane, “Questions
    on Why Suspect Wasn’t Stopped,” New York Times, December 27, 2009, https://www
    .nytimes.com/2009/12/28/us/28terror.html.
 48 A White House investigation found: The White House, “White House Review Sum¬
    mary Regarding 12/25/2009 Attempted Terrorist Attack.”
 48 An FBI field office had been monitoring Fort Hood: Final Report of the William H.
    Webster Commission.
 49 And the future Boston Marathon bomber Tamerlan Tsarnaev: Greg Miller and Sari
    Horwitz, “Boston Bombing Suspect Put on Terrorist Watch List at CIA Request,”
     Washington Post, April 25, 2013, http://articles.washingtonpost.com/2013-04-24
     /national/38781588_l_dagestan-u-s-embassy-paul-bresson.
                                                                           NOTES   [241]

 49 A 2006 paper by Jeff Jonas, an IBM research scientist: Jeff Jonas and Jim Harper,
    “Effective Counterterrorism and the Limited Role of Predictive Data Mining,” Cato
    Institute, Policy Analysis, no. 584, December 11, 2006, http://www.cato.org/sites
    /cato.org/files/pubs/pdf/pa584.pdf.
 49 Credit card companies develop “red flags": Siddhartha Bhattacharyya, in discussion
    with author, June 11, 2013.
 49 “Unlike consumers’ shopping habits and financial fraud”: Jonas and Harper, “Effec¬
    tive Counterterrorism.”
 49 In 2008, the National Academy of Sciences: Committee on Technical and Privacy
    Dimensions of Information for Terrorism Prevention and Other National Goals,
    National Research Council, Protecting Individual Privacy in the Struggle Against Ter¬
    rorists (Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press, 2008).
 49 In a 2012 speech, Matthew Olsen, the director of the National Counterterrorism Cen¬
    ter: Matthew Olsen (Director, National Counterterrorism Center), “The National
    Counterterrorism Center’s Role in Counterterrorism” (speech), Aspen Institute,
    Washington, D.C., July 26, 2012, http://www.aspeninstitute.org/video/national
    -counterterrorism-center-s-role-counterterrorism.
 49 And after the Boston Marathon bombings, the city’s police commissioner, Ed Davis:
    Michael Naughton, “Davis: Feds Didn’t Tell Boston Police About Tamerlan Tsar-
    naev,” Metro.us, May 13, 2013, http://www.metro.us/boston/news/local/2013/05/09
    /davis-feds-didnt-tell-boston-police-about-tamerlan-tsarnaev/.
 50 Even the Stasi failed to predict: Richard Popplewell, “The Stasi and the East German
    Revolution of 1989,” Contemporary European History 1, no. 1 (March 1992): 37-63.

4. FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION
 51 Yasir Afifi no longer: Yasir Afifi, in discussion with author, January 17, 2013.
 51 Paranoia doesn’t come naturally: Yasir Afifi, in discussion with author, August 15,
    2012.
 51 “I’m one of those guys”: Yasir Afifi, in discussion with author, January 17, 2013.
 52 She told me, “He’s": Yasir Afifi and Angelina Asfour, in discussion with author, June
    8,2013.
 52 The Iranians are obsessed: Farnaz Fassihi, “Iranian Crackdown Goes Global,”
    Wall Street Journal, December 3, 2009, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB
    125978649644673331.html.
 52 The Chinese are obsessed: Jenny W. Hsu and Eva Dou, “Chinese Dissident Skirts Talk
    of NYU,” Wall Street Journal, June 23,2013, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142
    4127887323998604578565310545277192.html.
 52 That’s why freedom of association: Article 17, The Universal Declaration of Human
    Rights, adopted December 10, 1948, https://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/index
    .shtml#atop.
 52 In 1958, the Supreme Court: National Association for the Advancement of Colored
    People v. Patterson, 357 U.S. 449 (1958).
 53 Consider people who track: Fitbit Inc., http://www.fitbit.com.
 53 “community of interest”: Glenn A. Fine, Inspector General, U.S. Department of Jus¬
    tice Statement before the House Committee on the Judiciary Subcommittee on the
    Constitution, Civil Rights and Civil Liberties concerning “Report by the Office of
    the Inspector General on the Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Use of Exigent Let¬
    ters and Other Informal Requests for Telephone Records,” April 14, 2010, http://
      www.justice.gov/oig/testimony/tl004.pdf.
[242]    NOTES

 53 In their 2013 book, Big Data: Viktor Mayer-Schonberger and Kenneth Cukier, Big
    Data: A Revolution That Will Transform How We Live, Work, and Think (New York:
    Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2013), 175-82.
 54 And no less a big data: Eric Schmidt, The New Digital Age: Reshaping the Future of
    People, Nations and Business (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 2013), 55.
 54 Although Schmidt and Cohen: Ibid., 77.
 54 In the hands of a police state: Ibid., 62.
 54 The surveillance ofYasirAfifi: The events described on the following pages are largely
    based on allegations in a lawsuit subsequently filed by Mr. Afifi, Yasir Afifi v. Eric
    Holder et al, l:llcv460 (D.C., 2012). As of October 2013, the suit was still pending.
 54 On June 24, 2010, a user: JayClay, “So if My Deodorant Could Be a Bomb, Why Are
    You Just Chucking It in the Bin?” Reddit, June 24, 2010, captured on January 28,
    2013, http://www.reddit.eom/r/AskReddit/comments/ciiag/so_if_my_deodorant
   _could_be_a_bomb_why_are_you/?limit=500.
54 On June 25, a user named “Khaledthegypsy”: khaledthegypsy, comment on Reddit,
   June 24, 2010, http://www.reddit.eom/r/AskReddit/comments/ciiag/so_if_my
   _deodorant_could_be_a_bomb_why_are_you/c0sve5q.
54 Four months later: Yasir Afifi, in discussion with author, August 15, 2012.
55 “That is not part of the car”: Khaled Ibrahim, in discussion with author, August 16,
   2012.
55 When the mechanic tugged: Yasir Afifi, in discussion with author, August 15, 2012.
55 Yasir thought to himself: Yasir Afifi, e-mail correspondence with author, February 2,
   2013.
55 Soon after Yasir’s return: Yasir Afifi, in discussion with author, August 15, 2012.
55 And so at 10:15 p.m. Khaled: Khaledthegypsy, “Does This Mean the FBI Is After
   Us?” Reddit, October 3, 2010, captured January 28, 2013, http://www.reddit.com
   /comments/dmh5s/does_this_mean_the_fbi_is_affer_us/.
55 Yasir recalled thinking: Yasir Afifi, in discussion with author, August 15, 2012.
56 Vincent played tough: Afifi v. Holder.
57 “We just want the device back”: Yasir Afifi, in discussion with author, August 15,
   2012.
57 Yasir suggested that he could: Afifi v. Holder.
57 “Why are you doing”: Yasir Afifi, in discussion with author, August 15, 2012.
57 The four agents with guns: Afifi v. Holder, Doc. 21.
57 She gave him a business card: Yasir Afifi, in discussion with author, August 15, 2012.
58 The FBI must have been: Yasir Afifi, e-mail correspondence with author, February 2,
   2013.
58 After the agents left: Yasir Afifi, in discussion with author, August 15, 2012.
58 On March 2, 2011, CAIR: Afifi v. Holder, 17.
58 The complaint alleged that Yasir: Ibid.
59 The FBI won the right: Afifi v. Holder, Defendants’ Motion for Privacy Act Protective
   Order and Leave to File Under Seal, June 16, 2011.
59 In its limited public filings: Afifi v. Holder et al., Doc. 37-1, January 11, 2013.
59 Since then, the Supreme Court: United States v. Jones, (2012), accessed at http://www.
   law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/10-1259.
59 The government also argued: Afifi v. Holder et al., Reply in Support of Defendants
   Holder and Mueller’s Motion to Dismiss and for Summary Judgment, January 11,
   2013.
59 “Congress shall make no law”: U.S. Const, amend. I.
                                                                             NOTES   [243]

  59 “First Amendment theory”: Lee Bollinger, in discussion with author, June 19, 2013.
  59 For instance, in 1964, the Supreme Court: New York Times v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254
     (1964).
  59 And in 2000, the Supreme Court: Boy Scouts of America et al. v. Dale, 530 U.S. 640
     (2000).
  60 In 1972, the Court ruled 5-4: Laird v. Tatum, 408 U.S. 1 (1972).
  60 And again in 2013, the Supreme Court: Clapper v. Amnesty International USA et al.
     (2013), accessed at http://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/ll-1025.
  60 “What can you do?”: Khaled Ibrahim, in discussion with author, August 16, 2012.
  61 When Redditers began pestering: khaledthegypsy, comment on Reddit, April 9, 2011,
     http://www.reddit.eom/r/AskReddit/comments/gmcw5/hey_reddit_what_hap
     pened_to_that_kid_who_sued_the/cloo07i.
  61 When Khaled and I met: Khaled Ibrahim, in discussion with author, August 16,
     2012.
  61 After 9/11, the FBI set up: Trevor Aaronson, “The Informants,” Mother Jones, Sep¬
     tember/October 2011, http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2011/08/fbi-terrorist
     -informants?
  61 The investigative journalist Trevor Aaronson: Trevor Aaronson, question and answer
     session, Columbia Law School, New York, January 31, 2013.
  61 One of the most aggressive efforts: “AP’s Probe into NYPD Intelligence Operations,”
     Associated Press, http://www.ap.org/Index/AP-In-The-News/NYPD.
  62 In 2008, an undercover agent accompanied: Chris Hawley, “NYPD Monitored Mus¬
     lim Students All over Northeast,” Associated Press, February 18, 2012, http://www
     .ap.org/Content/AP-In-The-News/2012/NYPD-monitored-Muslim-students-all
     -over-Northeast.
  62 Consider the story of Asad Dandia: Asad Dandia, “My Life Under NYPD Surveil¬
     lance: A Brooklyn Student and Charity Leader on Fear and Mistrust,” American
     Civil Liberties Union, Blog of Rights, June 18,2013, http://www.aclu.org/blog/national
     -security-religion-belief-criminal-law-reform-technology-and-liberty/my-life
    -under-nypd.
 62 On October 2, 2012, Rahman posted: Adam Goldman and Matt Apuzzo, “Informant:
    NYPD Paid Me to ‘Bait’ Muslims,” Associated Press, October 23, 2012, http://www
    .ap.org/Content/AP-In-The-News/2012/Informant-NYPD-paid-me-to-bait-Mus
    lims.
 62 “When I learned the news”: Dandia, “My Life.”
 62 Dandia has joined in a lawsuit: Raza et al. v. City of New York et al., CV 13-2448
    (E.D. N.Y. 2013).
 63 Yasir Afifi has also withdrawn: Yasir Afifi, in discussion with author, January 17,
    2013.
 63 “Would I like some policy”: Yasir Afifi, in discussion with author, August 15, 2012.
 63 One hot day, I came to visit: Afifi, author visit, June 8, 2013.

5. THREAT MODELS
 66 In the.computer security industry: Larry Osterman, “Threat Modeling Again, Threat
    Modeling Rules of Thumb/"Larry Osterman s WebLog, September 21,2007, retrieved
    April 22, 2013, http://blogs.msdn.eom/b/larryosterman/archive/2007/09/21/threat
    -modeling-again-threat-modeling-rules-of-thumb.aspx.
 66 Bruce Schneier calls this: Bruce Schneier, Schneier on Security (Indianapolis: Wiley
      Publishing, 2008), viii.
[244]    NOTES

 66 In 2012, the FBI uncovered: Jeff Stein, “Draft Dodgers,” Foreign Policy, November 14,
    2012, retrieved April 22, 2013, http://www.foreignpolicy.com/articles/2012/ll/14/
    drafudodgers.
 67 FBI agents traced: Kim Zetter, “Email Location Data Led FBI to Uncover Top Spy’s
    Affair,” Wired, November 12, 2012, retrieved April 23, 2013, http://www.wired.com
    /threatlevel/2012/ll/gmaiTlocation-data-petraeus/.
 67 Even then, there’s no guarantee: Nicole Perlroth, “Trying to Keep Your E-Mails Secret
    When the C.I.A. Chief Couldn’t,” New York Times, November 16, 2012, retrieved
    April 23, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/ll/17/technology/trying-to-keep
    -your-e-mails-secret-when-the-cia-chief-couldnt.html.
 67 Consider another case: Theodore J. Kaczynski: Robert D. McFadden, “Prisoner of
    Rage,” New York Times, May 26, 1996, retrieved April 23, 2013, http://www.nytimes
    .com/1996/05/26/us/prisoner-of-rage-a-special-report-from-a-child-of-promise-to
    -the-unabom-suspect.html.
 67 The FBI eventually tracked him: David Johnston, “17-year Search, an Emotional Dis¬
    covery and Terror Ends,” New York Times, May 5, 1998, retrieved April 23, 2013,
    http://www.nytimes.com/1998/05/05/us/17-year-search-an-emotional-discovery
    -and-terror-ends.html.
 68 Since 2009, the administration: Daniel Politi, “Obama Has Charged More Under Espi¬
    onage Act Than All Other Presidents Combined,” Slate.com, June 22, 2013, http://
    www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2013/06/22/edward_snowden_is_eighth_person
    _obama_has_pursued_under_espionage_act.html.
 68 providing classified information to journalists: David Carr, “Blurred Line Between
    Espionage and Truth,” New York Times, February 26, 2012, http://www.nytimes.com
    /2012/02/27/business/media/white-house-uses-espionage-act-to-pursue-leak-cases
    -media-equation.html.
69 When my husband and I bought: Julia Angwin, “The Mess We’re In,” Wall Street
   Journal, Brownstone Diary, February 19, 2010, retrieved April 23, 2013, http://online
   .wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704041504575045241309357722.html.
69 Although I never published: Ulysses, “Revive: The West 123rd Street Brownstone,”
   Harlem + Bespoke (blog), February 17, 2010, retrieved April 23, 2013, http://harlem
   bespoke, blogspot.com/2010/02/revive-west- 123rd-street-brownstone.html.
70 In How to Be Invisible: J. J. Luna, How to Be Invisible: Protect Your Home, Your Chil¬
   dren, Your Assets, and Your Life (New York: Thomas Dunne Books, 2004).
70 In One Nation, Under Surveillance: Kenneth W. Royce, One Nation, Under Surveil¬
   lance (Gillette, Wyo.: Javelin Press, 2009).
71 But in New York, where I live: N.Y. VAT. Law § 402: NY Code—Section 402: Distinctive
    Number; Form of Number Plates; Trailers, http://codes.lp.findlaw.com/nycode/VAT
    /IV/14/402.
72 I asked Mark Eckenwiler: Mark Eckenwiler, in discussion with author, March 6,
   2013.
72 Mark pointed me: 18 USC § 1028—Fraud and Related Activity in Connection with
   Identification Documents, Authentication Features, and Information, http://www
   .law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/18/1028.
72 But he also pointed me: Flores-Figueroa v. United States (No. 08-108) 274 Fed. Appx.
    501, reversed and remanded, http://www.law.cornell.edu/supct/html/08-108.ZO.
    html.
72 But then he pointed me: 18 USC § 1343—Fraud by Wire, Radio, or Television, http://
   www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/18/1343.
                                                                            NOTES    [245]

 72 John J. Strauchs, a former CIA: John Strauchs, in discussion with author, March 5,
    2013.
 73 In his delightful book: Michael Pollan, The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural History
    of Four Meals (New York: Penguin Books, 2006), 392.
 75 The Wiretap Act requires police officers: The Surveillance Self-Defense Project, “Wire-
    tapping Law Protections,” Electronic Frontier Foundation, accessed July 26, 2013,
    https://ssd.eff.org/wire/govt/wiretapping-protections.
 75 Considering that in the last half: Google, Inc., “Transparency Report: User Data
    Requests,” https://www.google.com/transparencyreport/userdatarequests/.
 77 Federal prosecutors have argued: Jennifer Valentino-Devries, “‘Stingray’ Phone
    Tracker Fuels Constitutional Clash,” Wall Street Journal September 22,2011, retrieved
    May 2, 2013, http://online.wsj.eom/article/SB100014240531119041946045765831127
    23197574.html.
 77 And NSA documents revealed: Eric Holder, “Minimization Procedures Used by the
    National Security Agency in Connection with Acquisitions of Foreign Intelligence
    Information Pursuant to Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of
    1978, as Amended,” July 28, 2004.
 77 After 9/11, Perry was outraged: Mike Perry, in discussion with author, June 5, 2013.
 78 Public places are apparently: John Strauchs, in discussion with author, March 5,
    2013.

B. THE AUDIT
 80 “You should know your data”: Michael Sussmann, in discussion with author, Octo¬
    ber 24,2012.
 81 To find my Google data: The Data Liberation Front, http://www.dataliberation.org/.
 82 A Google spokesman: Rob Shilkin, e-mail to the author, July 30, 2013.
 82 My Facebook data were a pale shadow: Nicole Lundeen and Kerry Skrying, “Stu¬
    dent Group Challenges Facebook on Privacy,” Wall Street Journal, Tech Europe
    (blog), February 2, 2012, http://blogs.wsj.com/tech-europe/2012/02/08/student
    -group-challenges-facebook-on-privacy/.
 82 Schrems, a law student in Vienna: “Facebook’s Data Pool,” europe-v-facebook.org,
    http://www.europe-v-facebook.org/EN/Data_Pool/data_pool.html.
 82 The European Union requires: Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of
    the Council of October 24, 1995. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ
    .do?uri=CELEX:31995L0046:EN:HTML.
 83 As a result, the Irish commission: Data Protection Commissioner, “Facebook Ireland
    Ltd, Report of Audit,” December 21, 2011, http://europe-v-facebook.org/Facebook
    _Ireland_Audit_Report_Final.pdf.
 83 A year later, Facebook changed: Facebook, Data Use Policy, Date of Last Revision:
    December 11, 2012, https://www.facebook.com/full_data_use_policy.
 83 In 2012, the Irish commission: Data Protection Commission, “Facebook Ireland Ltd,
    Report of Re-Audit,” September 21, 2012, http://europe-v-facebook.org/ODPC
     _Review.pdf.
. 83 Twitter didn’t give users: Mollie Vandor, “Your Twitter Archive,” Twitter Blog,
     December 19, 2012, https://blog.twitter.com/2012/your-twitter-archive.
 83 even though since 2010: Jud Valeski, “New Gnip & Twitter Partnership,” Company
    Blog, Gnip, November 17, 2010, http://blog.gnip.com/gnip-twitter-partnership/.
 84 This happened when I was sitting: Mike Griffin, in discussion with author, Septem¬
      ber 21, 2012.
[246]   NDTES

 84 Mike is a “repo” man who stumbled: Julia Angwin and Jennifer Valentino-DeVries,
    “New Tracking Frontier: Your License Plates,” Wall Street Journal, September 29,
    2012,,http://onhne.wsj.eom/article/SB10000872396390443995604578004723603576
    296.html.
 84 He mused about one possible: Mike Griffin, in discussion with author, September
    21,2012.                       f
 84 Asher made millions: Michael Shnayerson, “The Net’s Master Data-Miner,” Vanity
    Fair, December 2004.
 85 In 2009: Bloomberg Businessweek, “Company Overview of TLO, LLC,” accessed
    April 25, 2013, http://investing.businessweek.com/research/stocks/private/snapshot
    .asp?privcapld=128678962.
 85 founding a database company called: Ann Woolner, “Hank Asher’s Startup TLO
    Knows All About You,” Bloomberg Businessweek Magazine, September 15, 2011,
    http://www.businessweek.com/magazine/hank-ashers-startup-tlo-knows-all-about
    -you-09152011.html.
 85 He turned out to be right: TLO, LLC, “Press Release Honoring Frank,” January 12,
    2013, http://www.tlo.com/hank_press_release.html.
 85 Mike said TLO’s data: Mike Griffin, in discussion with author, September 21, 2012.
 85 which years earlier had: Ellen Nakashima and Robert O’Harrow Jr., “LexisNexis Par¬
    ent Set to Buy ChoicePoint,” Washington Post, February 22, 2008, http://articles.
    washingtonpost.com/2008-02-22/business/36857083_l_choicepoint-data-broker
    -lexisnexis-group; and Robert O’Harrow Jr., “LexisNexis to Buy Seisint for $775
    Million,” Washington Post, July 15, 2004, http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn
    /articles/A50577-2004Jull4.html.
 85 TLO charged only 25 cents: Woolner, “Hank Asher’s Startup.”
 85 By comparison, LexisNexis’s: PeopleWise, https://www.peoplewise.com/people
    /report.
 86 In 2007, Josh Levy and Ross Cohen: Dean Takahashi, “BeenVerified Hopes to Make
    Background Checks Easier and Cheaper,” VentureBeat, October 21, 2008, http://
    venturebeat.com/2008/10/21/beenverified-hopes-to-make-background-checks-eas
    ier-and-cheaper/.
 86 By 2011, the company said: Julia Angwin, “Sites Are Accused of Privacy Failings,”
    Wall Street Journal, February 13, 2012, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052
    970204136404577207183258570186.html.
 86 Those countries require: Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the
    Council, October 24, 1995.
 87 I was shocked that Acxiom: Acxiom Corp. 10-K annual report, http://www.sec.gov
    /Archives/edgar/data/733269/000073326913000012/financials.htm.
 87 One of its main products: Acxiom Corp., “My Cluster,” https://isapps.acxiom.com
    /personicx/personicx.aspx.
87 Thanks to the journalist Dan Tynan: Dan Tynan, “Further Adventures in Data Min¬
   ing, or Welcome to My Lear Jet Lifestyle,” ITworld.com, April 11, 2013, http://www
    .itworld.com/it-management/352177/adventures-data-mining-or-welcome-my-lear
    -jet-lifestyle.
87 Acxiom later introduced an online: AboutTheData.com, https://AboutTlTieData.com/.
88 Datalogix, which claims to have data: datalogix, http://www.datalogix.com/about/.
89 Intelius, one of the largest: Xu Wang, “Intelius May Revisit IPO After Shelving It in
    2010, CEO Says,” Bloomberg, October 25, 2011, http://www.bloomberg.com/news
    /2011-10-25/intelius-may-revisit-ipo-after-shelving-it-in-2010-ceo-says.html.
                                                                           NOTES    [W]

89 The Fair Credit Reporting Act: “A Summary of Your Rights Under the Fair Credit
   Reporting Act,” FTC Consumer Response Center, http://www.consumer.ftc.gov
   /articles/pdf-0096-fair-credit-reporting-act.pdf.                    _ -
89 In 2003, Congress passed a law: The White House, “Fact Sheet: President bush Signs
   the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003,” December 4, 2003, http://
   georgewbush-whitehouse.archives.gov/news/releases/2003/12/20031204-3.html.
90 In March 2013, it was revealed: Jordan Robertson, “Top Credit Agencies Say Hackers
   Stole Celebrity Reports,” Bloomberg, March 12, 2013, http://www.bloomberg.com
   /news/2013-03-12/equifax-transunion-say-hackers-stole-celebrity-reports.html.
90 The latest review of credit report: Federal Trade Commission, Report to Congress
    Under Section 319 of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of2003, Decem¬
   ber 2012, http://ftc.gOv/os/2013/02/130211factareport.pdf.
90 Based in Chicago and founded in 2004: eBureau, “About Us,” accessed May 5, 2013,
   http://www.ebureau.com/about.
91 The company says it analyzes: eBureau, “Using Third Party Data and Analytics to
   Help You Manage Lead Quality: Part 2,” eBureau Industry Blog, May 11, 2012, http://
   www.ebureau.com/blog/using-third-party-data-and-analytics-help-you-manage
   -online-lead-quality-part-2.
91 eBureau promotes its scores: eBureau, “Credit Risk Management,” http://www
   .ebureau.com/credit-risk-management.
91 and allowing debt collectors: eBureau, “Collections & Recovery,” http://www.ebureau
   .com/collections-recovery.
91 In a marketing sheet: eBureau, “Income Estimator,” http://www.ebureau.com/sites
   /default/files/file/datasheets/ebureau_income_estimator_datasheet.pdf.
91 When I contacted eBureau: eBureau e-mail to author dated July 31, 2013.
91 Even creepier was a company called PYCO: V12 Group, “The PYCO Personality
   Score: The Science of Motivating Consumers to Respond,” March 2012, http://www
   .vl2groupinc.com/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/PYCO_Personality_Score_White-
   Paper.pdf.
91 For example, getting married: Yen Lee, in discussion with author’s assistant Lauren
   Kirchner, May 30, 2013.
91 PYCO says it has built profiles: Yen Lee, e-mail to author’s assistant Lauren Kirchner,
   June 4, 2013.
91 Obviously, the National Security Agency: Bob Sullivan, “Lawyers Eye NSA Data as
   Treasure Trove for Evidence,” NBC News, June 21, 2013, http://www.cnbc.com/id
   /100834242.
91 Consider the story of an Ohio resident: Shearson v. U.S. Department of Homeland
   Security et al, No. 08-4582 (6th cir. 2011), http://papersplease.org/wp/wp-content
   /uploads/201 l/04/shearson-opinion-21apr2011.pdf.
92 Shearson, who is a convert to Islam: Julia Shearson, in discussion with Lauren Kirch¬
   ner, September 3, 2013.
92 the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit: Shearson v. U.S. Department of Home¬
   land Security et al, No. 08-4582 (6th cir. 2011).
92 Shearson settled for damages: Julia Shearson, in discussion with Lauren Kirchner,
   September 3, 2013.
92 I requested my FBI files: Federal Bureau of Investigations, correspondence to
   author, May 17, 2013.
92 For help interpreting the files: Edward Hasbrouck, in discussion with author,
   May 2, 2013.
[248]        NOTES

 92 He lost when a federal court-. Hasbrouck v. U.S. Customs and Border Protection,
    Order Re Cross-Motions for Summary Judgment, no. 10-3793 (N.D. Cal. 2012).
 93 The first eight pages: Edward Hasbrouck, in discussion with author, May 2, 2013.
 93 But after the 9/11 terrorist attacks: Aviation and Transportation Security Act,
    H.R. 107-71 (2001), http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-107publ71/html/PLAW
    -107publ71.htm.
 93 In typical fashion, “upon request”: 19 C.F.R. 122.49d—Passenger Name Record
    (PNR) Information, http://www.law.cornell.edu/cfr/text/19/122.49d.
 93 Now, airlines routinely contribute: U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Privacy
    Impact Assessment for the Automated Targeting System, June 1, 2012, http://www
    .dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/privacy/privacy_pia_cbp_ats006b.pdf.
 93 After a protracted legal: “EU Court Annuls Data Deal with US,” BBC News, May 30,
    2006, http://news.bbc.co.Uk/2/hi/europe/5028918.stm.
 93 After all, they didn’t want their citizens: “MEPs Back Deal to Give Air Passenger
    Data to US,” BBC News, April 19, 2012, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe
    -17764365.
 95 “We are working closely with our”: Colleen Schwartz (Dow Jones spokesperson), in
    discussion with author, July 30, 2013.

7. THE FIRST LINE OF DEFENSE
 97 I had also considered: Michael Tiffany, in discussion with author, February 2, 2013.
 97 “We have a saying in this business”: Lawrence Wright, “The Spymaster,” New Yorker,
      January 21, 2008, http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2008/01/21/080121fa_fact
      _wright.
 97 “We have to cast aside”: Janet Napolitano, “Achieving Security and Privacy,” May 2,
    2012, Australian National University, Canberra, http://www.dhs.gov/news/2012/05
      /02/remarks-secretary-homeland-security-janet-napolitano-achieving-security
      -and-privacy.
 98 The advice being peddled: “Comcast Partners with AG Blumenthal to Keep Kids Safe
    Online,” Red Orbit, June 15, 2009, http://www.redorbit.com/news/entertainment
    /1705787/comcast_partners_with_ag_blumenthal_to_keep_kids_safe_online/.
 99 In 2010, computer security researchers: Ashlee Vance, “If Your Password Is 123456,
    Just Make It HackMe, New York Times, January 20, 2010, https://www.nytimes.com
    /2010/01/21/technology/21password.html?_r=l&.
 99 The researchers, at the computer security firm Imperva: The Imperva Application
    Defense Center, Consumer Password Worst Practices,” 2010, http://www.imperva
    ,com/docs/WP_Consumer_Password_Worst_Practices.pdf.
 99 The British telecom regulator: Ofcom, “UK Adults Taking Online Password Security
      Risks, April 23, 2013, http://media.ofcom.org.uk/2013/04/23/uk-adults-taking
      -online-password-security-risks/.
100 In his well-regarded textbook: Ross Anderson, Security Engineering (Hoboken, N.J.:
    Wiley, 2008), 33, http://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/~rjal4/Papers/SEv2-c02.pdf.
100 In 2004, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers: Jeff Yan, Alan Blackwell,
    Ross Anderson, and Alasdair Grant, “Password Memorability and Security: Empiri¬
    cal Results,” IEEE Security & Privacy, September/October 2004, http://homepages.es
    .ncl.ac.uk/jeff.yan/jyan_ieee_pwd.pdf.
100 In 2010, computer scientists: Philip Inglesant and M. Angela Sasse, “The True Cost of
      Unusable Password Policies: Password Use in the Wild,” April 15, 2010, https://www
      .cl.cam.ac.uk/~rjal4/shbl0/angela2.pdf.
                                                                            HIES    [249]

101 And by the way, many. Per Thorsheim (password security expert), in discussion with
    Lauren Kirchner, June 28, 2013.
101 In 2005, Jesper Johansson: Munir Kotadia, “Microsoft Security Guru: JotDown Your
    Passwords,” CNET, May 23,2005, http://news.cnet.com/Microsoft-security-guru-Jot
    -down-your-passwords/2100-7355_3-5716590. html?tag=nefd.pop.
101 I was reminded of a study: “Online Americans Fatigued by Password Overload Jan-
    rain Study Finds,” Janrain press release, August 23, 2012, http://janrain.com/about
     /newsroom/press-releases/online-americans-fatigued-by-password-overload-jan
     rain-study-finds/.
103 And I bought a wallet: Spencer Michels, “Radio Frequency Identification Tags: Iden¬
    tity Theft Danger or Modern Aid?,” August 16, 2010, http://www.pbs.org/newshour
    /rundown/2010/08/radio-frequency-identification-a-danger-or-a-help-l.html.
103 To combat hackers: “HTTPS Everywhere,” Electric Frontier Foundation, https://
    www.eff.org/https-everywhere.
103 On Gmail, that meant installing: Google, Inc., “Google Authenticator,” iTunes App
    Store, Updated September 7, 2013, https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/google-authenti
    cator/id388497605?mt=8.
104 I also tried using a system: Little Snitch, Objective Development Software GmbH,
    http://www.obdev.at/products/littlesnitch/index.html.
104 I liked that it didn’t look: SpiderOak, https://spideroak.com/.
105 Over coffee, he told me his story: Ethan Oberman, in discussion with author, August
    15,2012.
105 He was, as I had guessed: Meredith M. Bagley, “M. Lax Blows Lead, Loses to Dart¬
    mouth,” Harvard Crimson, May 10, 1999, http://www.thecrimson.com/article/1999
    /5/10/m-lax-blows-lead-loses-to/.
105 After graduation in 2000: Ethan Oberman, in discussion with author, August 15,
    2012.
105 Two weeks later I spoke by phone: Alan Fairless, in discussion with author, August
    28, 2012.
106 Increased computing power: Jeremi Gosney (PasswordsCon, co-organizer and CEO
    of Stricture Group), in discussion with Lauren Kirchner, July 12, 2013.
106 To show how easy it has become: Nate Anderson, “How I Became a Password Cracker,”
    Ars Technica (blog), March 24, 2013, http://arstechnica.com/security/2013/03/how-i
    -became-a-password-cracker/.
107 Brute force attacks: Robert Graham, “Linkedln vs. Password Cracking,” Errata
    Security, June 6, 2012, http://erratasec.blogspot.com/2012/06/linkedin-vs-password
    -cracking.html.
107 For that reason, Anderson: Anderson, “How I Became a Password Cracker.”
107 One lesson from the world: Dan Goodin, “Why Passwords Have Never Been Weaker—
    and Crackers Have Never Been Stronger,” Ars Technica (blog), August 20, 2012,
    http://arstechnica.com/security/2012/08/passwords-under-assault/.
107 Sadly, salting is not: Paul Wagenseil, “Linkedln, eHarmony Don’t Take Your Secu¬
    rity Seriously,” TechNewsDaily, NBC News, June 8, 2012, http://www.nbcnews.com
    /technology/linkedin-eharmony-dont-take-your-security-seriously-819858.
107 Jeffrey Goldberg, a password expert at AgileBits: Jeffrey Goldberg, in discussion with
    author, May 14, 2013.
107 Julian Assange knew this: “Row Between Wikileaks and Guardian over Security
    Breach,” BBC News, September 1, 2011, http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-14743410.
108 One day I was sitting outside: Dan Wheeler, “Open Source Password Strength
[m\         non:

      Estimator,” April 2012, https://dl.dropboxusercontent.eom/u/209/zxcvbn/test/index
    .html.
109 In-2012, researchers at the University of Cambridge: Joseph Bonneau and Ekaterina
    Shutova, “Linguistic Properties of Multi-Word Passphrases,” USEC ’12: Workshop
    on Usable Security, Kralendijk, Bonaire, Netherlands, March 2, 2012, http://www.
    jbohneau.com/doc/BS12-USEC-passphrase_linguistics.pdf.
109 I found what I needed: Arnold Reinhold, “The Diceware Passphrase FAQ,” last
    updated April 18, 2012, http://world.std.com/~reinhold/dicewarefaq.html.
UP But even the simple Diceware: Bruce Marshall, in discussion with author’s assistant
    Lauren Kirchner, July 3, 2013.
110 the NSA had authored: Nicole Perlroth, “Government Announces Steps to Restore
    Confidence in Encryption Standards,” New York Times, Bits Blog, September 10,
    2013,     http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/09/10/government-announces-steps-to
    -restore-confidence-on-encryption-standards/?src=twrhp&_r=0.

B. LEAVING GOOGLE
112 On June 8, 2004: Joan Airoldi, “Privacy and Library Records, a Case Study in What¬
     com County,” Journal of Educational Controversy 5, no. 2 (Summer 2010), http://
     www.wce.wwu.edu/Resources/CEP/eJournal/v005n002/a007.shtml.
112 Nothing like that had ever: Deming, Washington, Population: Census 2010 and 2000
     Interactive Map, Demographics, Statistics, Quick Facts, http://censusviewer.com
     /city/WA/Deming.
112 Even so, the librarians: Joan Airoldi (director, Whatcom County Library System,
     Washington), in discussion with author, March 29, 2013.
112 A year earlier, the Whatcom: Deborra Garrett, in discussion with Lauren Kirchner,
     May 30, 2013.
112 Subsequently, forty-eight states: American Library Association, “State Privacy Laws
     Regarding Library Records,” http://www.ala.org/offices/oif/ifgroups/stateifcchairs
     /stateifcinaction/stateprivacy.
112 So when the FBI agent: Amory Peck (former board of trustees chair, Whatcom
     County Library System), in discussion with Lauren Kirchner, June 7, 2013.
112 the librarian on duty: Deborra Garrett, in discussion with Lauren Kirchner, May 30,
     2013.
113 But a few weeks later: Amory Peck, in discussion with Lauren Kirchner, June 7,
     2013.
113 Garrett suggested that it could: Phillip Taylor, “Kramerbooks Declares Victory in
     Subpoena Battle,” Freedom Forum, First Amendment Center, June 22, 1998, http://
    www.freedomforum.org/templates/document.asp?documentID=9736.
113 “It was a frightening stand”: Amory Peck, “Remarks Made by Amory Peck, Board of
    Trustees Chair, Whatcom County Library System” (Robert B. Downs Intellectual
     Freedom Reception, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, January 15, 2005),
    http://www.lis.illinois.edu/articles/2005/01/remarks-made-amory-peck-board
     -trustees-chair-whatcom-county-library-system.
113 “In my view, this case”: Deborra Garrett, in discussion with Lauren Kirchner, May
    30,2013.
114 In 2006, Google challenged: Nicole Wong, “Judge Tells DoJ ‘No’ on Search Queries,”
     Google Official Blog, March 17, 2006, http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2006/03/judge
    -tells-doj-no-on-search-queries.html.
114 In 2007, Amazon successfully: Order in re Grand Jury Subpoena to Amazon.com
                                                                           mi       [25i]

      Dated August 7, 2006 (W.D. Wis. 2007), http://dig.csail.mit(edu/2007/12/In-re
      -grand-jury-subpoena-amazon.PDF.
 114 The relevant law governing most: Julia Angwin, “Secret Orders Target Email,” Wall
      Street Journal, October 9, 2011, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970203
      476804576613284007315072.html.
 114 Not only that, courts often: Stephen W. Smith, “Gagged, Sealed 8c Delivered: Reform¬
      ing ECPA’s Secret Docket,” Harvard Law & Policy Review 6 (May 21, 2012): forth¬
      coming, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2071399.
 114 In 2012, Microsoft produced: Microsoft 2012 Law Enforcement Requests Report,
      https://www.microsoft.com/about/corporatecitizenship/en-us/reporting/transpar
      ency/#FAQsl.
 114 That same year, Google handed: “Google Transparency Report,” accessed August 15,
      2013,       https://www.google.com/transparencyreport/userdatarequests/countries
      /?t=table&p=2012-06.
 114 The leading Internet companies: Digital Due Process Coalition, http://www.digital
      dueprocess.org/.
 115 In 2011, Sonic.net: Angwin, “Secret Orders Target Email.”
 115 By speaking to me, Jasper: Dane Jasper, correspondence with Lauren Kirchner, Sep¬
      tember 2, 2013.
 115 As for Yahoo!, in 2008: Claire Cain Miller, “Secret Court Ruling Put Tech Companies
      in Data Bind,” New York Times, June 13, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/14
      /technology/secret-court-ruling-put-tech-companies-in-data-bind.html.
115 Yahoo! argued that the government’s: United States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance
      Court of Review Case No. 08-01 In Re Directives [redacted text] Pursuant to Section
      105B of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (FISA Ct. Rv. August 22, 2008),
      http://www.fas.org/irp/agency/doj/fisa/fiscr082208.pdf.
115 It was the first big Internet: David Drummond, “Greater Transparency Around Gov¬
      ernment Requests,” Google Official Blog, April 20, 2010, http://googleblog.blogspot.
      com/2010/04/greater-transparency-around-government.html.
115 And Google is appealing: Motion for Declaratory Judgment of Google Inc.’s First
     Amendment Right to Publish Aggregate Information About FISA Orders (FISA Ct.
      June 18, 2013), http://www.wired.com/images_blogs/threatlevel/2013/06/Foreign
      -Intelligence-Surveillance-Court-Motion-for-Declaratory-Judgment.pdf.
115 In 2010, Google launched: Federal Trade Commission, “FTC Charges Deceptive Pri¬
     vacy Practices in Google’s Rollout of its Buzz Social Network,” press release, March
     30, 2011, http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2011/03/google.shtm.
116 paid $8.5 million: Chloe Albanesius, “Google Settles Buzz Class-Action Suit for
     $8.5M,” PC Magazine, September 3, 2010, http://www.pcmag.eom/article2/0,2817
     ,2368714, OO.asp.
116 In 2012, my colleagues: Julia Angwin and Jennifer Valentino-DeVries, “Google’s
     iPhone Tracking,” Wall Street Journal, February 17, 2012, http://online.wsj.com/news
     /articles/SB10001424052970204880404577225380456599176.
116 Later that year: Federal Trade Commission, “Google Will Pay $22.5 Million to Settle
     FTC Charges It Misrepresented Privacy Assurances to Users of Apple’s Safari Inter¬
     net Browser,” press release, August 9, 2012, http://ftc.gov/opa/2012/08/google.shtm.
116 Google agreed to pay $7 million: Connecticut Attorney General George Jepsen,
     “Attorney General Announces $7 Million Multistate Settlement with Google Over
     Street View Collection of WiFi Data,” press release, March 12, 2013, http://www.ct
     .gov/ag/cwp/view.asp?Q=5205188cA=2341.
[252]    NOTES

116 I’d bean annoyed: Alma Whitten, “Updating Our Privacy Policy and Terms of Ser¬
    vice,” Google Official Blog, January 24, 2012, http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2012
    /01/updating-our-privacy-policies-and-terms.html.
116 that allowed Google to combine: Jennifer Valentino-Devries, “What Do Google’s
     Privacy Changes Mean for You?,” Wall Street Journal, Digits (blog), January 25,
    2012,      http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2012/01/25/what-do-googles-privacy-changes
    -mean-for-you/.
116 Google also doesn’t delete: Rob Shilkin (Google spokesman), in correspondence with
    author, July 30, 2013.
117 It doesn’t store any of the information: DuckDuckGo, Inc., “DuckDuckGo Privacy,
    accessed August 20, 2013, https://duckduckgo.com/privacy.
118 “The spread of computers": Tim Mullaney, “Jobs Fight: Haves vs. the Have-Nots,” USA
    Today, September 16, 2012, http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/money/business/story
    /2012/09/16/jobs-fight-haves-vs-the-have-nots/57778406/l.
119 It had principles but few: Miguel Helft and David Barboza, “Google Shuts Down Site
    in Dispute over Censorship,” New York Times, March 22, 2010, http://www.nytimes
    .com/2010/03/23/technology/23google.html?_r=0.
119 He told me that: Gabriel Weinberg (CEO, DuckDuckGo, Inc.), in discussion with
    author, October 24, 2012.
119 After selling a social networking: “United Online, Inc., Acquires Opobox, Inc.” (press
    release), Houston Chronicle, March 20, 2006, http://www.chron.com/news/article
    /PZ-United-Online-Inc-Acquires-Opobox-Inc-1654933.php.
121 Of course, Google says: Google, Inc., “Ads in Gmail,” accessed September 29, 2013,
    https://support.google.com/mail/answer/6603?hl=en.
121 Yes, its computers are: Glenn Greenwald and James Ball, “The Top Secret Rules That
    Allow NSA to Use US Data Without a Warrant,” Guardian, June 20, 2013, http://
    www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/20/fisa-court-nsa-without-warrant.
121 In 2010, Google fired: Adrian Chen, “GCreep: Google Engineer Stalked Teens, Spied
    on Chats,” Gawker, September 14, 2010, http://gawker.com/5637234/gcreep-google
    -engineer-stalked-teens-spied-on-chats.
121 and said it was the second: Jason Kincaid, “This Is the Second Time a Google Engi¬
    neer Has Been Fired for Accessing User Data,” TechCrunch, September 14, 2010,
    http://techcrunch.com/2010/09/14/google-engineer-fired-security/.
121 In 2008, two former NSA: Brian Ross, Vic Walter, and Anna Schecter, “Inside
    Account of U.S. Eavesdropping on Americans,” ABC News, October 9, 2008, http://
    abcnews.go.com/Blotter/exclusive-inside-account-us-eavesdropping-americans
    /story?id=5987804.
121 Finally, it was a project: MIT Media Lab, “Immersion: A People-centric View of Your
    Email Life,” accessed August 20, 2013, https://immersion.media.mit.edu/.
122 I briefly considered running: Drew Crawford, “NSA-Proof Your E-Mail in 2 Hours,”
    Sealed Abstract (blog), June 25, 2013, http://sealedabstract.com/code/nsa-proof-your
    -e-mail-in-2-hours/.
122 That left only a few: Lavabit LLC, https://lavabit.com/, accessed July 2, 2013 (website
    has since been shut down).
122 a Texas service that: Michael Phillips, “How the Government Killed a Secure E-Mail
    Company,” New Yorker, Elements (blog), August 8, 2013, http://www.newyorker.
    com/online/blogs/elements/2013/08/the-government-versus-your-secrets.html.
123 and Riseup, a service run by: Riseup.net, “About Us,” accessed August 20, 2013,
    https://help.riseup.net/en/about-us.
                                                                             NOTES    [253]

 123 But Riseup also stripped out: “When you send email with riseup.net, yO lr internet
       address (IP address) is not embedded in the email.” Riseup.net, “Riseup Email Help,”
       accessed August 20, 2013, https://help.riseup.net/en/email.
 123 while Lavabit said it: “Hie Lavabit e-mail servers do record the IP address used to
       send an outgoing message in the header of an outgoing e-mail. Because of this, it is
       possible for the recipient of a message to identify what IP was used to send a mes¬
       sage. We record this information in the message header so that law enforcement
       officials in possession of a message that violates the law can identify the original
       sender. Lavabit does not retain this information.” Accessed July 2, 2013, https://Iav
       abit.com/privacy_policy.html (website has since been shut down).
 123 We ask that you do not”: Riseup.net, “Social Contract,” https://help.riseup.net/en/
      social-contract.
 123 Riseup lets users store: Riseup.net, “Email Storage Quota,” https://www.riseup.net/en
      /quota.
 124 Riseup promises: Riseup.net, “Privacy Policy,” accessed August 20, 2013, https://help
      .riseup.net/en/privacy-policy.
 124 The 1986 Electronic Communications Privacy Act: Electronic Communications Pri¬
      vacy Act, 18 USC § 2510-22, https://it.ojp.gov/default.aspx?area=privacy&
      page=1285.
 124 But Thunderbird’s biggest backer, Mozilla: Mitchell Baker, “Thunderbird: Stability
      and Community Innovation,” Lizard Wrangling (blog), July 6, 2012, http://blog.liz
      ardwrangler.com/2012/07/06/thunderbird-stability-and-community-innovation/.
 124 Hewing to my guiding principle: Postbox, Inc. “Postbox,” accessed August 20, 2013,
      http://www.postbox-inc.com/index.php.
 124 It is worth noting that: In Re Google Inc. Gmail Litigation, 5:13-md-02430 (N.D. Cal.
      2013).
 124 Google argues that there: Defendant Google Inc.’s Motion to Dismiss Plaintiffs’ Con¬
      solidated Individual and Class Action Complaint; Memorandum of Points and
      Authorities in Support Thereof at 19, in re Google Inc. Gmail Litigation, 5:13-md-
      02430 (N.D. Cal. 2013).
 125 The founder, Ladar Levison: “Lavabit,” https://lavabit.com/, accessed July 2, 2013
      (website has since been shut down).
125 But after some documents: Nicole Perloth and Scott Shane, “As F.B.I. Pursued
     Snowden, an E-Mail Service Stood Firm,” New York Times, October 3, 2013, http://
     www.nytimes.com/2013/10/03/us/snowdens-e-mail-provider-discusses-pressure
     -from-fbi-to-disclose-data.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0.
125 In 2007, Hushmail, a privacy-oriented: Ryan Singel, “Encrypted E-Mail Company
     Hushmail Spills to Feds,” Wired, November 7, 2007, http://www.wired.com/threat
     level/2007/ll/encrypted-e-mai/.
126 But I couldn’t help: Somini Sengupta, “Lavabit Founder Says He Had ‘Obligation’ to
     Shut Service,” New York Times, Bits (blog), August 12,2013, http://bits.blogs.nytimes
     .com/2013/08/12/lavabit-founder-says-he-had-obligation-to-shut-service/?_r=0.
126 “Years of email accounts”: Ladar Levinson, “My Fellow Users ...,” Lavabit LLC’s
     Facebook page, August 8, 2013, https://www.facebook.com/permalink.phpJstory
     _fbid=529849123730760&id=432285083487165.
126 After Lavabit shut down: Jon Callas, “To Our Customers,” Silent Circle Blog, August
     9, 2013, http://silentcircle.wordpress.com/2013/08/09/to-our-customers/.
126 The Riseup collective posted: Riseup.net, “Riseup and Government FAQ,” accessed
     August 20, 2013, https://www.riseup.net/en/riseup-and-government-faq.
[254]    NOTES

9. IITR0DUCI1G IDA
127 Ida Tarbell was: Kathleen Brady, Ida Tarbell: Portrait of a Muckraker (New York:
        Seaview/Putnam, 1984).
129 Some studies show that avoiding: Jeffrey T. Hancock, Michael T. Woodworth, and
         Saurabh Goorha, “See No Evil: The Effect of Communication Medium and Motiva¬
        tion on Deception Detection,” Group Decision and Negotiation 19, no. 4 (July 2009):
         327-43.
 129 In a 2012 study, Hancock asked 119 college: Jamie Guillory and Jeffrey T. Hancock,
         “The Effect of Linkedln on Deception in Resumes,” Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and
         Social Networking 15, no. 3 (February 2012): 135-40.
 129 On the whole, Hancock said: Jeffrey T. Hancock, “The Future of Lying,” lecture,
         TEDx, Winnipeg, Canada, September 13, 2012, http://www.ted.com/talks/jeff_han
         cock_3_types_of_digital_lies.html#63003.
 129 In an earlier study, Hancock: Jeffrey T. Hancock, Catalina Toma, and Nicole Ellison,
         “The Truth About Lying in Online Dating Profiles,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI Con¬
       ference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (New York: ACM, 2007), 449-52,
         http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfmJdoidM240624.1240697.
129 Most of the men lied: Hancock, “The Future of Lying.”
129 In other studies, he found that lies: Darcy Warkentin, Michael Woodworth, Jeffrey T.
         Hancock, and Nicole Cormier, “Warrants and Deception in Computer Mediated
         Communication,” Proceedings of the 2010 ACM Conference on Computer Supported
         Cooperative Work (New York: ACM, 2010), 9-12, https://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm
         ?id=1718922.
129 One of the strongest views on lying: Immanuel Kant, “On a Supposed Right to Lie
        from Altruistic Motives (1797),” in Critique of Practical Reason and Other Writings
        in Moral Philosophy, ed. and trans. Lewis Black (Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press, 1949), 346-50, http://www.mesacc.edu/~davpy35701/text/kant-sup-right-to
        -lie.pdf.
130 I found myself attracted: Sissela Bok, Lying: Moral Choice in Private and Public Life
        (New York: Vintage, 1999), 93.
130 In 2012, the International Air Transport Association: International Air Transport
        Association, “Industry Group Adopts Foundation Standard for New Distribution
        Capability” (press release), October 19, 2012, http://www.iata.org/pressroom/pr
        /pages/2012-10-19-02.aspx.
130 the New York Times editorial: “Frequent Fliers, Prepare to Pay More,” New York
        Times, March 3, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/04/opinion/frequent-fliers
        -prepare-to-pay-more.html.
131 In 2013, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of North Carolina: Jen Weiczner, “How the
        Insurer Knows You Just Stocked Up on Ice Cream and Beer,” Wall Street Journal,
        February 25,2013, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142412788732338460457832
        6151014237898.html.
131 Maybe it was even the kind: Paul Myerberg, “Dr. Phil: Tuiasosopo ‘romantically in
        love’ with Te’o,” USA Today, January 30, 2013, http://www.usatoday.com/story
        /gameon/2013/01 /30/dr-phil-ronaiah-tuiasosopo-confused-sexual-identity
       /1876995/.
132 He had come to my office: Jon Callas, in discussion with author, September 5, 2012.
133 I consulted with Michael Sussmann: Michael Sussmann, in discussion with author,
       January 23, 2013.
                                                                            IIIIES   [ 25 5 ]

 133 I sat down, ordered: “Tor: Overview,” Tor Project, accessed October 2, 2013, https://
       www.torproject.org/about/overview.html.en.
 134 I declined Amazon’s offer: Amazon.com, Inc., “Amazon Betterizer,” accessed August
       21, 2013, http://www.amazon.com/gp/betterizer.
 134 The first book I ordered: Herbert N. Foerstel, Surveillance in the Stacks: The FBI’s
      Library Awareness Program (Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press, 1991).
 134 the program that prompted: American Library Association, “State Privacy Laws
      Regarding Library Records,” http://www.ala.org/ofhces/oif/ifgroups/stateifcchairs
      /stateifcinaction/stateprivacy.
 135 American Express says: Marina Hoffmann Norville (vice president, corporate, finan¬
      cial, and risk public relations at American Express), discussion with Lauren Kirch-
      ner, October 4, 2013.
 135 For instance, if I created: “How Spamgourmet Works,” https://spamgourmet.com/.
 135 So I started using: MaskMe, Abine, Inc., https://www.abine.com/maskme/.
 137 I hoped to buy bitcoins: “FAQ—Bitcoin,” accessed August 21, 2013, https://en.bitcoin
      .it/wiki/FAQ#How_can_I_get_bitcoins.3F.
 137 Bitcoins can be used on: Adrian Chen, “The Underground Website Where You Can
      Buy Any Drug Imaginable,” Kotaku.com, June 1, 2011, http://kotaku.com/5805928
      /the-underground-website-where-you-can-buy-any-drug-imaginable.
 137 In May 2013, Kashmir Hill: Kashmir Hill, “Living on Bitcoin for a Week: The Jour¬
      ney Begins,” Forbes.com, May 1, 2013, http://www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill
      /2013/05/01/living-on-bitcoin-for-a-week-the-journey-begins/.
 137 A digital cash start-up, E-gold: United States Department of Justice, “Digital Cur¬
      rency E-Gold Indicted for Money Laundering and Illegal Money Transmitting,”
      press release, April 27, 2007, http://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/2007/April/07_crm_301
      .html.
137 The following year: United States Department of Justice, “Digital Currency Business
      E-Gold Pleads Guilty to Money Laundering and Illegal Money Transmitting
      Charges,” press realease, July 21, 2008, http://justice.gov/opa/pr/2008/July/08_crm
     _635.html.
137 And in 2013, federal prosecutors: Marc Santora, William K. Rashbaum, and Nicole
     Perlroth, “Online Currency Exchange Accused of Laundering $6 Billion,” New York
      Times, May 28, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/29/nyregion/liberty-reserve
     -operators-accused-of-money-laundering.html?ref=technology.
138 In 1996, self-proclaimed Internet anarchist: Declan McCullagh, “Crypto-Convict
     Won’t Recant,” Wired.com, April 14, 2000, http://www.wired.com/politics/law
     /news/2000/04/35620.
138 Jim Bell posted on an Internet forum: Jim Bell, “Assassination Politics,” Google
     Groups posting, January 23, 1996, https://groups.google.com/forum/?hl=en#!search
     /assasination$20politics$20jim$20bell|sort:date/list.libernet/Mo2RIiViYDE/Pp7
     BMppVDBYJ.
138 In 1997, IRS agents raided Bell’s home: Associated Press, “Bell Gets 11 Months in
     Prison, 3 Years Supervised Release, Fine,” December 12, 1997, http://cryptome.org
     /jdb/jimbell7.htm.
139 They are debts between: David Graeber, Debt: The First 5,000 Years (Brooklyn, N.Y.:
     Melville House, 2010), 120.
[25B]    ions
10. POCKET UTTER
140 I had just arrived in the city. Julia Angwin, “Secret Orders Target Email,” Wall Street
       Journal, October 9, 2011, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142405297020347680
       4576613284007315072.html.
141 About a year after our meeting: Ira Hunt, “The CIA’s ‘Grand Challenges’ with
       Big Data,” GigaOM Structure: Data Conference 2013, http://new.livestream.com
       /accounts/74987/events/1927733/videos/14306067.
 141 But in 2006, the FBI sought: Declan McCullagh and Anne Broache, “FBI Taps Cell
        Phone Mic as Eavesdropping Tool,” CNET News, December 1,2006, http://news.cnet
        ,com/2100-1029-6140191.html.
 142 The most outrageous example: “Verizon Forced to Hand Over Telephone Data—Full
        Court Ruling,” Guardian, June 5, 2013, http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/interac
        tive/2013/jun/06/verizon-telephone-data-court-order.
 142 President Obama described the program: Barack Obama, interviewed by Charlie
        Rose, June 16, 2013, http://www.charlierose.com/watch/60230424.
 142 In 2011, the top U.S. wireless carriers: Eric Lichtblau, “Wireless Firms Are Flooded by
        Requests to Aid Surveillance,” New York Times, July 8, 2013, http://www.nytimes
        .com/2012/07/09/us/cell-carriers-see-uptick-in-requests-to-aid-surveillance.html
        ?pagewanted=all&_r=0.
 142 As warrantless cell phone tracking: Julia Angwin and Scott Thurm, “Judges Weigh
        Phone Tracking,” Wall Street Journal, November 9, 2011, http://online.wsj.com/arti
        cle/SB10001424052970203733504577024092345458210.html.
 143 In 2010, the Third Circuit Court of Appeals: No. 08-4227, “In the Matter of the Appli¬
        cation of the United States of America for an Order Directing a Provider of Elec¬
        tronic Communication Service to Disclose Records to the Government,” United
        States Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit, September 7, 2010, https://www.eff.org
        /files/3d%20Circuit%200pinion%20%28Cell%20Site%29.pdf.
 143 But in 2013, the Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals: No. 11-20884, “In Re: Application of
        the United States of America for Historical Cell Site Data,” United States Court of
        Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, July 30, 2013, http://legaltimes.typepad.com/files/cell
        -site-5th.pdf.
 143 During World War I: “The Origination and Evolution of Radio Traffic Analysis: The
        World War I Era,” Cryptologic Quarterly (date unknown): 21-40, http://www.nsa
        .gov/public_info/_files/cryptologic_quarterly/trafficanalysis.pdf.
 143 Prior to the attack on Pearl Harbor: George Danezis and Richard Clayton, “Intro¬
        ducing Traffic Analysis,” January 26, 2007, https://research.microsoft.com/en-us/
        um/people/gdane/papers/TAIntro-book.pdf.
 143 In 1942, it set up a traffic analysis group: “The Origination and Evolution of Radio
        Traffic Analysis.”
 144 The goal of a traffic analyst: Author Redacted, “Computerizing Traffic Analysis,” in
       A Collection of Writings on Traffic Analysis, Vol. 4: Sources in Cryptologic History,
        Center for Cryptologic History, National Security Agency, 1993, 204, http://www
        .governmentattic.org/8docs/NSA-TrafficAnalysisMonograph_1993.pdf.
 144 In 2004, Hezbollah in Lebanon: Matt Apuzzo, “Hezbollah Unravels CIA Spy Net¬
        work in Lebanon,” Associated Press, November 21, 2011, http://www.guardian.co
        .uk/world/feedarticle/9958834.
 144 According to a law enforcement document: “Retention Periods for Major Cellular
        Service Providers,” U.S. Department of Justice, August 2010, http://www.aclu.org
        /files/pdfs/freespeech/retention_periods_of_major_cellular_service_providers.pdf.
                                                                             NOTES   [25/]

 145 In 2010, President Obama signed: S. 30 (111th), “Truth in Caller ID Act of 2009,”
     December 22, 2010, http://www.govtrack.us/congress/bills/lll/s30/text.
 146 Harlo Holmes, head of metadata at the Guardian Project: Harlo Holmes, e-mail cor¬
     respondence with author, May 19, 2013.
 147 Depressed, I called Moxie Marlinspike: Moxie Marlinspike, in discussion with
     author, March 20, 2013.
148 In 2003, a Boston company called Skyhook: Julia Angwin and Jennifer Valentino-
    Devries, “Apple, Google Collect User Data,” Wall Street Journal, April 20,2011, http://
    online.wsj.eom/artide/SB10001424052748703983704576277101723453610.html.
148 In 2010, the privacy investigative: Scott Thurm and Yukari Iwatani Kane, “Your Apps
     Are Watching You,” Wall Street Journal, December 17, 2010, http://online.wsj.com
    /article/SB10001424052748704694004576020083703574602.html.
149 Some companies placed the equipment in: Anton Troianovski, “New Wi-Fi Pitch:
    Tracker,” Wall Street Journal, June 18, 2012, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142
    4052702303379204577474961075248008.html.
149 One London marketing company: Siraj Datoo, “This Recycling Bin Is Following You,”
    Quartz, August 8, 2013, http://qz.com/112873/this-recycling-bin-is-following-you/.
149 (The company stopped): Zachary M. Seward and Siraj Datoo, “City of London Halts
    Recycling Bins Tracking Phones of Passers-by,” Quartz, Augustl2, 2013, http://qz
    .com/114174/city-of-london-halts-recycling-bins-tracking-phones-of-passers-by/.
149 Kaveh Memari, the CEO of Renew: Datoo, “This Recycling Bin Is Following You.”
149 In 2012, Verizon launched: Verizon Wireless, “Our Measurement Solutions,” http://
     business.verizonwireless.com/content/b2b/en/precision/our-measurement-solu
     tions.html.
149 In 2013, AT&T said it would also: AT&T, “Our Updated Privacy Policy,” June 28,
    2013, http://www.attpublicpolicy.com/privacy/our-updated-privacy-policy-2/.
149 spawning conferences such as Location Intelligence: Location Intelligence Confer¬
    ence, http://www.locationintelligence.net/.
149 the Geoweb Summit: Geoweb Summit, http://geowebsummit.com/.
149 Location Business Summit USA: Location Business Summit USA, http://www.mfor
    mobile.com/location-business-summit-usa/.
149 the Signal conference in Chicago in 2012: Signal: Chicago, http://www.federated
    media.net/events/ll/.
149 a location analysis company: JiWire, http://jiwire.com/audience.
149 “Where you are says”: David Staas (CEO, JiWire), “Using Location Patterns to Power
    Big Data on Mobile,” Signal Conference, September 11, 2012, Chicago, Illinois,
    http://link.brightcove.com/services/player/bcpid 1450672650001 ?bckey=AQ —
    ,AAAAFktgNgk~ ,QKA7V92zyumLLIZb3v45LGr2NPanaTlq &
    bclid=1826428698001&bctid=1843067500001.
149 “We cannot and never will receive”: Will Smith, correspondence to A1 Franken, March
    28, 2013, http://www.franken.senate.gov/files/docs/130328_Euclid.pdf.
150 to Senator Al Franken of Minnesota: “Sens. Franken, Blumenthal Introduce Bill to
    Protect Consumer Privacy on Mobile Devices” (press release), June 15, 2011, http://
    www.franken.senate.gov/?p=press_release&id=1587.
150 Euclid helps retailers to identify shoppers: Will Smith, correspondence to Al Franken,
    March 28, 2013.
150 But the truth is that location: Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye, Cesar A. Hidalgo, Michel
    Verelysen, and Vincent D. Blondel, “Unique in the Crowd: The Privacy Bounds of
    Human Mobility,” Scientific Reports 3, no. 1376 (March 2013).
[258]       NDIES

150 Researchers at Microsoft found: Adam Sadilek and John Krumm, “Far Out: Predict¬
    ing Long-Term Human Mobility,” Association for the Advancement of Artificial
    Intelligence, 2012, https://research.microsoff.com/en-us/um/people/jckrumm/Pub
    lications%202012/Sadilek-Krumm_Far-Out_AAAI-2012.pdf.
150 adding _nomap to the end of the name: “Greater Choice for Wireless Access Point
    Owners,” Google, Inc., Official Blog, November 14, 2011, http://googleblog.blogspot
    .com/2011/11/greater-choice-for-wireless-access.html.
151 Such bags are called “Faraday cages”: Geeta Dayal, “QuickStudy: Faraday Cages,”
    Computerworld, August 23, 2006, http://www.computerworld.eom/s/article
    /9002661/Faraday_cages?pageNumber=l.
151 Since then, Faraday cages: “Faraday Cages in Health Care,” TNO Prevention and
    Health, http://web.archive.Org/web/20060324100513/http://www.tno.nl/kwaliteit
    _van_leven/preventie_en_zorg/kwaliteit_in_de_zorg/faraday_cages_in_health_c
    /046.pdf.
151 When I told John Strauchs: John Strauchs, in discussion with author, March 5, 2013.
152 Tall and lanky, Adam: Adam Harvey, in discussion with author, April 19, 2013.
152 It would reduce the signal: Adam Harvey, in correspondence with author, August 12,
    2013.

11.1PTII6 OUT
153 its privacy policy states: Linkedln Corp., “Privacy Policy: Linkedln,” accessed May
    21, 2013, http://www.linkedin.com/legal/privacy-policy. Language has since
    changed.
153 Linkedln says: Doug Madey (corporate communications associate for Linkedln
    Corp.), in e-mail correspondence with Lauren Kirchner, September 12, 2013.
154 “They still could not stand to see”: Dan Ariely, Predictably Irrational: The Hidden
    Forces That Shape Our Decisions (New York: Harper Perennial, 2009), 150.
154 “They still had the same irrational”: Ibid., 147.
154 I consulted two experts: Author in discussion with Alex Bennert on February 26,
    2013, and Rhea Drysdale on March 11, 2013.
154 A website whose passwords had been hacked: Elinor Mills, “Linkedln Confirms Pass¬
    words Were ‘Compromised,’” CNET, June 6, 2012, http://news.cnet.com/8301-1009
    _3-57448465-83/linkedin-confirms-passwords-were-compromised/.
154 Linkedln said that after: Linkedln Corp., “Privacy Policy: Linkedln.”
155 “A public display of connections”: Judith Donath and Danah Boyd, “Public Displays
    of Connection,” BT Technology Journal 22, no. 4 (October 2004): 73, http://www.
    danah.org/papers/PublicDisplays.pdf.
155 Scientists have found that people: Nalini Ambady and Robert Rosenthal, “Thin Slices
    of Expressive Behavior as Predictors of Interpersonal Consequences: A Meta-
    Analysis,” Psychological Bulletin 111, no. 2 (1992): 256, http://ambadylab.stanford
    ,edu/pubs/1992Ambady.pdf.
155 Online photos are notoriously misleading: Lauren F. Sessions, “‘You Looked Better
    on MySpace’: Deception and Authenticity on Web 2.0,” First Monday 14, no. 7 (July
    6, 2009), http://firstmonday.Org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2539/2242#4a.
155 Donath . . . has done fascinating work: Judith S. Donath, “Identity and Deception
    in the Virtual Community,” in Communities in Cyberspace (New York: Routledge,
    1999), 27.
155 For example, consider the “femme fatale”: Ibid., 54.
155 “Potential rivals or mates need not”: Ibid., 30.
                                                                             NOTES   [259]

155 If an unknown person is a friend of my friend-. Donath and Boyd, “Public Displays of
    Connection,” 72.
155 But the pressure to create: Judith Donath, in discussion with author, April 4, 2013.
156 Todesco deleted her Facebook account during: Gaebriella Todesco, in discussion with
    author, December 7, 2011.
156    There was nothing to do but go on”: Gaebriella Todesco, in discussion with author,
      January 23, 2013.
156 Before a breakup: Gaebriella Todesco, e-mail to author, March 21, 2013.
156 In the fall of her senior year: Todesco, in discussion with author, December 7, 2011.
157 I realized that if I had been on Facebook”: Todesco, in discussion with author, January
    23, 2013.
158 when Sean Lane bought: Ellen Nakashima, “Feeling Betrayed, Facebook Users Force
    Site to Honor Their Privacy,” Washington Post, November 30, 2007, http://www
    .washingtonpost.eom/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/ll/29/AR2007112902503.html.
158 In 2009, Facebook agreed: Juan Carlos Perez, “Facebook Will Shut Down Beacon to
    Settle Lawsuit,’ IDG News Service, September 18, 2009, http://www.pcworld.com/
    article/172272/facebook_will_shut_down_beacon_to_settle_lawsuit.html.
158 Facebook revived it in 201F. Rob Pegoraro, “Facebook ‘Sponsored Stories’ Turn You
    into the Ad,” Washington Post, January 27, 2011, http://voices.washingtonpost.com
    /fasterforward/2011/01/facebook_sponsored_stories_tur.html.
158 Facebook agreed to pay $20 million: Dan Levine, “U.S. Judge Approves Facebook
    Privacy Settlement over Ads,” Reuters, August 26, 2013, http://www.reuters.com
      /article/2013/08/26/net-us-facebook-privacy-settlement-idUS
      BRE97P0VG20130826.
158 Facebook simply added new language: Jessica Guynn, “Facebook under Fire from
    Privacy Watchdogs over ‘Sponsored Stories’ Ads,” Los Angeles Times, September 4,
    2013.
158 Google has since joined the fray: Alexei Oreskovic, “Google Unveils Plans for User
    Names, Comments to Appear in Ads,” Reuters, October 14,2013, http://www.reuters
    ,com/article/2013/10/14/net-us-google-ads-idUSBRE99A0S720131014.
158 Facebook suddenly made changes to its privacy policy: Ruchi Sanghvi, “New Tools to
    Control Your Experience,” Facebook Blog, December 9, 2009, http://blog.facebook.
    com/blog.php?post=196629387130.
158 Outraged, I wrote a column: Julia Angwin, “How Facebook Is Making Friending
    Obsolete,” Wall Street Journal, December 15, 2009, http://online.wsj.com/article/
    SB126084637203791583.html.
158 Facebook later agreed to settle charges: Federal Trade Commission, “Facebook Set¬
    tles FTC Charges That It Deceived Consumers by Failing to Keep Privacy Promises,”
    November 29, 2011, http://www.ftc.gov/opa/2011/ll/privacysettlement.shtm.
159 7 dug around in Facebook’sprivacy settings: “Data Use Policy,” Facebook, last revised
    December 11, 2012, https://www.facebook.com/full_data_use_policy.
160 I learned that lesson the hard way: Julia Angwin, “How Are You? No, How Are You
    Really?” Wall Street Journal, June 16, 2009, http://online.wsj.com/article/SBl
    24510254756316521.html.
161 For the big data brokers: Catalog Choice, TrustedID, https://www.catalogchoice
    .org/.
162 For the lookup sites, I signed up for: Abine Inc., “DeleteMe—Protect Your Personal
    Data and Reputation Online,” accessed May 21, 2013, http://www.abine.com
      /deleteme/landing.php.
[2BD]       NOTES

162 I called Jim Adler: Jim Adler, in discussion with author, April 10, 2013.
162 When I contacted Abine: Sarah Downey, in discussion with author, April 12, 2013.
162 USA People Search doesn’t accept: USA People Search, “Privacy Policy Highlights,”
     May 7, 2013, http://www.usa-people-search.com/privacy.aspx.
162 “That’s one of the reasons why I’ve”: Sarah Downey, e-mail to author, May 13, 2013.
163 A spokeswoman for Catalog Choice said: Lyn Chitow Oakes (TrustedID Catalog Choice
     spokeswoman), e-mails with author, July 29, 2013.
163 I didn’t feel comfortable: Free Phone Tracer, http://www.freephonetracer.com/.
163 It stated: MyLife.com, Inc., “Public Profile FAQ’s,” accessed May 21, 2013, http://
     www.mylife.com/faq.pub.
164 It seemed particularly underhanded: PeopleSmart.com, “How We’re Different,”
     accessed October 4, 2013, http://www.peoplesmart.com/difference.
164 Its website describes the company as: Inflection LLC, “Careers,” accessed May 21,
     2013, http://inflection.com/careers/.
164 To his credit, the company’s: Matthew Monahan, e-mail to author, May 6, 2013.
164 One day later, he sent a detailed: Matthew Monahan, e-mail to author, May 7,
    2013.
164 “There’s no mal-intent here”: Matthew Monahan, in discussion with author, May
     14, 2013.
165 Intelius claimed to include ninety million cell phone numbers: M. Alex Johnson, “Cell
     Phone Directory Rings Alarm Bells,” NBC News, January 30, 2008, http://www.nbc
    news.com/id/22902400/.
165 A few months later, Intelius shut down: Suzanne Choney, “Company Shuts Down
    Cell Phone Directory,” NBC News, February 1, 2008, http://www.nbcnews.com/id
    /22956815/.
165 In 2012, Ancestry.com bought Archives.com: Inflection LLC, “Inflection Sells Archives
    .com to Ancestry.com Inc.,” PR Newswire, April 25, 2012, http://www.prnewswire
    .com/news-releases/inflection-sells-archivescom-to-ancestrycom-inc-148969015.
    html.
165 “I just feel like our work is not done”: Matthew Monahan, in discussion with author,
    May 14, 2013.

12. THE HALL OF MIRRORS
167 When Rayne Puertos started a new job: Rayne Puertos, in discussion with author,
    February 12,2013.
167 In 2013, there were 328: “The State of Data Collection on the Web,” 2013 Krux Cross
    Industry Study.
168 Ashley Hayes-Beaty was shocked: Julia Angwin, “The Web’s New Gold Mine: Your
    Secrets,” Wall Street Journal, July 30, 2010, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424
    052748703940904575395073512989404.html.
168 And Google accurately identified a dozen: Steve Stecklow, “On the Web, Children
    Face Intensive Tracking,” Wall Street Journal, September 17, 2010, http://online.wsj
    .com/article/SB10001424052748703904304575497903523187146.html.
168 In 2006, the New York Times: Michael Barbara and Tom Zeller Jr., “A Face Is Exposed
    for AOL Searcher No. 4417749,” New York Times, August 9, 2006, http://www
      .nytimes.com/2006/08/09/technology/09aol.html?_r=0&gwh=2CACC912D19D87B
      DFD3A39B96C429022.
168 In 2008, researchers at the University of Texas: Arvind Narayanan and Vitaly Shma-
                                                                          NOTES    [2B1]

     tikov, “Robust De-anonymization of Large Sparse Datasets,” Security and Privacy
    (2008): 111-25, http://www.cs.utexas.edu/~shmat/shmat_oak08netflix.pdf.
168 In 2012, my Wall Street Journal team: Jennifer Valentino-Devries and Jeremy Singer-
    Vine, “They Know What You’re Shopping For,” Wall Street Journal, December 7,
     2012, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014241278873247844045781431441327362
     14.html.
169 But Professor Ryan Calo of the University of Washington: M. Ryan Calo, “Digital
    Market Manipulation,” Research Paper No. 2013-27, University of Washington
     School of Law, August 15, 2013, http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfmJabstract
     _id=2309703.
170 In one experiment, researchers at Carnegie Mellon: Laura Brandimarte, Alessandro
    Acquisti, and George Loewenstein, "Misplaced Confidences: Privacy and the Con¬
    trol Paradox,” Social Psychological and Personality Science, August 9, 2012. http://
    spp.sagepub.com/content/early/2012/08/08/1948550612455931.abstract.
170 Calo says that market: Calo, “Digital Market Manipulation.”
170 Benjamin Reed Shiller, an economics: Benjamin Reed Shiller, “First Degree Price
    Discrimination Using Big Data” (Working Paper Series, Brandeis University,
    August 20, 2013), http://www.brandeis.edu/departments/economics/RePEc/brd/doc
    /Brandeis_WP58R.pdf.
170 Incognito mode is privacy protection: Google, Inc., “Incognito Mode (Browse in Pri¬
    vate),” google.com, accessed August 22, 2013, https://support.google.com/chrome
    /answer/95464?hl=en.
171 My next stop was the advertising industry’s: “Consumer Opt-Out,” Network Adver¬
    tising Initiative, http://www.networkadvertising.org/choices/.
171 Even then, the industry’s list: 2013 Krux Cross Industry Study.
171 The first, Adblock Plus: Adblock Plus, https://adblockplus.org/.
171 The second, NoScript: NoScript Firefox extension, Inform Action, Open Source Soft¬
    ware, noscript.net.
172 Google’s online advertising: Doubleclick by Google, accessed March 28, 2013, http://
    www.google.com/doubleclick/.
172 a company that boasts: “Data Drives Everything,” AddThis, accessed March 28, 2013,
    http://www.addthis.com/data.
172 ConvergeTrack, which describes: ConvergeDirect, accessed March 28, 2013, http://
    www.convergedirect.com/technology/convergetrack/.
172 Bazaarvoice, which says it: “Join the Bazaarvoice Network,” accessed March 28,
    2013, http://www.bazaarvoice.com/.
172 Coremetrics: “IBM Product Recommendations,” accessed March 28,2013, http://www
    -03.ibm.com/soffware/products/us/en/personalized-product-recommendations/.
172 I asked FreshDirect: Sarah Promisloff, e-mail to author, June 27, 2013.
173 Reading FreshDirect’s privacy policy: “Privacy Policy,” FreshDirect, LLC, accessed
    August 22, 2013, https://www.freshdirect.com/help/privacy_policy.jsp.
173 In 1995, Daniel Jaye: Dan Jaye, in discussion with author, May 6, 2010.
174 Engage was part of a conglomerate: Paul C. Judge, “David Wetherell: Internet Evan¬
    gelist,” BusinessWeek, October 25, 1999, http://www.businessweek.com/1999/99
    _43/b3652001.htm.
174 CMGI’s losses had reached $1 billion: Keith Regan, “Fallen Dot-Com Star CMGI
    Drops Stadium Deal,” E-Commerce Times, August 6, 2002, http://www.ecommerce
    times.com/story/commerce/18904.html.
[ttl]    NOTES

174 Meanwhile, Dan figured that: Dan Jaye, in discussion with author, May 6, 2010.
175 Soon, online tracking was: Kate Kaye, “Tacoda Buy Could Bolster AOL Relevance in
    Web Ad Arena,” Clickz, July 24, 2007, http://www.clickz.com/clickz/news/1712324
    /tacoda-buy-could-bolster-aols-relevance-web-ad-arena.
175 Google paid $3.1 billion: Paul R. La Monica, “Google to Buy Doubleclick for $3.1 Bil¬
    lion,” CNN Money, April 13, 2007, http://money.cnn.com/2007/04/13/technology
    /google_doubleclick/index.htm.
175 Microsoft paid $6 billion: Chris Isidore, “Microsoft Buys aQuantive for $6 Billion,
    Pays 85% Premium,” CNN Money, May 18, 2007, http://money.cnn.com/2007/05/18
    /technology/microsoft_aquantive/.
175 Online auction houses such: Lauren Bell, “New Online Data Company BlueKai
    Strives for Quality, Privacy,” Direct Marketing News, September 15, 2008, http://
    www.dmnews.com/new-online-data-company-bluekai-strives-for-quality-privacy
    /article/116668/.
175 Each day, BlueKai sells eighteen million: AdAge, “Custom Programs: BlueKai,” accessed
    October 5, 2013, http://brandedcontent.adage.com/adnetworkguidelO/network.php
     ?id=20.
175 for as little as a tenth of a cent apiece: Julia Angwin, “The Web’s New Gold Mine:
     Your Secrets,” Wall Street Journal, July 30, 2010, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100
    01424052748703940904575395073512989404.html.
175 Online-off-line matching is why Linda Twombly: Emily Steel, “A Web Pioneer Pro¬
    files Users by Name” Wall Street Journal, October 25, 2010, http://online.wsj.com
    /article/SB10001424052702304410504575560243259416072.html.
176 Dan worried that this development: Dan Jaye, in discussion with author, May 6, 2010.
176 “When you’re in the business of slinging": Ibid.
176 Google is said to be developing: Alistair Barr, “Google May Ditch ‘Cookies’ as Online
    Ad Tracker,” USA Today, September 17, 2013, http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech
    /2013/09/17/google-cookies-advertising/2823183/.
176 “If you don’t want anybody”: Adam Tanner, “The Web Cookie Is Dying. Here’s the
    Creepier Technology That Comes Next,” Forbes, June 17, 2013, http://www.forbes
    . com/sites/adamtanner/2013/06/ 17/the-web-cookie-is-dying-heres-the-creepier
    -technology-that-comes-next/.
176 A company called FaceFirst: FaceFirst Retail Brochure, FaceFirst, LLC.
177 A retail executive who requested anonymity: Chris Trlica, “Facial Recognition: A
    Game-Changing Technology for Retailers,” LP Magazine, May-June 2013, http://
    www.lpportal.com/feature-articles/item/2482-facial-recognition-a-game-changing
    -technology-for-retailers.html.
177 “Build a database of good customers”: FaceFirst Retail Brochure.
177 I wasn’t going to wear a baseball cap: “How to Make an Infrared Mask to Hide Your
    Face from Cameras,” WonderHowTo, posted by Amie, http://mods-n-hacks.won
    derhowto. com/how- to/make-infrared-mask-hide-your-face-from-cameras-201280/.
178 or an anti-drone hoodie: Adam Harvey, “Exhibition: Stealth Wear: New Designs for
    Counter Surveillance,” Primitive London, January 4, 2013, http://www.primitivelon
    don.co.uk/exhibition-adam-harvey-stealth-wear-new-designs-for-counter-surveil
    lance-presented-by-primitive-london-and-tank-magazine/.
178 So I called Ashkan Soltani: Ashkan Soltani, in discussion with author, March 29,
    2013.
179 Ashkan showed me the setting: For the nerds: Ashkan also showed me two small
    tweaks to make in my browser that involved bypassing a warning that said, “Chang-
                                                                           »DHS    [2B3]

    ing these advanced settings can be harmful to the stability, security, and perfor¬
    mance of this application.” Those tricks were: I enabled “Click_to_play,” which
    disables plugins until I choose to play them, and I set “network.http.sendReferer-
    Header = 0,” which strips referer headers when browsing the Internet, so that web¬
    sites I visit don’t know which website I just arrived from.
179 In 2009, an entrepreneur named: David Cancel, “The Future of Ghostery,” David
    Cancel (blog), January 19, 2010, http://davidcancel.com/the-future-of-ghostery/.
179 In 2010, he sold it to an advertising services: Adam DeMartino, “Better Advertising
    Acquires Ghostery,” The Evidon Blog, January 19, 2010, http://www.evidon.com
    /blog/better-advertising-acquires-ghostery.
180 one of the most comprehensive lists: There are some other crowd-sourced compre¬
    hensive lists—such as the EasyPrivacy list that can be added to AdblockPlus—-
    https://easylist-downloads.adblockplus.org/easyprivacy.txt. (As of October 5, 2013,
    the list included 8,376 items.)
180 of tracking technologies: Andy Kahl, in discussion with author, May 30, 2013.
180 Brian Kennish, an engineer at Google: Julia Angwin, “Wall Street Journal Privacy
    Series Inspires One Start-Up,” Wall Street Journal, Digits (blog), February 27, 2011,
    http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2011/02/27/wall-street-journal-privacy-series-inspires
    -one-start-up/.
181 So that evening, Kennish went home: Alexia Tsotsis, “Google Engineer Builds Face-
    book Disconnect,” TechCrunch, October 20, 2010, http://techcrunch.com/2010/10
    /20/google-facebook-disconnec/.
181 Within two weeks, his free software: Angwin, “One Start-Up.”
181 In December, he launched a free program: Alexia Tsotsis, “Former Googler
    Launches Disconnect, Browser Extension That Disables Third Party Data Track¬
    ing,” TechCrunch, December 13, 2010, http://techcrunch.com/2010/12/13/former
    -googler-launches-disconnect-browser-extension-that-disables-third-party-data
    -tracking/.
181 In October 2011, he raised $600,000: Rip Empson, “Disconnect: Ex-Googlers Raise
    Funding to Stop Google, Facebook & More from Tracking Your Data,” TechCrunch,
    March 22, 2012, http://techcrunch.com/2012/03/22/disconnect-me-raise/.
181 And they had a dashboard of statistics: Brian Kennish, in discussion with author,
    August 16, 2012.
182 “I think that might be why I’m into data”: Ibid.

13. LONELY CODES
185 First, I downloaded free encryption software: “The GNU Privacy Guard,” Free Soft¬
    ware Foundation, Inc., http://gnupg.org/.
185 a program called Enigmail: “A Simple Interface to OpenPGP Email Security,” The
    Enigmail Project, https://www.enigmail.net/home/index.php.
185 designed to run with: GnuPG, “GnuPG Frequently Asked Questions,” http://www
    .gnupg.org/faq/GnuPG-FAQ.html.
185 The Postbox support page said: Postbox, Inc., “Extending Postbox,” http://www.post
    box-inc.com/extensions.
185 The Enigmail support forums said: SourceForge, Inc., “PostBox 3.0.7 and Enigmail
    1.2.3 Freezing Problem” (forum), http://sourceforge.riet/p/enigmail/forum/support
    /thread/bfd56f75/?limit=25#ld58.
185 I had eagerly downloaded: “The CrytpoParty handbook,” Version: 2013-08-21, http://
    www.cryptoparty.in/documentation/handbook.
[2B4]    NOTES

186 Snowden apparently used the Lavabit address: Danny Yadron, “Snowden’s Email
    Service Shuts,” Wall Street Journal, Digits (blog), August 8, 2013, http://blogs.wsj
    .com/digits/2013/08/08/snowdens-email-service-shuts/; and “Snowden to Meet with
    Human Rights Groups in Moscow,” Novinvite.com, July 12, 2013, http://www
    .novinite.com/view_news.php?id=151966.
186 I posted my key “fingerprint”: Author’s website “Angwin GPG Key,” posted July 11,
    2013, http://juliaangwin.com/contact/ed06b6f6/.
187 “I really dislike using GPG”: Christopher Soghoian, in discussion with author, June 5,
    2013.
187 Robinson showed me: David Robinson, in discussion with author, June 6, 2013.
187 “I don’t trust my ability to use”: Karl Fogel, “Karl Fogel’s GPG Public Key,” November
    22, 2010, http://www.red-bean.com/kfogel/public-key.html.
187 In 2010, Immigration and Customs Enforcement investigators: Susan Stellin, “The
    Border Is a Back Door for U.S. Device Searches,” New York Times, September 9, 2013,
    http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/10/business/the-border-is-a-back-door-for-us
    -device-searches.html.
188 House sued the Department of Homeland Security: “U.S. Settles Lawsuit with Bradley
    Manning Supporter Who Had Laptop Seized at Airport,” ACLU.org (press release),
    https://www.aclu.org/free-speech/us-settles-lawsuit-bradley-manning-supporter
    -who-had-laptop-seized-airport.
188 Consider the story of Husain Abdulla: Vernon Silver, “Cyber Attacks on Activists
    Traced to FinFisher Spyware of Gamma,” Bloomberg.com, July 25,2012, http://www
    .bloomberg.com/news/2012-07-25/cyber-attacks-on-activists-traced-to-finfisher-
    spyware-of-gamma.html.
189 After months of painstaking examination: Nicole Perlroth, “Software Meant to Fight
    Crime Is Used to Spy on Dissidents,” New York Times, August 20, 2012, http://www
    .nytimes.com/2012/08/31/technology/finspy-software-is-tracking-political-dissi
    dents. html?ref=technology&_r=0.
189 Gamma told Bloomberg that: Vernon Silver, “Gamma Says No Spyware Sold to Bah¬
    rain; May Be Stolen Copy,” Bloomberg, July 27, 2012, http://www.bloomberg.com
    /news/2012-07-27/gamma-says-no-spyware-sold-to-bahrain-may-be-stolen-copy
    .html.
189 In October 2011, my colleague: Jennifer Valentino-DeVries, Julia Angwin, and Steve
    Stecklow, “Document Trove Exposes Surveillance Methods,” Wall Street Journal,
    November 19, 2011, http://online.wsj.eom/article/SB100014240529702036114045770
    44192607407780.html.
189 We published much of the literature online: “The Surveillance Catalog,” Wall Street
    Journal, updated February 7, 2012, http://projects.wsj.com/surveillance-catalog/.
189 The brochure for Gamma Group’s FinSpy: Remote Monitoring and Infection Solu¬
    tions, FinSpy (brochure), FinFisher, Gamma Group, The Surveillance Catalog,
    Wall Street Journal, http://projects.wsj.com/surveillance-catalog/documents/267841
    -merged-finspy/.
189 “FinSpy is a field-proven Remote Monitoring Solution”: “Remote Control System: Cyber
    Intelligence Made Easy,” HackingTeam, The Surveillance Catalog, Wall Street Jour¬
    nal, http://projects.wsj.com/surveillance-catalog/documents/267005-hacking-team
    -remote-control-system/#document/p3/a38816.
190 Jerry Lucas, the organizer of the Wiretapper’s Ball, told us: Valentino-Devries, Ang¬
    win, and Stecklow, “Document Trove Exposes Surveillance Methods.”
190 In June 2007, for instance, the FBI obtained: Declan McCullagh, “FBI Remotely
                                                                          NOTES   [265]

    Installs Spyware to Trace Bomb Threat,” CNET, July 18, 2007, http://news.cnet.com
    /8301-10784_3-9746451-7.html#!.
190 Judge Stephen Smith, the Texas magistrate: "In Re Warrant to Search a Target Com¬
    puter at Premises Unknown,” Case no. H-13-234M (S.D. Tex. 2013), http://files
    .cloudprivacy.net/Order%20denying%20warrant.MJ%20Smith.042213.pdf.
190 that have the capacity to pull in roughly 75 percent: Siobhan Gorman and Jennifer
    Valentino-Devries, “New Details Show Broader NSA Surveillance Reach,” Wall Street
    Journal, August 20, 2013, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142412788732410820
    4579022874091732470.html.
190 In a 2009 memo revealed by Edward Snowden: Eric Holder, “Minimization Proce¬
    dures Used by the National Security Agency in Connection with Acquisitions of
    Foreign Intelligence Information Pursuant to Section 702 of the Foreign Intelligence
    Surveillance Act of 1978, as Amended,” July 28, 2004, https://s3.amazonaws.com/s3
    .documentcloud.org/documents/716634/exhibit-b.pdf.
191 “I don’t trust any crypto in the public realm": William Binney, in discussion with
    author, March 18, 2012.
191 One night I met the three: William Binney, Thomas Drake, and Kirk Wiebe, in dis¬
    cussion with author, May 24, 2012.
191 Off-the-Record was created in 2004: Nikita Borisov, Ian Goldberg, and Eric Brewer,
    “Off-the-Record Communication, or, Why Not to Use PGP,” 2004, http://www
    .cypherpunks.ca/otr/otr-wpes.pdf; and Brian Whitley, “Students Develop Encryption
    for Instant Messaging,” Daily Californian, February 22, 2005, http://www.cypher
    punks.ca/otr/press/www.dailycal.org/article.php%3fid=17720.html.
191 Off-the-Record helps solve the problem: Borisov, Goldberg, and Brewer, “Off-the-
    Record Communication, or, Why Not to Use PGP.”
192 (Tails) operating system: “Documentation,” Tails, https://tails.boum.org/doc/index
    .en.html.
192 At his military court proceedings: Bradley Manning, “Bradley Manning’s Statement
    Taking Responsibility for Releasing Documents to WikiLeaks,” February 28, 2013,
    http://www.bradleymanning.org/news/bradley-mannings-statement-taking
    -responsibility-for-releasing-documents-to-wikileaks.
192 He was betrayed by a friend: Kevin Poulsen and Kim Zetter, “U.S. Intelligence Ana¬
    lyst Arrested in Wikileaks Video Probe,” Wired, Threat Level (blog), June 6, 2010,
    http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2010/06/leak/.
192 Government investigators later found traces: Eva Blum-Dumontet, “Bradley Man¬
    ning Legal Proceedings: Fact Sheet,” WikiLeaks Press, March 31, 2012, http://
    wikileaks-press.org/bradley-manning-legal-procedures-fact-sheet/.
192 that has any paid staff: “Core Tor People,” The Tor Project, https://www.torproject
    .org/about/corepeople.html.en.
192 Jabber is run by volunteers: “Notices,” Jabber, Inc., http://www.jabber.org/notices
     .html.
193 Off-the-Record is a volunteer project: Off-the-Record Messaging, “The OTR Devel¬
    opment Team,” http://www.cypherpunks.ca/otr/people.php.
193 It turned out he was: Evan Schoenberg, in discussion with author, November 25,
    2012.
193 When the antinuclear activist Phil Zimmermann: Phil Zimmermann, “Creator of
    PGP and Zfone: Background,” Philzimmermann.com (personal blog), http://www
    .philzimmermann.com/EN/background/index.html.
193 The software I was using: “The GNU Privacy Guard,” GnuPG, http://gnupg.org/.
[2GB]    ions
193 On March 9, 1993, Eric Hughes published: Eric Hughes, “A Cypherpunk’s Mani¬
    festo,” March 9, 1993, http://www.activism.net/cypherpunk/manifesto.html.
194 The U.S. Customs Service began investigating whether: Phil Zimmermann, “Testi¬
    mony of Philip R. Zimmermann to the Subcommittee on Science, Technology, and
    Space of the US Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation,”
    philzimmermann.com (personal blog), June 26,1996, http://www.philzimmermann
    .com/EN/testimony/.
194 In 1996, however, the government dropped: Phil Zimmermann, “Significant Moments
    in PGP’s History: Zimmermann Case Dropped” philzimmermann.com (personal
    blog), January 12, 1996, http://www.philzimmermann.com/EN/news/PRZ_case
    _dropped.html.
194 And in 1999, the United States dropped: Jeri Clausing, “White House Eases Export
    Controls on Encryption,” New York Times, September 17, 1999, http://www.nytimes
    .com/library/tech/99/09/biztech/articles/17encrypt.html.
194 It developed the “Clipper chip” to encrypt: John Markoff, “Technology; Wrestling
    over the Key to the Codes,” New York Times, May 9, 1993, http://www.nytimes.com
    /1993/05/09/business/technology-wrestling-over-the-key-to-the-codes.html.
194 copies of the encryption keys: Steven Levy, “Battle of the Clipper Chip,” New York
    Times, June 12, 1994, http://www.nytimes.com/1994/06/12/magazine/battle-of-the
    -clipper-chip.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm.
194 In 1994, Matt Blaze at AT&T Bell Labs: Matt Blaze, in discussion with author, May 8,
    2013.
194 “It is insufficient to protect ourselves”: Bruce Schneier, Applied Cryptology: Protocols,
    Algorithms, and Source Code in C (New York: Wiley, 1996).
194 The Cypherpunks built “remailers”: Steve Lohr, “Technology; Privacy on Internet
    Poses Legal Puzzle,” New York Times, April 19, 1999, http://www.nytimes.com/1999
    /04/19/business/technology-privacy-on-internet-poses-legal-puzzle.html.
194 the largest remailer: Peter H. Lewis, “Computer Jokes and Threats Ignite Debate on
    Anonymity,” New York Times, December 31, 1994, http://www.nytimes.com/1994
    /12/31 /us/computer-jokes -and-threats-ignite -debate -on-anonymity.html
    ?pagewanted=all8rsrc=pm.
194 shut down rather than comply with a court order: Dave Mandl, “Life After Penet:
    The Remailer Is Dead, Long Live the Remailer,” Village Voice, October 8, 1996,
    http://wfmu.org/~davem/docs/penet.html; and Peter H. Lewis, “Behind an Inter¬
    net Message Service’s Close,” New York Times, September 6, 1996, http://www
    . ny times, com/1996/09/06/business/behind-an-internet-message-service-s-close
    .html.
194 By 2000, Bruce Schneier issued a correction: Bruce Schneier, Secrets & Lies: Digital
    Security in a Networked World (New York: Wiley, 2000).
195 “aggressive, multipronged effort to break”: Nicole Perlroth, Jeff Larson, and Scott
    Shane, “N.S.A. Able to Foil Basic Safeguards of Privacy on Web,” New York Times,
    September 5, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/06/us/nsa-foils-much-internet
    -encryption.html.
195 “Trust the math”: Bruce Schneier, “NSA Surveillance: A Guide to Staying Secure,”
    Guardian, September 6, 2013, https://www.schneier.com/essay-450.html.
195 Julian Assange, a longtime Cypherpunk, transformed: Raffi Khatchadourian, “No
    Secrets: Julian Assange’s Mission for Total Transparency,” New Yorker, June 7, 2010,
    http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2010/06/07/100607fa_fact_khatchadourian
    ?currentPage=all.
                                                                           NOTES    [267]

195 Moxie Marlinspike in San Francisco built encryption apps: Moxie Marlinspike, in
    discussion with author, March 20, 2013.
195 Nathan Freitas and the Guardian Project: Nancy Scola, “The Guardian Project:
    Building Mobile Security for a Dangerous World,” Personal Democracy Plus, Tech
    President (blog), March 31, 2011, http://techpresident.com/blog-entry/guardian
    -project-building-mobile-security-dangerous-world.
195 The U.S. government funded some projects: Moody, Famiglietti & Andronico, The
    TOR Project, Inc. and Affiliate, Consolidated Financial Statements and Reports
    Required for Audits in Accordance with Government Auditing Standards and OMB
    Circular A-133, December 31, 2011, and 2010, https://www.torproject.org/about
    /findoc/2011-TorProject-Amended-FinaTReport.pdf.
195 while at the same time the Justice Department: Julia Angwin, “Secret Orders Target
    Email,” Wall Street Journal, October 9, 2011, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014
       24052970203476804576613284007315072.html?mod=WSJ_whattheyknow2011_
       LeftTopNews.
195 He sold PGP to Network Associates: Jamie Beckett, “New Company’s Fast Start / Net¬
    work Associates Buys Software Firm for $36 Million,” San Francisco Chronicle,
    December 2, 1997, http://www.sfgate.com/business/article/New-Company-s-Fast
    -Start-Network-Associates-2792220.php.
195 And in 2012, he joined with: Nicole Perlroth, “Security Pioneer Creates Service to
    Encrypt Phone Calls and Text Messages,” New York Times, Bits (blog), February 5,
    2013, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/02/05/security-pioneer-creates-service-to
    -encrypt-phone-calls-and-text-messages/.
196 cofounder Mike Janke told me: Mike Janke, in discussion with author, November 5,
    2012.
196 This meant passing key information: Jon Callas, in discussion with author, April 5,
    2013.

14. FIGHTING FEAR
 199 The American Academy of Pediatrics recommends: Daniel D. Broughton, “Keeping
     Kids Safe in Cyberspace,” AAP News, August 1, 2005, http://aapnews.aappublica
     tions.org/content/26/8/ll.full.
199 The FBI recommends that parents use: “A Parent’s Guide to Internet Safety,” Federal
     Bureau of Investigation Publications, http://www.fbi.gov/stats-services/publications
     /parent-guide.
200 The Department of Homeland Security suggests: Stop.Think.Connect. (pamphlet),
     Department of Homeland Security, http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/stc/stc-chat
     ting-with-kids-printable.pdf.
200 The rate of violent crime declined: “Table 1: Crime in the United States by Volume
     and Rate per 100,000 Inhabitants, 1990-2009,” Federal Bureau of Investigation,
     http://www2.fbi.gov/ucr/cius2009/data/table_01.html.
200 Murders are down 83 percent: CompStat Report Covering the Week 9/16/2013 Through
     9/22/2013, Police Department of the City of New York, http://www.nyc.gov/html
     /nypd/downloads/pdf/crime_statistics/cscity.pdf.
200 The city had the second-lowest: Anthony M. Destefano, “FBI Crime Stats Mixed for
     NYC,” Newsday, June 13, 2013, http://www.newsday.com/news/new-york/fbi-crime
     -stats-mixed-for-nyc-1.5479442; and Crime in the United States 2012, Federal Bureau
     of Investigation, http://www.fbi.gOv/about-us/cjis/ucr/crime-in-the-u.s/2012/crime
      -in-the-u.s.-2012.
[268]   ions
200 Sexual abuse of children plummeted: David Finkelhor and Lisa Jones, “Have Sexual
    Abuse and Physical Abuse Declined Since the 1990s?,” Crimes Against Children
    Research Center, November 2012, http://www.unh.edu/ccrc/pdf/CV267_Have
    %20SA%20%20PA%20Decline_FACT%20SHEET_ll-7-12.pdf.
200 Other studies show that bullying: David Finkelhor, “Trends in Bullying and Peer
    Victimization,” Crimes Against Children Research Center, January 2013, http://cola
    .unh.edu/sites/cola.unh.edu/files/CV280_Bullying_Peer_Victimization_Bulletin
    _l-23-13_with_toby_edits.pdf.
200 Teen suicide: “Teen Homicide, Suicide and Firearm Deaths,” Child Trends Data
    Bank, http://www.childtrends.org/?indicators=teen-homicide-suicide-and-firearm
    -deaths.
200 and teen pregnancy: “Teen Births,” Child Trends DataBank, http://childtrends.org
    /?indicators=teen-births.
201 “juvenoia”: David Finkelhor, “The Internet, Youth Safety and the Problem of
    ‘Juvenoia,’” Crimes Against Children Research Center, January 2011, http://www
    .unh.edu/ccrc/pdf/Juvenoia%20paper.pdf.
201 A landmark 1975 study: Mark R. Lepper and David Greene, “Turning Play into
    Work: Effects of Adult Surveillance and Extrinsic Rewards on Children’s Intrinsic
    Motivation,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 31, no. 3 (1975): 479-86,
    http://www.jwalkonline.org/docs/Grad%20Classes/Fall%2007/Org%20Psy/Cases
    /motivation%20articles/PERUSED/effects%20of%20surveillance.pdf.
202 it began threatening to delete our photos: David Lazarus, “Precious Photos Disap¬
    pear,” San Francisco Chronicle, February 2, 2005, http://www.sfgate.com/business
    /article/Precious-photos-disappear-2734149.php.
203 The law required websites to get parental permission: “Title XIII—Children’s Online
    Privacy Protection Act of 1998,” Federal Trade Commission, http://www.ftc.gov/ogc
    /coppal.htm.
203 In 2013, the law was updated: Anton Troianovski and Danny Yadron, “U.S. Expands
    Child Online Privacy Law to Cover Apps, Social Networks,” Wall Street Journal,
    December 19, 2012, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB100014241278873237772045781
    89430101877770.html.
203 In 2011, researchers led by Microsoft’s Danah Boyd: Danah Boyd, “Why Parents Help
    Children Violate Facebook’s 13+ Rule,” Apophenia (blog), November 1, 2011, http://
    www.zephoria.org/thoughts/archives/2011/ll/01/parents-survey-coppa.html.
204 The researchers concluded: Danah Boyd, Eszter Hargittai, Jason Schultz, and John
    Palfrey, “Why Parents Help Their Children Lie to Facebook About Age: Unin¬
    tended Consequences of the ‘Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act,’” First
    Monday 16, no. 11 (November 7, 2011), http://journals.uic.edu/ojs/index.php/fm
    /article/view/3850/3075.
204 The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974: “FERPA General Guidance
    for Parents,” U.S. Department of Education, http://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid
    /fpco/ferpa/parents.html.
204 send student data to an outside data storage center: Corrinne Lestch and Ben
    Chapman, “New York Parents Furious at Program, inBloom, That Compiles Pri¬
    vate Student Information for Companies That Contract with It to Create Teaching
    Tools,” New York Daily News, March 13, 2013, http://www.nydailynews.com/new
    -york/student-data-compiling-system-outrages-article-1.1287990; and “Our
    Vision: Personal Path, Common Ground,” inBloom, https://www.inbloom.org
    /our-vision.
                                                                            NOTES    [269]

204 “teachers take on the role of coaches”: Darrell M. West, “Using Technology to Person¬
    alize Learning and Assess Students in Real-Time,” Brookings Institution, October 6,
    2011, http://www.brookings.edU/~/media/research/files/papers/2011/10/06%20per
    sonalize%20learning%20west/1006_personalize_learning_west.pdf.
204 could start paying $2 to $5 per kid: Leonie Haimson, “NYC Parent Sounds Alarm on
    Student Privacy,” WNYC.org, July 23, 2013, http://www.wnyc.org/story/307074
    -what-you-need-know-about-inbloom-student-database/;    and    Adam      Gaber
    (inBloom spokesman), in correspondence with Lauren Kirchner, August 29, 2013.
204 “organizations conducting studies”: “FERPA General Guidance for Parents,” U.S.
     Department of Education, http://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/fpco/ferpa/parents
     .html.
204 InBloom, which is a nonprofit: Natasha Singer, “Deciding Who Sees Students’ Data,”
    New York Times, October 5, 2013, http://www.nytimes.com/2013/10/06/business
    /deciding-who-sees-students-data.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0.
205 eighteen-year-old Justin Carter of Texas, who was arrested: Doug Gross, “Teen in Jail
    for Months over ‘Sarcastic’ Facebook Threat,” CNN.com, July 3, 2013, http://edition
     .cnn.com/2013/07/02/tech/social-media/facebook-threat-carter/index.html;   and
     Jennifer Carter, “Release My Son Justin Carter—Being Prosecuted for a Facebook
     Comment,” Change.org, https://www.change.org/petitions/release-my-son-justin
      -carter-being-prosecuted-for-a-facebook-comment.
205 He was arrested and charged: Brandon Griggs, “Teen Jailed for Facebook ‘Joke’ Is
     Released,” CNN.com, July 12, 2013, http://www.cnn.com/2013/07/12/tech/social
     -media/facebook-jailed-teen/index.html.
205 an anonymous donor posted the $500,000 bail: Pulin Modi, “Statement from Justin’s
     Lawyer,” Change.org, July 12, 2013, https://www.change.org/petitions/release-my
     -son-justin-carter-being-prosecuted-for-a-facebook-comment.
205 In January 2012, two British tourists were detained: Richard Hartley-Parkinson,
     “ ‘I’m Going to Destroy America and Dig Up Marilyn Monroe’: British Pair Arrested
     in U.S. on Terror Charges over Twitter Jokes,” Daily Mail, January 31, 2012, http://
     www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2093796/Emily-Bunting-Leigh-Van-Bryan-UK
     -tourists-arrested-destroy-America-Twitter-jokes.html.
205 On September 9, 2009, Joe Lipari had: Julius Motal, “Charges Dropped over Face-
    book Apple Rant,” PC Magazine, June 28, 2011, http://www.pcmag.com/article2
     /0.2817,2387730,OO.asp.
205 They searched his house for explosives: Joe Lipari, in discussion with author, July 23,
    2013.
205 A 2012 survey of teens: Mary Madden, Amanda Lenhart, Sandra Cortesi, and Urs
    Gasser, “Teens and Mobile Apps Privacy,” Pew Research Center’s Internet & American
    Life Project, August 22, 2013, http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Teens-and
    -Mobile-Apps-Privacy.aspx.
205 The study also found that 70 percent: Amanda Lenhart, Mary Madden, Sandra Cor¬
    tesi, Urs Gasser, and Aaron Smith, “Where Teens Seek Online Privacy Advice,” Pew
    Research Center’s Internet 8c American Life Project, August 15, 2013, http://pewin
    ternet.org/Reports/2013/Where-Teens-Seek-Privacy-Advice.aspx.
206 according to interviews with 163 teens: Danah Boyd and Alice Marwick, “Social Pri¬
    vacy in Networked Publics: Teens’ Attitudes, Practices, and Strategies” (paper pre¬
    sented at Oxford Internet Institute’s “A Decade in Internet Time: Symposium on the
    Dynamics of the Internet and Society”), September 22, 2011, http://www.danah.org
    /papers/2011/SocialPrivacyPLSC-Draft.pdf.
209 the Ghostery app: Ghostery, Evidon, Inc., https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/ghostery
   ' /id472789016?mt=8.
209 Disconnect Kids: “Introducing Disconnect Kids!” Disconnect, https://www.discon
      nect.me/kids.

15. A1 U1FAIR1ESS DBCTRI1E
211 when black students in Greensboro, North Carolina: “The Greensboro Chronology,”
    International Civil Rights Center & Museum, http://www.sitinmovement.org/his
    tory/greensboro-chronology.asp.
212 In 1969, a chocolate-brown oil slick: “American’s Sewage System and the Price of
    Optimism,” Time, August 1, 1969, http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article
    /0,9171,901182, OO.html.
212 It was not the first time that debris: Jonathan H. Adler, “Fables of the Cuyahoga:
    Reconstructing a History of Environmental Protection,” Fordham Environmental
    Law Journal 14 (2003): 89-146.
212 The air is cleaner: “Highlights from the Clean Air Act 40th Anniversary Celebra¬
    tion,” United States Environmental Protection Agency, http://www.epa.gov/air/caa
    /40th_highlights.html.
212 The water is cleaner: Nancy Stoner, "Celebrate the 40th Anniversary of the Clean
    Water Act,” It’s Our Environment (blog), U.S. EPA, October 18, 2012, http://blog.epa
    .gov/blog/2012/10/cwa40/.
212 Endangered species have been saved: John R. Platt, “The Endangered Species Act at
    40: Forty Things Journalists Should Know,” Society of Environmental Journalists,
    July 15, 2013, http://www.sej.org/publications/sejournal-sul3/endangered-species
    -act-40.
212 Now there are more than forty: Michael Scott and James Owens, “2009 Year of the
    River,” Cleveland Plain Dealer, January 4, 2009, http://blog.cleveland.com/metro
    /2009/01/04CGRIVER.pdf.
212 even a few freshwater mussels: Michael Scott, “Freshwater Mussels Found in
    Cuyahoga River, Indicating Improved Water Quality,” Cleveland Plain Dealer,
    August 22, 2009, http://www.cleveland.com/science/index.ssf/2009/08/freshwater
    _mussels_found_in_cu.html.
213 To understand the links: Dennis Hirsch, in discussion with author, July 26, 2011.
213 as portrayed in Garrett Hardin’s: Garrett Hardin, “The Tragedy of the Commons,”
    Science 162, no. 3859 (December 13, 1968): 1423-48, http://www.sciencemag.org/
    content/162/3859/1243.full.
213 “The risk here is that eventually”: Dennis Hirsch, in discussion with author, July 26,
    2011.
214 This is the argument put forth: David Brin, The Transparent Society (New York: Basic
    Books, 1999).
214 Brin argues that: David Brin and Ben Goertzel, “David Brin on the Path to Positive
    Sousveillance,” h+, May 23, 2011, http://hplusmagazine.com/2011/05/23/david-brin
    -on-the-path-to-positive-sousveillance/.
214 a police officer who pepper-sprayed nonviolent: “Cop Who Pepper-Sprayed Students
    at Occupy Protest Wants Worker’s Compensation for ‘Psychiatric Injury,’ ” Associ¬
    ated Press, July 26, 2013, http://talkingpointsmemo.com/news/pepper-spray-cop
     -occupy-protest-wants-workers-compensation-for-psychiatric-injury.php.
214 In 2010, the actor George Clooney: “Our Story,” Satellite Sentinel Project, http://www
     .satsentinel.org/our-story.
                                                                           NOTES   [271]

214 In May 2013, Clooney: “Broken Agreement: Violations in the Demilitarized Border
    Zone by Sudan and South Sudan,” Satellite Sentinel Project, May 2013, http://www
    .satsentinel.org/sites/default/files/Broken_Agreement.pdf.
214 Snowden’s revelations of the intelligence agencies’': Barton Gellman and Greg Miller,
    “U.S. Spy Network’s Successes, Failures and Objectives Detailed in ‘Black Budget’
    Summary,” Washington Post, August 29, 2013, http://www.washingtonpost.com
     /world/national-security/black-budget-summary-details-us-spy-networks-suc-
     cesses-failures-and-objectives/2013/08/29/7e57bb78-10ab-lle3-8cdd-bcdc09410972
     _story.html.
214 an accurate count of the civilians killed in the Iraq: David Leigh, “Iraq War
    Logs Reveal 15,000 Previously Unlisted Civilian Deaths,” Guardian, October
     22,  2010,     http://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/oct/22/true-civilian-body
     -count-iraq.
214 and Afghanistan wars: David Leigh, “Afghanistan War Logs: Secret CIA Paramili¬
    taries’ Role in Civilian Deaths,” Guardian, July 25, 2010, http://www.theguardian
     .com/world/2010/jul/25/afghanistan-civilian-deaths-rules-engagement.
215 In 2013, Manning was sentenced to: Paul Lewis, “Bradley Manning Given 35-Year
     Prison Term for Passing Files to WikiLeaks,” Guardian, August 21, 2013, http://
     www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/21/bradley-manning-35-years-prison
     -wikileaks-sentence.
215 Snowden obtained temporary political asylum: Alec Luhn, Luke Harding, and Paul
     Lewis, “Edward Snowden Asylum: US ‘Disappointed’ by Russian Decision,”
     Guardian, August 1, 2013, http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/01/edward
     -snowden-asylum-us-disappointed.
215 In 2013, the Justice Department informed: Devlin Barrett, “U.S. Seized Phone Rec¬
     ords of AP Staff,” Wall Street Journal, May 13, 2013, http://online.wsj.com/article
     /SB10001424127887324715704578481461374133612.html.
215 “We regard this action”: Gary Pruitt (president and CEO of the Associated Press),
     “Updated: AP Responds to Latest DOJ Letter,” May 14, 2013, http://blog.ap.org/2013
    /05/13/ap-responds-to-intrusive-doj-seizure-of-journalists-phone-records/.
215 And the Department of Justice is pushing for: Scott Shane, “Prosecutors Press Sub¬
    poena for Times Reporter in Leak Case,” New York Times, August 26, 2013, http://
    www.nytimes.com/2013/08/27/us/prosecutors-press-subpoena-for-times-reporter
    -in-leak-case.html?_r=0.
215 Risen has said that he will go: Charlie Savage, “Court Tells Reporter to Testify in
    Case of Leaked C.I.A. Data,” New York Times, July 19, 2013, http://www.nytimes
    . com/2013/07/20/us/in-major-ruling-court-orders-times-reporter-to-testify.html
    ?pagewanted=all.
215 A few start-ups have popped up: Julia Angwin and Emily Steel, “Web’s Hot New
    Commodity: Privacy,” Wall Street Journal, February 28, 2011, http://online.wsj.com/
    article/SB10001424052748703529004576160764037920274.html.
215 the World Economic Forum declared: World Economic Forum, Personal Data: The
    Emergence of a New Asset Class (report), January 2011, http://www3.weforum.org
    /docs/WEF_ITTC_PersonalDataNewAsset_Report_2011.pdf.
216 An analysis by the Financial Times: Emily Steel, “Financial Worth of Data Comes In
    at Under a Penny a Piece,” Financial Times, June 12, 2013, http://www.ft.com/intl
    /cms/s/0/3cb056c6-d343-lle2-b3ff-00144feab7de.html?siteedition=intl#axzz
    2dglKkHpd.
216 In one experiment, Acquisti: Alessandro Acquisti, Leslie K. John, and George
[272]    NOTES

    Loewenstein, “What Is Privacy Worth?” Journal of Legal Studies 42, no. 2 (June 2013):
    249-74, http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/671754.
216 “What this tells us”: Alessandro Acquisti, in discussion with author, March 11,
     2011.
217 health: “Health Information Privacy,” U.S. Department of Health and Human Ser¬
    vices, http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/index.html.
217 finance: “Privacy Act Issues Under Gramm-Leach-Bliley,” Federal Deposit Insur¬
     ance Corporation, http://www.fdic.gov/consumers/consumer/alerts/glba.html.
217 children: Title XIII—Children’s Online Privacy Protection, http://www.ftc.gov/
     ogc/coppal.pdf.
217 government records: The Privacy Act of 1974, http://www.justice.gov/opcl/privstat
     .htm
217 The Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act: Title XIII.
217 Or consider the Health Insurance: “Health Information Privacy,” US DHHS.
217 It also prohibits the sale of: “Memo on Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc.” (memo), Center for
     Democracy & Technology, March 22, 2011, https://www.cdt.org/files/pdfs/20110324
     _SorrellvIMS.pdf.
217 Vermont tried to ban the sale of: Sorrell v. IMS Health Inc., 131 S. Ct. 2653, 180 L. Ed.
     2d 544 (June 23, 2011), http://www2.bloomberglaw.com/public/desktop/document
     /Sorrell_v_IMS_Health_Inc_131_S_Ct_2653_180_L_Ed_2d_544_2011_Court.
217 Or consider the Federal Privacy Act: Julia Angwin, “U.S. Terrorism Agency to Tap a
     Vast Database of Citizens,” Wall Street Journal, December 13, 2012, http://online.wsj
     .com/article/SB10001424127887324478304578171623040640006.html.
217 But, instead of seeking consent: “Privacy: Congress Should Consider Alternatives for
     Strengthening Protection of Personally Identifiable Information,” Government
     Accountability Office, June 18, 2008, http://www.gao.gov/assets/130/120411.html.
217 failed to prevent: Angwin, “U.S. Terrorism Agency to Tap a Vast Database of Citi¬
     zens.”
218 In 2009, Gulet Mohamed, a U.S. citizen: Gulet Mohamed v. Eric Holder, Robert Muel¬
    ler, Timothy Healy et al., Third Amended Complaint, August 29, 2013 (E.D. Va.); and
    Mark Mazzetti, “Detained American Says He Was Beaten in Kuwait,” New York
    Times, January 5, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/01/06/world/middleeast
    /06detain.html?_r=3&hp&.
218 Instead, the government argues that: Gulet Mohamed v. Eric Holder Jr. and Janet
    Napolitano, No. 11-1924, Consolidated Reply in Support of Motion to Dismiss and
    Opposition to Cross-Motion for Remand, January 2013.
218 Travelers who are denied boarding can: “DHS Traveler Redress Inquiry Program
    (DHS TRIP),” U.S. Department of Homeland Security, http://www.dhs.gov/dhs
    -trip.
218 However, the department is not required to offer: Latif et al. v. Holder et al., No. 11-
     35407, D.C. No. 3:10-cv-00750-BR, Opinion, http://aclu-or.org/sites/default/files/
     ACLU_OR_No_Fly_9th_Circuit.pdf.
218 Mohamed claims that by denying: Gulet Mohamed v. Eric Holder, Robert Mueller,
    Timothy Healy et al, Third Amended Complaint.
219 The European Union requires companies to provide: European Parliament, Council,
    “Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October
    1995 on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of Personal
    Data and on the Free Movement of Such Data,” http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ
    /LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31995L0046:en:NOT.
                                                                             NOTES    [2/3]

219 In 2011, Senators John McCain and John Kerry proposed: “S. 779—Commercial Pri¬
    vacy Bill of Rights Acts of 2011,” 112th Cong., April 12, 2011, http://www.opencon
    gress.org/bill/112-s799/text.
219 by both privacy advocates: “Consumer Groups Welcome Bipartisan Privacy Effort,
    But Warn Kerry-McCain Bill Insufficient to Protect Consumers’ Online Privacy,”
    Center for Digital Democracy, April 18, 2011, http://www.democraticmedia.org
      /consumer-groups-welcome-bipartisan-privacy-effort-warn-kerry-mccain-bill
      -insufficient-protect-consum.
219   and data brokers: “Senators Kerry and McCain Introduce Privacy Bill; Legislation
      Could Undercut Information Economy,” Direct Marketing Association, April 12,
      2011, http://www.the-dma.org/cgi/disppressrelease?article=1479-H-H-+.
219   and failed to make progress: “S. 779—Commercial Privacy Bill of Rights Acts of
      2011, Actions & Votes,” 112th Cong., April 12, 2011, http://www.opencongress.org
      /bill/112-s799/actions_votes.
219   In 2012, the Obama administration declared: “We Can’t Wait: Obama Administra¬
      tion Unveils Blueprint for a ‘Privacy Bill of Rights’ to Protect Consumers Online”
      (press release), White House Office of the Press Secretary, February 23, 2012, http://
      www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-ofiice/2012/02/23/we-can-t-wait-obama-adminis
      tration-unveils-blueprint-privacy-bill-rights.
219   One of the most successful methods: Fair Credit Reporting Act, http://www.ffc.gov/os
      /statutes/031224fcra.pdf.
219   says its scores are used to “evaluate": Natasha Singer, “Secret E-Scores Chart Con¬
      sumers’ Buying Power,” New York Times, August 18, 2012, http://www.nytimes.com
      /2012/08/19/business/electronic-scores-rank-consumers-by-potential-value.html
    ?pagewanted=all.
220 Federal Trade commissioner Julie Brill has advocated: Julie Brill, “Reclaim Your
    Name” (keynote address, 23rd Computers Freedom and Privacy Conference, Wash¬
    ington, D.C., June 26, 2013), http://www.ftc.gov/speeches/brill/130626computers
    freedom.pdf.
220 “whether we are too risky": Julie Brill, “Demanding Transparency from Data Bro¬
    kers,” Washington Post, August 15, 2013, http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions
    /demanding-transparency-from-data-brokers/2013/08/15/00609680-0382-lle3
    -9259-e2aafe5a5f84_story_l.html.
220 When it comes to government surveillance: A good analysis of government dragnets
    comes from Christopher Slobogin: Christopher Slobogin, “Government Dragnets”
    (Vanderbilt Public Law research paper number 10-37, July 14, 2010), http://ssrn.com
    /abstract=1640108.
220 We rejected airport body scanners: Mike M. Ahlers, “TSA Removing ‘Virtual Strip
    Search’ Body Scanners,” CNN.com, January 19, 2013, http://www.cnn.com/2013/01
    /18/travel/tsa-body-scanners/index.html.
220 We do not embed tracking microchips: “California Bans Forced RFID Tagging of
    Humans,” Government Technology, October 17, 2007, http://www.govtech.com/secu
    rity/California-Bans-Forced-RFID-Tagging-of.html?topic=l 17688.
.220 In 2013, Judge Shira Scheindlin: David Floyd, Lalit Clarkson, Deon Dennis, and
     David Ourlicht v. the City of New York, 08 Civ. 1034 (SAS) (S.D. N.Y. 2013), http://
     www.nyclu.org/files/releases/Floyd%20opinion.pdf.
221 In 1944, the Supreme Court ruled: Korematsu v. United States, 323 U.S. 214 (1944),
    http://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/323/214/case.html.
221 Every year, the Environmental Protection Agency publishes: Toxics Release Inventory
[2 74 ]   NOTES

    (TRI) Program, United States Environmental Protection Agency, http://www2.epa
    .gov/toxics-release-inventory-tri-program.
221 “Everybody wants to avoid being high”: Lisa Heinzerling, in discussion with author,
    March 15, 2013.
221 This is the essence of an argument raised: Slobogin, “Government Dragnets.”
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS




Nonfiction books are group projects that are marketed as the work of an
individual. This book, in particular, owes its existence to a veritable vil¬
lage of collaborators and coconspirators.
    The village, of course, starts with my family. My husband and chil¬
dren were gracious enough to participate in my privacy experiments and
patiently tolerated my round-the-clock work on this project. My parents,
my brother, and his fiancee swept in with crucial support at key moments
in the writing process. My in-laws provided unending love and support.
My definition of family also includes the women who have held my hand
through every part of this journey, and without whom I would be lost.
They would like to be known as Hedy Lamarr, Hildy Johnson, and George
Eliot. Blessings and love to all of my family.
    I also relied heavily on my family of coconspirators at the Wall Street
Journal, past and present, who joined me on this lengthy and improbable
reporting journey—of which the book is only one piece. Without Jenni¬
fer Valentino-DeVries, Ashkan Soltani, Emily Steel, Jesse Pesta, Jeremy
Singer-Vine, and Scott Thurm, none of this would have been possible.
Special thanks to Kevin Delaney, Rebecca Blumenstein, Mike Williams,
and Alix Freedman, who nourished my vision from the beginning.
    One of the most pleasant surprises of this journey was discovering a
welcoming community of academic researchers who had been working
[276 ]   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

for years to navigate this emerging digital terrain and who eagerly shared
their findings with me. I owe a lot to their collective body of work. In
particular, my deepest gratitude and thanks to Ryan Calo, Danielle Cit¬
ron, and Daniel Weitzner, who were my first readers and provided indis¬
pensable insights on my drafts. I am also in debt to Julie Brill, Paul Ohm,
Alessandro Acquisti, Susan Freiwald, Katherine Strandburg, Chris Hoof-
nagle, Rachel Levinson-Waldman, Christopher Slobogin, Gary Bruce, and
Lisa Sotto, whose work and guidance particularly influenced my thinking.
    I also received a warm welcome from the far-flung community of hack¬
ers around the world. Without their work, we would not know where our
data was going, nor would we have any tools to protect it. Among the
many who have guided my work and thinking are Ashkan Soltani, Dave
Campbell, Jacob Appelbaum, Brian Kennish, Jon Callas, Michael J. J.
Tiffany, Mike Perry, Christopher Soghoian, Dan Kaminsky, and Jonathan
Mayer. Special thanks to John Gilmore, who offered my first window into
this world so many years ago and whose story I still hope to tell in the
fullness that it deserves.
    I also was lucky that my publishing village was run by excellent lead¬
ers. My agent, Todd Shuster, was my savior on many fronts—but most
importantly by urging me to make the book more personal. The team at
Holt—Stephen Rubin, Paul Golob, Emi Ikkanda, Patricia Eisemann,
Maggie Richards, and Leslie Brandon—were insightful and encouraging.
I cannot sing the praises highly enough of my research assistants, Lauren
Kirchner, Courtney Schley, Neena Lall, and my fact-checker Ben Kalin.
They burned the midnight oil on far too many occasions and shared my
passion for accuracy.
   Finally, I would like to thank everybody who trusted me with their
life stories—most especially Bilal Ahmed, Sharon Gill, Yasir Afifi, and
Bill Binney. It is no small thing to entrust your narrative to another, and
I hope that I managed to paint honest and sensitive portraits.
 NDEX




Aaronson, Trevor, 61                        Alexander, Keith, 47-48
Abdulla, Husain, 188                        al-Qaeda, 47, 61
Abdulmutallab, Umar Farouk, 46, 48-49       AltaVista, 120, 174
Abine, 135, 137, 145, 162                   Al-Wefaq party, 189
Abrams, Martin, 15                          Amazon, 77-78, 102, 103, 109, 114, 130,
accountability, 219-20, 222-24                 134, 172
Accurint, 85, 88                            American Academy of Pediatrics, 199
Acquisti, Alessandro, 216                   American Business Information, 30
Acxiom, 30-32, 87-88, 161,175               American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU),
Adblock Plus, 171-72, 179                      104, 123, 144, 186
ADFGVX cipher, 143                          American Express, 132-33
Adium, 191-93                               American Revolution, 22-23
Adler, Jim, 162                             Americans for Democracy and Human
Adobe Reader, 98                                Rights, 188
AdThis, 172                                 Ancestry.com, 165
adversary, identifying, 66-67               Anderson, Nate, 10, 106-7
advertisers and ad-tracking, 1, 4, 14-15,   Anderson, Ross, 100
     22, 29-32,158, 167-82, 209-10, 223     Andreessen, Marc, 28, 118
  blocking,71, 170-72, 178-82,210           Android phones, 144, 146-48, 195
Afghanistan, 25, 214                        AnnualCreditReport.com, 89
Afifi, Yasir, 51-61, 63-64, 222, 224        anonymizing software, 133-34,146-47,
AgileBits, 107                                   211
Ahmed, Bilal, 1-3, 5, 19, 222, 224          Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty (1972), 43
airlines, 7-8, 28, 78, 93-94, 130-31.       anti-tracking software, 71
     See also travel                        antivirus software, 98-99
airport body scanners, 18, 54, 76-77,       antiwar protests, 214
    97, 220                                 “anxious awareness,” 41
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), 2                AOL, 31, 125, 168, 175
 [278 ]   INDEX

Appelbaum, Jacob, 115,140-41, 192, 195        Bin Laden (Bodansky), 112
Apple, 114-16, 148,172. See also specific     Binney, Bill, 21-22, 34-36, 190-91
     products                                 bitcoins, 137
Applied Cryptography (Schneier), 194          black budget, 214
Apuzzo, Matt, 48                              Blaze, Matt, 194
aQuantive, 31,175                             blogging software, 120
Arab-Americans, 5                             Bloomberg News, 189
Archives.com, 165                             Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina,
Ariely, Dan, 154                                     131
Aristotle Inc., 33                            BlueKai, 31, 175, 178-79
Arnold, Thelma, 168                           Bodansky, Yossef, 112
Arnold McGrath agency, 29                     Bok, Sissela, 130,131, 138
Asfour, Angelina, 52                          Bollinger, Lee, 59
Asher, Hank, 84-85                            Bonannee, Alci, 13
Assange, Julian, 107, 109, 192, 195           Bonneau, Joseph, 109
“Assassination Politics” (Bell), 138          Booz Allen, 186
Associated Press, 62, 215                     border searches, 24, 141,187-88
AT&T, 4, 26, 34, 142, 144, 149, 194, 216      Borisov, Nikita, 191
Australia, 5                                  Bormann, Gunter, 38-39
“Authorization for specified electronic       Boston Marathon bombers, 46-49
     surveillance” (October 4, 2001,          Boyd, Danah, 155, 203-4, 206
     Bush memo), 25                           Boyer, Amy, 7
Automated Targeting System (ATS), 92, 93      Boy Scouts of America, 60
automobiles, 4, 5. See also license plates;   Brewer, Eric, 191
     motor vehicle registries                 Brill, Julie, 220
AutoTrack, 85                                 Brin, David, 42-43, 214
Awlaki, Anwar al-, 48-49, 218                 Britain, 22-23, 99-100
                                              Broadwell, Paula, 66-67
Bahrain, 188-89                               Bruce, Gary, 39, 40
bail bondsmen, 84                             brute force attacks, 106-7
Baltimore Sun, 34-35                          Buchwald, Naomi Reice, 29
banking, 7, 101-3                             Bumpers, Dale, 30
Baptist Health South Florida, 13              burner phone, 78, 144-46, 151, 210
bathrooms, 10                                 Burney, Thomas, 15
Bauer, Babett, 41                             Bush, George W„ 25, 26, 77
Bazaarvoice, 172                              BusinessWeek, 174
BeenVerified.com, 86                          Buzz, 115-16
Bell, Jim, 138
BellSouth, 26                                 California Research Bureau, 44
Bennett, Richard D„ 35-36                     Callas, Jon, 132, 195-96
Bentham, Jeremy, 41                           CallerlD, 164
Bentsen, Lloyd, 30                            “call pairs,” 142
Beyonce, 90                                   Calo, Ryan, 15, 44, 169-70
Big Data (Mayer-Schonberger and               camera dragnets, 8-10
      Cukier), 53                             Cancel, David, 179-81
Bill of Rights, 35. See also Fourth           Capital One, 15, 31
     Amendment; freedom of association        Carter, Jimmy, 43
Bilton, Nick, 10                              Carter, Justin, 205
bin Laden, Osama, 113                         Catalog Choice, 161-63
                                                                           INDEX    [ 273 ]

Cato Institute, 49                             data buying and selling by, 4, 29-32
cell phone carriers, 4, 142, 144, 148-49.      data loss by, 13
      See also specific companies              data tracking and, 3-4, 28-31, 167-82
cell phones, 4, 8, 27, 53, 66, 73, 78, 98,     fairness test and, 223
      141-52,210, 223                          fake identity to evade, 74, 129-30,
   children and, 205                              136-37
   citizen surveillance with, 214              government and, 31, 34-35
   encryption and, 195-96                      trust and, 155
   evading dragnets, 144-52                  commercial privacy legislation, 219
   fake identity and, 128                    computers, 3-4, 13, 42, 98-99. See also
   removing batteries from, 78, 141               e-mail; IP address; passwords;
   reverse lookups and, 164-65                    Web browsers; websites; and specific
censorship, 77                                    companies, services, and software
census data, 5                                 compartmentalization and, 71
Center for Technology and Society              encryption and, 103-6
      (Berlin), 45                             malicious software and, 188-89
Central Intelligence Agency (CIA),             passwords and, 96-101
       11,61-62, 141, 144,215                  terrorism and, 46-47, 49
chaining, 25, 27                               threat models and, 66
Cheney, Dick, 25                             ConvergeTrack, 172
child pornographers, 137                     cookies, 29-31, 170-71, 173-76
child predators, 98                          copyrights, 11, 203
children, 65, 68, 70, 199-211                CoreLogic, 34
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act     Council on American-Islamic Relations
      (COPPA, 1998), 203-4, 217                   (CAIR), 58
Childs, J. R., 143                           court orders, 114-15, 142, 194
China, 6, 52, 119                            court records, 34, 164
“CIA’s ‘Grand Challenges’ with Big Data”     credit cards, 12-13, 15-16, 31, 49, 66, 94,
     (Hunt), 141                                  103, 131-38, 161
City College of New York, 62                   disposable number, 136-37
Clement, Edith Brown, 143                      fake identity and, 131-37
Clipper chip, 194                            credit reports, 12, 33, 76, 86, 89-90,
Clooney, George, 214                              219, 222
closed-circuit television (CCTV), 45-46      credit score, 89-91, 135, 219-20
cloud storage, 104-6                         crime, 6, 10, 44-46, 50, 137-38, 200-201
CMGI, 174                                    Crimes Against Children Research
Cobham company, 55                                Center, 200-201
codebooks, 183-85, 187, 191                  criminal records, 14
Cohen, Jared, 54                             CryptoParty handbook, 186
Cohen, Ross, 86                              Cuban missile crisis, 43
COINTELPRO, 6                                Cukier, Kenneth, 53
Cold War, 43, 50                             culture of fear, 19-20, 71, 77, 222
Commerce Department, 7                       customized content, 14-15
commercial dragnets, 4, 14-15. See also      Cuyahoga River, 212
     advertisers and ad-tracking; data       cyber-espionage companies, 189
     brokers; and specific companies and     cyber-stalking, 7
    services                                 Cypherpunks, 193-96
  blocking, 208-9                            Cypherpunk’s Manifesto, A (Hughes),
  children and, 208-9                             193
[2110]   INDEX

Dandia, Asad, 62-63                           Downey, Sarah, 162
dark data cycles, 33-34                       dragnets, 37-50
data auctions, 175, 178                         abuse of data gathered in, 4-6, 11-20
data audit, 53-54, 80-95                        accountability and transparency to
   credit scoring and, 89-91                       limit, 214-15, 218-24
   data brokers and, 84-89                      amount of information collected by, 95
   fake identity and, 129                       auditing commercial collectors of,
   Freestylers and, 81-84,116                      80-91,95
   government and, 91-95                        auditing government collectors of,
   travel and,81-82, 92-95                         91-95
data brokers, 4, 7, 17, 30-34                   buying back privacy to limit, 215-16
   auditing your data on, 84-89, 215,           cell phone location tracking and burner
      219-20,223                                   to evade, 140-52
   government and, 27, 33-34, 95                commercial, and accountability, 219-20
   health insurers and, 131                     commercial, and advertising, 1, 4, 6,
   opt-outs and, 161-66, 210-11                    14-15, 22, 28-33, 167-82, 209-10
   regulation of, 86, 219-20, 223               commercial data brokers, opting out
data exchanges, 33                                 and,161-66
Dataium service, 4                              computer security vs., 98-99
Data Liberation Front, 81-82                    crime prevention and, 43-46
Datalogix, 88, 162-63                           encrypted cloud service and, 104-6
DataLossDB website, 13                          encryption to evade, 183-99
data pollution strategy, 74, 127-39             fake identity to evade, 127-39
data-scoring business, 90-91                    fighting for privacy rights vs., 211-24
data storage, 3, 204                            Fourth Amendment loopholes and,
dating profiles, 129                               23-28
Davis, Ed, 49                                   freedom of association limited by, 51-64
Debt (Graeber), 138-39                          Gmail alternatives to evade, 121-26
Defense Department, 34                          Google search alternatives to evade,
DeleteMe, 162                                      113-21
Democratic Party, 30                            government, 34-36, 190-91, 194-95
Demographics Inc., 30                           government abuse of, 51-64, 112-15,
Diceware, 109-10                                  218-24
Digg, 181                                       government access to commercial,
direct marketers, 30, 86                          33-34, 95
Direct Marketing Association, 17                growth of, and loss of privacy, 1-12,
Discipline and Punish (Foucault), 41               19-20
Disconnect, 180-82                              hall of mirrors and, 14-15, 167
Disconnect Kids, 209                            history of, 21-36
Discover card, 16, 31                           individual democratized, 33
dissidents, 77-78                               Internet providers and, 113-15
document shredding, 103                         online ad-tracking and blocking, 167-82
Docusearch, 7                                   online-off-line matching and, 175-76
domestic spying, 24-27, 32, 34, 77, 121-22,     passwords as defense vs„ 96-97, 99-104,
     190-91                                        106-11
Donath, Judith, 155-56                          privacy laws to limit, 217-24
dot-com bubble, 22, 29, 174                     protecting children from, 199-209, 217
Doubleclick, 29, 31, 172, 175, 178              psychological impact of, 41-44
Douglas, William O., 60                         repressive power of, 19, 41-42
                                                                             INDEX    [281]

  social media and opting out to evade,        Enigmail, 185
    153-61                                     entropy, 107-8
  Stasi, vs. modern, 37-41                     environmental pollution, 212-13, 220-21,
  terrorism prevention and, 46-51                   223-24
   threat models and defense vs., 65-79        Environmental Protection Agency, 220-21
   types of, 32-33                             Epsilon, 86-87, 163
Drake, Thomas, 35-36, 191                      Equifax, 17, 89
driver’s license, 17, 31, 71-72, 161, 163      Espionage Act (1917), 35, 68, 215
drones, 4, 9-10, 33                            Euclid, 150
Dropbox, 108                                   European Commission, 32
Drug Enforcement Administration, 85            European Court of Justice, 93
DuckDuckGo, 117-20, 147, 209                   European Union, 82-83, 86, 93-94, 219
due process, 18, 219                           Evidon,179-80
Duncan, Bobbie, 10                             Experian, 86, 89, 161
                                               external hard drive, 103
East Germany, 37-41, 50
eBay, 31                                       Facebook, 10-11, 32, 39, 51, 62, 90, 114-15,
eBureau, 90-91, 219-20                               167, 169, 180-81, 202, 204-6, 210, 223
Eckenwiler, Mark, 72                              Activity Log, 82
Egan, Erin, 169                                   auditing your data on, 81-83
E-gold, 137                                       Beacon service, 158
eHarmony, 107                                     opting out of, 155-61
elderly, 16-17                                    Sponsored Stories, 158
Electronic Communications Privacy Act          Facebook Disconnect, 181
      (1986), 114-15, 124                      FaceFirst, 176-77
Electronic Frontier Foundation, 104            facial recognition scanners, 4, 17-18, 152,
e-mail, 4, 6, 11, 65, 101-2, 114-16, 121-26,         176-78
      134-35                                   Fair Credit Reporting Act (1970), 89,
   alternates for privacy on, 121-26                 219-20
   children and, 200, 202                      Fairless, Alan, 105-6
   contact data and, 95, 116                   fake identity, 72, 127-39, 144, 145, 196,
   encryption and, 72, 124, 183-98, 210              208,210,211
   fake identity and, 78, 134, 208             Family Educational Rights and Privacy
   government access to, 25, 47, 66, 125-26          Act (FERPA, 1974), 203
   passwords and, 101-2                        Faraday, Michael, 151
   privacy laws and, 23, 114-15                Faraday cages, 151-52, 178
   traffic analysis and, 74                    Farrington, David, 45
employer, 7, 8, 95                             Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),
encryption, 34, 72, 77, 98, 104-6, 124-26,           6, 25, 27-28, 32, 35, 47-49, 51, 53,
      132,194,210-11                                 55-61, 66-67, 90, 92, 112-13, 134,
   children and, 208                                 141, 190, 192, 199-200,218
   e-mail and, 72, 124, 183-98, 210            federal government, 22, 27. See also
   NSA and, 77, 190-91, 194-95, 211                  specific agencies and laws
  travel and, 188                                 auditing your data and, 91-95
encryption keys, 185-90, 195-97                   Cypherpunks and,194-95
Enemies Within (Apuzzo and Goldman),              e-mails and, 47
     48                                           fighting unfair surveillance by, 218-24
energy usage sensors, 5, 53, 69                  Internet traffic and, 190
Engage Technologies, 173-74                      watch lists and, 218-19
[202]    INDEX

Federal Privacy Act, 217                   Gass, John, 17, 18
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), 12, 13,    GenealogyArchives.com, 165
      17,90, 116, 158,220                  Geoweb Summit, 149
Feinstein, Dianne, 26                      German Military Ciphers from February to
Fesabeelillah Services of NYC (FSNYC),           November 1918 (Childs), 143
      62                                   Germany, 143
Fight Club (film), 205                       Nazi, 5, 36, 52
file-sharing networks, 11                  Ghostery, 179-82, 208-9
financial manipulation, 6, 15-17           Gill, Sharon, 1-3, 5, 19, 222, 224
Financial Times, 216                       Giorgio, Ed, 97
fingerprinting, 176                        Gmail, 66, 81, 103-4, 116, 121-26, 128, 203
Finkelhor, David, 201                      GMRS (General Mobile Radio Service),
FinSpy, 189-90                                   191
Firefox, 133-34,171-72, 179                GNU Privacy Guard (GPG), 185-87,
Firm, The (Bruce), 39                            186-87, 193
First Amendment, 52, 58, 59, 92, 113,      Goldberg, Ian, 191, 193
      114,217                              Goldberg, Jeffrey, 107
Flash, 171                                 Goldman, Adam, 48
Florida Department of Motor Vehicles,      Gonzalez, Tony, 13
      31,85                                GoodHire.com, 165
Fogel, Karl, 187                           Google, 5, 10, 14-15, 31-34, 38, 51, 54,
Forbes, 137                                      68, 75, 150, 158, 172, 175-76, 178,
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act            180-81,202,210, 223
      (1978, 2008), 26                       auditing your data on, 80-82
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court,     surveillance problems and, 113-26,
      25-26,34, 115                              147-48
Foreign Policy, 66                         Google+, 202
ForeignPolicy.com, 135                     Google Buzz, 115-16
Fort Hood shooting, 46, 48-49              Google Chrome, 146, 170—71
Foucault, Michel, 41                       Google Dashboard, 81
Fourteenth Amendment, 52, 58               Google Drive, 81
Fourth Amendment, 23-24                    Google Glass, 5, 10, 33
France, 5, 143                             Google Maps, 118
Franken, Al, 150                           Google News, 118
freedom of association, 42-43, 51-65, 71   Google Street View, 1, 116, 148
Freedom of Information Act (1966), 92      Google Web History, 81-82
freedom of speech, 52, 59                  Gorman, Siobhan, 190
FreePhoneTracer, 163                       government. See federal government; state
free software movement, 76                      and local governments; and specific
Freestylers, 81-83, 223                         agencies
Freitas, Nathan, 195                       GPS tracking, 55, 58-61, 63, 148
FreshDirect, 172-73, 182                   Graeber, David, 138-39
Frizzell, Trude, 16                        Graham, Robert, 107
Furniture.com, 174                         Greene, David, 201-2
fusion centers, 27                         Griffin, Mike, 84
                                           Guardian, 107, 195
gag orders, 115, 125                       Guardian Project, 146, 147, 195
Gamma Group, 189-90                        Gupta, Vinod, 30
Garrett, Deborra, 112-13                   Guthrie, Woody, 207
                                                                          INDEX   [283]

hackers, 1-3, 6, 99, 106-7                   identity theft (impersonation), 6, 12-13,
Hadayet, Hesham Mohamed, 46                        17-18, 103, 137
Hall of Mirrors, 6, 14-15, 167-82, 204       IMEI (International Mobile Equipment
Hancock, Jeff, 129                                 Identifier), 98
Hardin, Garrett, 213                         Immersion, 121
Harlan, John Marshall, 52                    Immigration and Customs Enforcement,
Harper, Jim, 49                                    187-88
Harriton High School, 9                      Imperva, 99
Harvey, Adam, 152, 178                       inBloom, 204
Hasan, Nidal Malik, 46, 48-49                indiscriminate tracking, 67-68, 70-71, 98
Hasbrouck, Edward, 92-94                     Inflection, 164
Hashcat, 106                                 Infogroup, 30, 88
hashing, 106-7                               informants, 37-39, 61-63,192
Hayden, Michael, 24-25, 34                   Information Protection Agency, proposed,
Hayes-Beaty, Ashley, 168                           220
Health Insurance Portability and             instant messages, 74-75, 78
      Accountability Act (1996), 217            encryption and, 191-93, 210
Heinzerling, Lisa, 221                       Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Hempel, Leon, 45                                   Engineers, 100
Hezbollah, 144                               insurers, 5, 49, 84
Highland Capital, 181                        Intelius, 32, 89, 162, 164-65
“High Terrorist Lactor” list, 85             Interactive Advertising Bureau, 31
Hill, Kashmir, 137                           Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 13, 32, 138
Hilton, Paris, 90                            International Air Transport Association,
Hinman, Donald, 30                                 130-31
Hirsch, Dennis, 213                          Internet Explorer, 28-29, 170
Holmes, Harlo, 146                           iPad, 209
home address, 7-10, 69, 70, 78, 95,133-34,   IP address, 66-67, 117, 125, 133
      161, 175                               iPhone, 69, 116, 132, 144, 146-47, 209
Home Depot, 16                                  encryption and, 132, 196-98
Homeland Security Department (DHS),          Iran, 52
      5, 27-28, 34, 97, 188, 200, 218        Iraq, 214
  auditing your data and, 92-93              Irish Data Protection Commission, 82-83
Hoover, J. Edgar, 6                          Isaac, Carrie, 15
Horowitz, Scott, 8                           ISS World (Wiretapper’s Ball), 189-90
hotels, 67, 78, 94, 102-3
House, David, 188                            Jabber, 191-93
How to Be Invisible (Luna), 70               Janke, Mike, 196
HTTPS Everywhere, 103, 104                   Japan,143-44
Hudson, Dave, 2                              Japanese-Americans, internment of, 5, 221
Hughes, Eric, 193                            Jasper, Dane, 115
Hunt, Ira “Gus,” 141                         JavaScript, 98, 171-72, 178, 179
Hushmail, 122, 125                           “JayClay,” 54
                                             Jaye, Daniel, 173-76
I-Behavior, 163                              Jentzsch, Bernd, 40
iberation technology, 195                    Jews, 5, 52, 63-64
IBM Coremetrics, 172                         JiWire, 149
Ibrahim, Khaled, 54-55, 57, 60-61, 63, 224   Johansson, Jesper, 101
Identity.com, 165                            Jonas, Jeff, 49
[IU]      INDEX

journalists, 68, 85, 94-95, 140-41, 159,      Location Business Summit USA, 149
      188-89, 192, 195, 215                   Location Intelligence, 149
Justice Department, 28-29, 72, 80, 114,       location tracking, 1-8, 16, 65, 72, 149-52,
      195,215                                      205
                                                limiting, 65, 72, 150-52
Kaczynski, Theodore J„ 67                     lookup business, 86, 162-65
Kahl, Andy, 180                               Los Angeles International Airport (LAX),
Kanaan, Jennifer, 56-57, 60                        46
Kant, Immanuel, 129-30                        Lowe’s, 16
KBM Group, 163                                LP Magazine, 177
Kelley, Jill, 66                              Lucas, Jerry, 190
Kennedy, John F„ 43                           Luna, J. J., 70
Kennish, Brian, 180-82, 209                   Lycos, 174
Kerry, John, 219
keystroke capturing software, 72, 189         Maas, Jenna, 168
KGB, 36                                       MAC (media access control), 150
King, Martin Luther, Jr., 6                   mail, postal, 72, 78, 114
Kiriakou, John, 11                            malicious software, 188-91, 195
Klein, Mark, 26                               Manning, Bradley, 188, 192, 214-15
Klout, 135                                    marketers, 6, 30, 32-33, 91
Kodak Gallery, 202                            market manipulation, 16, 170
Korrelate, 176                                Marlinspike, Moxie, 147,195
Kramerbooks & Afterwords, 113                 Marshall, Bruce, 110
Krux Digital, 168                             Marshall, Thurgood, 60
Kuneva, Meglena, 32                           Marwick, Alice, 206
                                              MaskMe, 135-36, 145
Lamo, Adrian, 192                             Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Lane, Sean, 158                                    121, 150
laptops, 9, 98, 103                           Massachusetts Registry of Motor Vehicles,
Lavabit, 122-23, 125-26,186                       17-18
law enforcement, 7, 32, 106, 112-15, 190.     “mass production of bias,” 15
      See also police; and specific federal   MATRIX program, 85
      agencies                                Mayer-Schonberger, Viktor, 53
Lepper, Mark R., 201-2                        McCain, John, 219
Levin, Joshua, 9                              McGrath, Pat, 29
Levison, Ladar, 125-26                        medical data, 1-4, 12, 217
Levy, Josh, 86                                Memari, Kaveh, 149
Lewinsky, Monica, 113                         metadata, 23-24, 26-27, 121-22,
LexisNexis, 33-34, 85, 88, 162, 163               146-47
   Accurint Person Report, 88                 “method of loci,” 97
   PeopleWise service, 85                     Microsoft, 28-29, 31, 34, 98, 101, 114, 150,
Liberty Reserve, 137                              175, 203-4, 206
libraries, 112-14, 134                        Microsoft Outlook, 98, 134
license plates, 4, 7, 27, 71, 84, 223         Mijangos, Luis, 10
Life of Brian (film), 206                     Mohamed, Gulet, 218-20
Linkedln, 38, 40, 107, 129, 153-56            Monahan, Brian, 164
Lipari, Joe, 205                              Monahan, Matthew, 164-65
Little Snitch, 104                            money launderers, 137
Lo, Steve, 7                                  Morgan, Ted, 148
                                                                          INDEX   [285]

mortgage data, 17, 33-34, 175               nuclear weapons, 43, 212
motor vehicle registries, 32-33, 175        nude images, 10,42
Mozilla, 124
Mozy, 105                                   Obama, Barack, 12, 14, 27, 33, 48, 68, 142,
mud-puddle test, 74, 102, 106, 122, 123           145,214-15
Mueller, Robert, 90                         Obama, Michelle, 90
Mugshots.com, 161                           Oberman, Ethan, 104-5
Murphy, Frank, 221                          Ofcom, 99-100
Muslims, 48, 61-63, 92, 223                 OFF Pocket, 152
Muslims Giving Back, 62                     Off-the-Record Messaging, 191-93, 196
mutual surveillance, 43, 50, 215            Olsen, Matthew, 49
MyLife.com, 163                             Omniture, 179
MySpace, 68, 98, 157, 190                   Omnivore’s Dilemma, The (Pollan), 73
                                            One Nation, Under Surveillance (Royce),
Names Database, 119                              70
Napolitano, Janet, 97                       1 Password, 102-4, 107, 111, 172, 208
National Academy of Sciences, 49            online “black markets,” 137
National Association for the                online-off-line matching, 175-76
     Advancement of Colored People          online reputation, bulletproofing, 68
     (NAACP), 52                            Open Security Foundation, 13
National Change of Address database, 31     OpenTable, 81, 128, 134
National Counterterrorism Center,           “Operational Case Jentzsch,” 40
     28, 49, 217                            Operation High-Rise, 47
National Security Agency (NSA), 1,4, 6,     OPK (Operative Personenkontrolle), 39
     21, 24-27, 32, 34-36, 47-48, 60, 77,   Oppenheim, Melissa, 33
     110, 121-22, 144, 214, 221, 223        opting out, 153-66, 211, 219
  auditing your data on, 91                 Otis, James, Jr., 23
  encryption and, 190-91, 194-95, 211       Oulasvirta, Antti, 42
  fairness test and, 223                    Overstock.com, 158
negative rights, 59
NeoMail, 122                                “Panopticon” (Bentham), 41
Netflix, 168, 170                           Party, Boston T. See Royce, Kenneth W.
Netherlands, 5                              passports, 8, 103
Netscape Navigator, 28-29, 118              password-management software, 97,
Network Associates, 195                          101-3, 105-7
New Digital Age, The (Schmidt and           “Password Memorability and Security”
     Cohen), 54                                  (IEEE), 100
New Hampshire Supreme Court, 7              PasswordResearch.com, 110
New Yorker, 97                              passwords, 96-111, 125, 154, 194, 208, 210,
New York Police Department (NYPD),               211
     48, 61-63, 205, 220, 223                 children and, 208
New York Times, 10, 25-26, 59, 130, 168,      creating strong, 100-101, 107-11
     175,215                                  mud-puddle test, 74
Nielsen Company, 2-4                          two-factor authentication, 103
Nigeria, 48                                 PatientsLikeMe.com, 1-3, 19, 19, 224
no-fly lists, 5, 18, 218-19                 Patriot Act, 47
Norway, 5                                   pay-for-performance principle, 76, 101-2,
NoScript, 171-72, 178, 179, 208                  105, 124, 161
Noyes, Andrew, 11                           Pearl Harbor attacks, 143
[m]       INDEX

Peck, Amory, 113                               privacy software, 146-47, 209
PeopleSmart.com, 163-65                        private investigators, 70, 84
Perkins Coie law firm, 80                      Pruitt, Gary, 215
Permissus, 174                                 publicity test, 130-31,221-23
Perry, Edward, 17                              public records, 85, 164, 165
Perry, Mike, 77-79, 146                        public space, 23
PersonicX database, 87                         Puertos, Rayne, 167, 169
Petraeus, David, 11, 66-67                     Puppy Linux, 70
Phoenix Suns basketball team, 8                PYCO, 91
phone calls, 4, 8, 25-27, 47, 74-75, 215.
      See also cell phones                     racial, ethnic, and religious profiling,
   international records, 25, 27                    5, 14-15, 48, 61-63, 92, 220-21, 223
phone number, 95, 136, 145, 161                Rahman, Shamiur, 62
photos, 5, 202-3                               random number generators, 110
Picasa, 81                                     Rapleaf, 175-76
PNR (Passenger Name Records), 93-94            Reagan, Ronald, 24, 33
Poland, 5                                      real-time communications, 75, 142
police, 4, 6, 8, 17-18, 27, 32, 75, 85, 142,   RecordedFuture.com, 135
      223                                      Reddit.com, 54, 55, 61
political campaigns, 6, 30-31, 33, 175-76      red flags, 77, 190-91
political websites, 53-54                      RedPhone, 147, 195
Pollan, Michael, 73                            Rehnquist, William H., 60
pornography, 11, 171                           Reid, Cate, 168
Postbox, 124, 185, 186                         Reid, Richard Colvin 46
Precision Market Insights, 8,149               Reinhold, Arnold, 109-10
Prendergast, John, 214                         remailers, 194
prepaid debit cards, 136                       Remote Monitoring, 189-90
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), 193, 195-96         Renew, 149
price manipulation, 15-16, 130-31, 170         repression, 36, 37, 41, 50, 52, 77, 126
PRISM program, 26, 47                          Republican Party, 175
privacy. See also dragnets                     restaurant reservations, 128, 130,
   changing conversation about, 211                  134-35
   children and, 69, 199-211                   reverse phone numbers, 7, 163, 164-65
   Cypherpunks and, 193-94                     RFID chips, 8, 103
   data audit for, 80-95                       Risen, James, 215
   economics of, 216                           Riseup, 123-26
   environmental pollution and, 212-13         Robbins, Blake, 8-9
   first steps to protect, 66-77               Robinson, Benjamin, 7-8
   loss of, 3, 19-20, 42, 65                   Robinson, David, 187
   metadata and, 23-24, 26-27                  rogue employees, 7-8
   mud-puddle test and, 74                     Romney, Mitt, 14
   paying to protect, 76, 216                  Rose, Charlie, 48
   public space and, 23, 78                    Rossman, Gregg, 8
   security vs., 66, 97-98                     Rothenberg, Randall, 31-32
   Third-Party Doctrine and, 23                Royce, Kenneth W. (“Boston T. Party”),
   Web search engines and, 119-20                  70
Privacy Act (1974), 91, 92                     RSA firm, 6
privacy laws, 203-5, 217-24                    Rutgers University, 62
   European, 82-83, 93-94, 219                 Rwanda, 5
                                                                            INDEX    [287]

Safari, 116, 209                             Smith, Stephen, 142, 143, 190
salting, 107, 154                            Smith, Will, 150
San Francisco Chronicle, 120                 Snowden, Edward, 4, 24, 26-27, 47, 77,110,
Satellite Sentinel Project, 214                  122-23, 125, 128, 142, 186-87, 190,
Scheindlin, Shira, 220                           195,214-15, 221
Schley, Courtney, 160, 163-64                social networking sites, 6, 68, 69, 101, 122,
Schmidt, Eric, 54                                 153-61, 206. See also specific sites
Schneier, Bruce, 66, 194-95                  social network mapping, 38-40, 99, 122
Schneier on Security (Schneier), 66          social security numbers, 7, 13, 161, 211
Schoenberg, Evan, 193                        Soghoian, Christopher, 104, 123, 186-87
schools, 8-9, 204                            Soltani, Ashkan, 178-79, 182, 209
Schrems, Max, 82-83                          Sonic.net, 115
Science, 213                                 “sousveillance,” 214
Scoble, Robert, 10                           South Africa, 5
SearchBug.com, 161                           Southern District of New York (federal
search engines, 68, 116-20, 154, 168,             court), 29
      181, 202. See also specific search     Soviet Union, 24, 43
      engines                                spamgourmet.com, 135
   auditing your data on, 81-82, 95          spam messages, 96
search warrants, 75, 114-15, 142,            SpiderOak, 104-6, 188
      190                                    Spokeo, 162
Secret New York (Rives), 183                 spoofing, 145
secret police, 36-41                         Sputnik, 43
Secrets & Lies (Schneier), 195-96            spy satellites, 43
Secret Service, 5                            spyware, 6, 10, 141, 190-91
security, privacy vs., 66, 97-98             Staas, David, 149
Security Engineering (Anderson), 100         stalkers, 7-8
security questions, 90                       Standard Oil Company, 127
Security Theater, 54                         Staples, 16
September 11, 2001, attacks, 21-22, 24-26,   Stasi, 36, 37-41, 50, 52, 83, 95
      28, 61, 85, 93-94                      state and local governments, 4, 27-28,
sexual orientation, 10-11, 167, 169                31-34
Shahzad, Faisal, 46                          stealth wear, 152, 177-78
Shearson, Julia, 92                          Stecklow, Steve, 168
Shilkin, Rob, 82                             Steel, Emily, 168, 176, 180
Shiller, Benjamin Reed, 170                  Strauchs, John J., 72, 78, 151
Shopping.com, 174                            sucker lists, 16-17
Shutova, Ekaterina, 109                      Sudan,214
Shutterfly, 202                              Suell, Jaleesa, 12
Signal conference, 149                       Suffolk County Superior Court, 18
Silent Circle, 126, 196-99, 208              super-warrants, 75
Silent Phone, 196                            surveillance. See dragnets
Silent Text, 196-99                          Surveillance Catalog, 189
Sinclair, Upton, 127                         surveillance flexitarians, 79
Singer-Vine, Jeremy, 151-52                  Surveillance in the Stacks (Foerstel), 134
Skyhook, 148                                 surveillance theater, 44
Skype, 189                                   surveillance vegans, 78-79, 146
Slobogin, Christopher, 221-22                Sussmann, Michael, 80, 133
smart card, 187                              Sweeney, Latanya, 14
[ 20 0 ]   INDEX

TACODA, 31, 174-75                               Treasury Enforcement Communications
Tarbell, Ida (fake identity), 127-28,                 System, 93
      131-33, 135, 145-46, 156, 184, 196,        TrueRep.com, 89
      208,210-11                                 trust, 155, 212, 213
tax fraud, 12-13                                 Truth in Caller ID Act (2010), 145
Taylor, Wendy, 29                                Tsarnaev, Dzhokhar, 46-47
TECS database, 93                                Tsarnaev, Tamerlan, 46-47, 49
telecommunications providers, 26-27, 32          Twitter, 90, 96, 158, 160, 178, 181
Te’o, Manti, 131                                    auditing your data on, 81, 83-84
terms of service, 2-3                               password and, 102-4
terrorism, 6, 21-22, 24-27, 46-50, 61,           two-factor authentication, 103-4
      92-95, 112,200, 205,217-19                 Twombly, Linda, 175-76
terrorist watch lists, 63, 92, 218-19            Tynan, Dan, 87
text messages, 65, 74-75, 145
   encrypted, 196, 210                           Union Square Ventures, 120
TextSecure, 147, 195                             United Kingdom, 100
The Amnesic Incognito Live System                United Nations Declaration of Human
      (Tails), 192                                    Rights, 52
ThinThread, 34-35                                U.S. Army, 60, 192
Third-Party Doctrine, 23                         U.S. citizens, 21, 24-28, 77, 92, 121.
Thomson Reuters’s Westlaw, 88-89                      See also domestic spying
threat models, 65-77                             U.S. Congress, 34, 49, 59, 81, 89, 143, 219
   assessing vulnerabilities and, 68-69          U.S. Constitution, 22, 220
   identifying threats, 67-68                    U.S. Court of Appeals
   self-defense tactics vs., 70-77                 Third Circuit, 143
thumb drives, 188, 192                             Fourth Circuit, 125
Thunderbird, 124, 186                              Fifth Circuit, 11, 143
Tiffany, Michael J. J., 97                         Sixth Circuit, 92
Time, 28, 212                                      Ninth Circuit, 24
TLO (The Last One), 84-86                        U.S. Customs and Border Patrol, 24,
Todesco, Gaebriella, 156                              92-93, 194
Topfer, Eric, 45                                 U.S. District Courts, 35
Toporoff, Steve, 12                              U.S. House of Representatives, 33
Tor, 77-78, 133-34, 146-47, 191-93, 195          U.S. Postal Service, 31
Toxics Release Inventory, 221                    U.S. Senate, 48
tracker blockers, 179-82                         U.S. Supreme Court, 23, 52-53, 59-60,
tracker lists, 179                                    72, 143, 217, 221
traffic analysis, 74-75, 143-46                  United States v. Cotterman, 24
“Tragedy of the Commons” (Hardin), 213           University of California at Davis, 214
Trailblazer, 34                                  Urban Institute, 44-46
transparency, 76, 221-24                         USA People Search, 162
Transparent Society, The (Brin), 42, 214         USA Today, 26
TransUnion, 89-90                                US Search, 162
travel, 81-82, 92-95, 188. See also airlines;
      border searches; no-fly lists; terrorist   Valentino-DeVries, Jennifer, 189, 190
      watch lists                                Verizon, 8, 4, 26, 34, 149, 165
Traveler Redress Inquiry Program (TRIP),         Vermont, 217
    218-19                                       video chats, 75
Treasury Department, 13, 93                      videos, posted online, 203, 207
                                                                            INDEX    [269]

video surveillance, 42-45, 97, 190           Wheeler, Dan, 108
Virgin Mobile, 144                           whistle-blowers, 21, 34-36, 68, 94, 191
voter registration lists, 33, 175            white page directories, 30
Vue, Chu, 7                                  WhitePages.com, 162
                                             Whole Foods, 4
Wainstein, Kenneth, 27                       Wiebe, Kirk, 34-36, 191
Wall Street Journal, 15, 69, 94-95, 123,     Wi-Fi, 67, 98, 103, 108, 196
     148, 158, 168-69, 175, 176, 180           cell phones and, 148-50
Wamble, Kim, 16                                Google Street View and, 116
Ward, Charles, 30                            WikiLeaks, 107, 115, 140-41, 188, 192, 195
wardriving, 148                              Windows 95, 28
war-phoning, 148-49                          wire fraud statutes, 72
warrantless orders, 24-26, 60, 115, 124,     Wiretap Act, 75, 124
     142-43. See also Foreign Intelligence   wiretapping, 26. See also search warrants;
     Surveillance Court; search warrants;         warrantless orders
     and specific government agencies        World Economic Forum, 215
Washington Post, 30                          World War I, 5, 143
Web browsers, 4, 28-29, 31, 104, 116-18,     World War II, 5, 52, 143, 221
     133-34, 146-47. See also search         writs of assistance, 22-23
    engines; and specific browsers
  ad-tracking and, 167-82                    Xdrive, 105
  blocking tracking and, 171, 208-9
webcams, 9-10, 103, 189                      Yahoo!, 26, 29, 34, 107, 115, 168, 178, 181
Weber, Richard, 138                          yellow page directories, 30
websites                                     Yemen, 48, 215
  ad-tracking and, 2, 14-15, 29-31,          Youens, Liam, 7
     167-82                                  YouTube, 69, 207, 224
  auditing your data on, 81
  children and, 199-200                      ZabaSearch, 162
  hacking of, 1-3                            Zazi, Najibullah, 47-49
  NS A tracking and, 25                      zero data retention, 73, 117
Weinberg, Gabriel, 119-20                    zero data border crossing, 188
Welsh, Brandon, 45                           zero-knowledge environment, 104-5,
Westlaw reports, 88-89                             144
Wetherell, David, 174                        Ziff Davis Smart Business, 29
Whatcom County, Washington, 112-13           Zimmermann, Philip, 193-96
Julia Angwin is the author of Stealing MySpace and an award-winning

investigative journalist for the independent news organization ProPublica.
From 2000 to 2013 she was a staff reporter for The Wall Street Journal,
where she was on the team of reporters awarded the 2003 Pulitzer Prize for
coverage of corporate corruption and led a team covering online privacy
that was a finalist for a 2012 Pulitzer Prize. She lives in New York City with
her husband and two children.
■




    ♦




        i
Julia Angwin          is the author of Stealing
MySpace and an award-winning investigative
journalist for the independent news organi¬
zation ProPublica. From 2000 to 2013 she
was a staff reporter for The Wall Street Jour¬
nal, where she was on the team of reporters
awarded the 2003 Pulitzer Prize for coverage
of corporate corruption and led a team cov¬
ering online privacy that was a finalist for a
2012 Pulitzer Prize. She lives in New York City
with her husband and two children.




WWW.HENRYH0LT.COM

WWW.JULIAANGWIN.COM



TIMES BOOKS

HENRY HOLT AND COMPANY

1 ?5 FIFTH AVENUE

NEW YORK, NEW YORK 10010
                   Advance Praise for DRAGNET NATION
    “In this thought-provoking, highly accessible exploration of the issues around
  personal data gathering, Julia Angwin provides a startling account of how we’re all
being tracked, watched, studied, and sorted. Her own (often very funny] attempts to
 maintain her online privacy demonstrate the ubiquity of the dragnet—and the near
        impossibility of evading it. I’ll never use Google in the same way again.”
                                            —GRETCHEN RUBIN,
                  bestselling author of Happier at Home and The Happiness Project



        “Dragnet Nation is an impressive picture of the new world of electronic
 surveillance—from Google to the NSA. Julia Angwin’s command of the technology is
sure, her writing is clear, and her arguments are compelling. This is an authoritative
  account of why we should care about privacy and how we can protect ourselves.”
                                            -BRUCE SCHNEIER,                                          i
            author^of Liars and Outliers: Enabling the Trust That Society Needs to Thrive



   “Julia Angwin’s pathbreaking reporting for the Wall Street Journal about online
tracking changed the privacy debate. Her new book represents another leap forward:
  by showing how difficult it was to protect her own privacy and vividly describing
 the social and personal costs, Angwin offers both a wake-up call and a thoughtful
   manifesto for reform. This is a meticulously documented and gripping narrative
                about why privacy matters and what we can do about it.”

                        'MOjffl ~jeffrey ROSEN.
president and CEO, National Cons^ifuMon Center, and author of The Unwanted Gaze and The Naked Crowd
                         ■ ■ ■   • . .'.V



     “Dragnet Nation is a fascinating, compelling, and powerful read. Many of us
   would simply prefer not to know how much others know about us, and yet Julia
  Angwin opens a door onto that dark world in a way that both raises a new set of
    public issues and canvasses a range of solutions. We can reclaim our privacy
   while still enjoying the benefits of many types of surveillance—but only if we
                   take our heads out of the sand and read this book.”
                                  -ANNE-MARIE SLAUGHTER,
                                     president and CEO, New America




                                                       BUSINESS & ECONOMICS

                                      ISBN-13:   TTfl-D-flOSQ-^flOV-S




                                        780805 098075
