BOSTON   PUBLIC LIBRARY


    99093010849
     Property of the
Boston Public Library
OBFUSCATION
OBFUSCATION
A USER'S GUIDE
FOR PRIVACY AND PROTEST




Finn Brunton               | Helen Nissenbaum

The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England
© 2015 Finn Brunton and Helen Nissenbaum

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form by any
electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying, recording, or information
storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the publisher.

MIT Press books may be purchased at special quantity discounts for business or sales .
promotional use. For information, email special_sales@mitpress.mit.edu.

Set in PF Din Text Cond Pro by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited. Printed and bound
in the United States of America.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data are available.
ISBN: 978-0-262-02973-5

10   F826:           data         eoe
CONTENTS




Acknowledgments        ix

Introduction   1


| AN OBFUSCATION VOCABULARY
1 Core Cases       8

1.1 Chaff: defeating military radar 8
1.2 Twitter bots: filling a channel with noise 9
1.3 CacheCloak: location services without location tracking 12
1.4 TrackMeNot: blending genuine and artificial search queries 13
1.5 Uploads to leak sites: burying significant files 14
1.6 False tells: making patterns to trick a trained observer 15
et Group identity: many people under one name 15
1.8 Identical confederates and objects: many people in one outfit 16
19 Excessive documentation: making analysis inefficient 17
1.10 Shuffling SIM cards: rendering mobile targeting uncertain 18
1.11 Tor relays: requests on behalf of others that conceal personal
     traffic 19
1.12 Babble tapes: hiding speech in speech 21
1.13 Operation Vula: obfuscation in the struggle against Apartheid 21

2 Other Examples 25
2.1 Orb-weaving spiders: obfuscating animals 25
(ay. False orders: using obfuscation to attack rival businesses 25
2.3 French decoy radar emplacements: defeating radar detectors 26
2.4 AdNauseam: clicking all the ads 26
2.5 Quote stuffing: confusing algorithmic trading strategies 27
2.6 Swapping loyalty cards to interfere with analysis of shopping
     patterns 28
2.7 BitTorrent Hydra: using fake requests to deter collection of
    addresses 29
2.8 Deliberately vague language: obfuscating agency 30
2.9 Obfuscation of anonymous text: stopping stylometric analysis 31
2.10 Code obfuscation: baffling humans but not machines 33
2.11 Personal disinformation: strategies for individual disappearance 35
2.12 Apple's “cloning service” patent: polluting electronic profiling 36
2.13 Vortex: cookie obfuscation as game and marketplace 37
2.14 “Bayesian flooding” and “unselling” the value of online identity 38
2.15 FaceCloak: concealing the work of concealment 39
2.16 Obfuscated likefarming: concealing indications of manipulation 40
2.17 URME surveillance: “identity prosthetics” expressing protest 40
2.18 Manufacturing conflicting evidence: confounding investigation 41

Il UNDERSTANDING            OBFUSCATION
3 Why Is Obfuscation Necessary? 45
3.1 Obfuscation in brief 45
3.2 Understanding information asymmetry: knowledge and power 48
3.3 The fantasy of opting out 53
3.4 Weapons of the weak: what obfuscation can do 55
3.5 Distinguishing obfuscation from strong privacy systems 58

4 |s Obfuscation Justified?      63

4.1 Ethics of obfuscation   64
4.2 From ethics to politics 70




vi                                                                   CONTENTS
   5 Will Obfuscation Work?       84
   5.1 Obfuscation is about goals 85
   5.2 | want to use obfuscation ... 87
          ... to buy some time 88
          ... to provide cover 88
          ... for deniability 89
          ... to prevent individual exposure 89
          ... to interfere with profiling 90
           ... to express protest 90
   5.3 Is my obfuscation project... 90
         ... individual, or collective? 91
         ... Known, or unknown? 92
         ... Selective, or general? 92
         ... short-term, or long-term? 94

   Epilogue 97
   Notes 99
   Bibliography 113
   Index 121




CONTENTS                                          vii
obesevlmhiae
   ye - goto“A
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS




 This book began with technology—the TrackMeNot project—and we owe
 our deepest thanks to Daniel Howe, who got it on its feet, and Vincent
 Toubiana, who joined the effort, expanded its scope, and continues tirelessly
 to support it and its adopters. Feedback and comments from the community of
 users and from the privacy community at large, and a joint technical paper
 with Lakshminarayanan Subramanian (Vincent Toubiana, Lakshminarayanan
 Subramanian, and Helen Nissenbaum, “TrackMeNot: Enhancing the Privacy of
 Web Search”) have opened our eyes to its potential and limitations. More
 recently, creating and launching a second system, AdNauseam, with Daniel
 Howe, in collaboration with the designer Mushon Zer-Aviv, further expanded
 our perspective on obfuscation and on the need for a deeper, systematic
 appreciation of what it offers as a method and a strategy.
       As we began to work on a general understanding of obfuscation, we were
 able to explore many of the concepts in a paper published in First Monday and
a chapter in Privacy, Due Process and the Computational Turn, which benefited
enormously from review and editorial feedback in those venues.
       Obfuscation became a book with the encouragement and thorough advice
of the reviewers and of Marguerite Avery, Gita Manaktala, Susan Buckley,
Katie Helke, and Paul Bethge at the MIT Press. Our thanks to all of them. Emily
Goldsher-Diamond did meticulous work as a research assistant, as well as
organizing many other aspects of this project. Work on this book through all its
drafts was supported by grants from the National Science Foundation (ITR-
0331542: Sensitive Information in a Wired World), from EAGER (CNS-1355398:
Values in Design for Future Internet Architecture—Next Phase), from the Air
Force Office of Scientific Research (MURI-ONR BAA 07-036: Collaborative
Policies and Assured Information Sharing), and from the Intel Science and
Technology Center for Social Computing. Support from these grants provided
time, technology, and a collegial context for pursuing this project and bringing
it to fruition.
       Two major events helped shape and refine our thinking about obfuscation.
 One was the Symposium on Obfuscation (February 15, 2014), jointly organized
 by New York University’s Department of Media, Culture, and Communication
 and the Information Law Institute and co-sponsored by the Intel Science and
 Technology Center for Social Computing. For making this event possible, we
 would like to thank Nicole Arzt, Emily Goldsher-Diamond, Dove Helena
 Pedlosky, MelissaLucas-Ludwig, Erica Robles-Anderson, and Jamie Schuler—
 and, above all, Seda Giirses, who organized, structured, and shaped so much
 of the day. Every single speaker had a direct effect on our manuscript. The
 other event was the ongoing conversation of the Privacy Research Group at
 NYU, at whose weekly seminars we presented several stages of this material.
 The book would not have this final form without the PRG discussions; our fond
 thanks to everyone involved.
      Other opportunities to present and test aspects of this work have been
 enormously productive, and our ideas have been greatly improved by the
 responses of supporters, critics, believers, and skeptics. These opportunities
 have included a joint MIT Center for Civic Media and Comparative Media Studies
 Colloquium; The New School for Social Research 2014 Graduate Conference:
 New Media Salon, Tel Aviv; Communications and Journalism Departmental
Seminar, Hebrew University of Jerusalem; IBM R&D Labs, Haifa; Eyebeam Art
+ Technology Center; HotPETS 2013; Computers, Privacy and Data Protection,
Brussels; and the Surveillance Studies Conference, Queens University.
      We are deeply grateful for friends and colleagues with whom we could
discuss obfuscation as it developed, and who offered feedback, criticism,
encouragement, and ideas. In particular we would like to thank Julia Angwin,
Solon Barocas, danah boyd, Claudia Diaz, Cynthia Dwork, Cathy Dwyer,
Tarleton Gillespie, Mireille Hildebrandt, Ari Juels, Nick Montfort, Deirdre
Mulligan, Arvind Narayanan, Martijn van Otterloo, Ira Rubinstein, lan Spiro,
Luke Stark, Katherine Strandburg, Matthew Tierney, Joe Turow, Janet Vertesi,
Tal Zarsky, Malte Ziewitz, and Ethan Zuckerman.
      Finally, this book would not have been possible without the support of our
professional home base, the Department of Media, Culture, and Communica-
tion at New York University. Thanks to you all!




x                                                        ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
OBFUSCATION
                                                                     :
                 ce oy oye -                                   a




     =




Vi




                                                          ds                           ee!
                                                      rt                          Sue


                                                                         4        i                  :
                                                      i        voi                    ew       ee   be


                               ’                                     :       ‘+         pit   ts         i
         ==                        1                                     hls                  Van
                                                                                               rr ae
                           .           >
                           7                .
                                                 iw




                 *
                     im;



                       vibe                wis
          £ xx             i ‘i ,      ”




                                           te
INTRODUCTION

We mean to start a revolution with this book. But not a big revolution—at
least, not at first. Our revolution does not rely on sweeping reforms, on a com-
prehensive Year Zero reinvention of society, or on the seamless and perfectly
uniform adoption of a new technology. It is built on preexisting components—
what a philosopher would call tools ready-to-hand, what an engineer would
call commodity hardware—that are available in everyday life, in movies, in
software, in murder mysteries, and even in the animal kingdom. Although its
lexicon of methods can be, and has been, taken up by tyrants, authoritarians,
and secret police, our revolution is especially suited for use by the small
players, the humble, the stuck, those not in a position to decline or opt out or
exert control over our data emanations. The focus of our limited revolution is
on mitigating and defeating present-day digital surveillance. We will add
concepts and techniques to the existing and expanding toolkit for evasion,
noncompliance, outright refusal, deliberate sabotage, and use according to
our terms of service. Depending on the adversary, the goals, and the resources,
we provide methods for disappearance, for time-wasting and analysis-
frustrating, for prankish disobedience, for collective protest, for acts of indi-
vidual redress both great and small. We draw an outline around a whole
domain of both established and emerging instances that share a common
approach we can generalize and build into policies, software, and action. This
outline is the banner under which our big little revolution rides, and the space
it defines is called obfuscation.
     In a sentence: Obfuscation is the deliberate addition of ambiguous,
confusing, or misleading information to interfere with surveillance and data
collection. \t's a simple thing with many different, complex applications and
uses. If you are a software developer or designer, obfuscation you build into
your software can keep user data safe—even from yourself, or from whoever
acquires your startup—while you provide social networking, geolocation, or
other services requiring collection and use of personal information. Obfusca-
tion also offers ways for government agencies to accomplish many of the
goals of data collection while minimizing the potential misuses. And if you are
a person or a group wanting to live in the modern world without being a subject
of pervasive digital surveillance (and an object of subsequent analysis),
    obfuscation is a lexicon of ways to put some sand in the gears, to buy time, and
    to hide in the crowd of signals. This book provides a starting point.

 Our project has tracked interesting similarities across very different domains
 in which those who are obliged to be visible, readable, or audible have
 responded by burying salient signals in clouds and layers of misleading
 signals. Fascinated by the diverse contexts in which actors reach for a strategy
 of obfuscation, we have presented, in chapters 1 and 2, dozens of detailed
 instances that share this general, common thread. Those two chapters, which
 make up part | of the book, provide a guide to the diverse forms and formats
 that obfuscation has taken and demonstrate how these instances are crafted
 and implemented to suit their respective goals and adversaries. Whether on a
 social network, at a poker table, or in the skies during the Second World War,
 and whether confronting an adversary in the form of a facial-recognition
 system, the Apartheid government of 1980s South Africa, or an opponent
 across the table, properly deployed obfuscation can aid in the protection of
 privacy and in the defeat of data collection, observation, and analysis. The
sheer range of situations and uses discussed in chapters 1 and 2 is an inspira-
tion and a spur: What kind of work can obfuscation do for you?
      The cases presented in chapter 1 are organized into a narrative that intro-
duces fundamental questions about obfuscation and describes important
approaches to it that are then explored and debated in part Il of the book. In
chapter 2, shorter cases illustrate the range and the variety of obfuscation
applications while also reinforcing underlying concepts.
      Chapters 3-5 enrich the reader's understanding of obfuscation by consid-
ering why obfuscation has a role to play in various forms of privacy work; the
ethical, social, and political problems raised by using obfuscatory tactics; and
ways of assessing whether obfuscation works, or can work, in particular sce-
narios. Assessing whether an obfuscation approach works entails under-
standing what makes obfuscation distinct from other tools and understanding
its particular weaknesses and strengths. The titles of chapters 3-5 are framed
as questions.
      The first question, asked in chapter 3, is “Why is obfuscation necessary?”
In answering that question, we explain how the challenges of present-day
digital privacy can be met by obfuscation’s utility. We point out how obfusca-
tion may serve to counteract information asymmetry, which occurs when data



2                                                                  INTRODUCTION
about us are collected in circumstances we may not understand, for purposes
we may not understand, and are used in ways we may not understand. Our
data will be shared, bought, sold, managed, analyzed, and applied, all of which
will have consequences for our lives. Will you get a loan, or an apartment, for
which you applied? How much of an insurance risk or a credit risk are you?
What guides the advertising you receive? How do so many companies and
services know that you're pregnant, or struggling with an addiction, or plan-
ning to change jobs? Why do different cohorts, different populations, and dif-
ferent neighborhoods receive different allocations of resources? Are you going
to be, as the sinister phrase of our current moment of data-driven anti-
terrorism has it, “on a list’? Even innocuous or seemingly benign work in this
domain has consequences worth considering. Obfuscation has a role to play,
not as a replacement for governance, business conduct, or technological
interventions, or as a one-size-fits-all solution (again, it’s a deliberately small,
distributed revolution), but as a tool that fits into the larger network of privacy
practices. In particular, it’s a tool particularly well suited to the category of
people without access to other modes of recourse, whether at a particular
moment or in general—people who, as it happens, may be unable to deploy
optimally configured privacy-protection tools because they are on the weak
side of a particular information-power relationship.
      Similarly, context shapes the ethical and political questions around
obfuscation. Obfuscation’s use in multiple domains, from social policy to social
networks to personal activity, raises serious concerns. In chapter 4, we ask “Is
obfuscation justified?” Aren’t we encouraging people to lie, to be willfully inac-
curate, or to “pollute” with potentially dangerous noise databases that have
commercial and civic applications? Aren’t obfuscators who use commercial
services free riding on the good will of honest users who are paying for
targeted advertising (and the services) by making data about themselves
available? And if these practices become widespread, aren't we going to be
collectively wasting processing power and bandwidth? In chapter 4 we address
these challenges and describe the moral and political calculus according to
which particular instances of obfuscation may be evaluated and found to be
acceptable or unacceptable.
     What obfuscation can and can't accomplish is the focus of chapter 5. In
comparison with cryptography, obfuscation may be seen contingent, even
shaky. With cryptography, precise degrees of security against brute-force



INTRODUCTION                                                                       3
 attacks can be calculated with reference to such factors as key length, pro-
cessing power, and time. With obfuscation such precision is rarely possible,
because its strength as a practical tool depends on what users want to accom-
plish and on what specific barriers they may face in respective circumstances
of use. Yet complexity does not mean chaos, and success still rests on careful
attention to systematic interdependencies. In chapter 5 we identify six common
goals for an obfuscation project and relate them to design dimensions. The
goals include buying some time, providing cover, deniability, evading observa-
tion, interfering with profiling, and expressing protest. The aspects of design
we identify include whether an obfuscation project is individual or collective,
whether it is known or unknown, whether it is selective or general, and
whether it is short-term or long-term. For some goals, for instance, obfusca-
tion may not succeed if the adversary knows that it is being employed; for
other goals—such as collective protest or interference with probable cause
and production of plausible deniability—it is better ifthe adversary knows that
the data have been poisoned. All of this, of course, depends on what resources
are available to the adversary—that is, how much time, energy, attention, and
money the adversary is willing to spend on identifying and weeding out obfus-
cating information. The logic of these relationships holds promise because it
suggests that we can learn from reasoning about specific cases how to
improve obfuscation in relation to its purpose. Will obfuscation work? Yes—
but only in context.
      Let's begin.




4                                                              INTRODUCTION
An Obfuscation Vocabulary
There are many obfuscation strategies. They are shaped by the user’s pur-
poses (which may range from buying a few minutes of time to permanently
interfering with a profiling system), by whether the users work alone or in
concert, by its target and its beneficiaries, by the nature of the information to
be obfuscated, and by other parameters we will discuss in part Il. (Parts | and
Il can be read independently—you are encouraged to skip ahead if you have
questions about obfuscation’s purposes, about ethical and political quanda-
ries, or about the circumstances that, we argue, make obfuscation a useful
addition to the privacy toolkit.) Before we get to that, though, we want you to
understand how of the many specific circumstances of obfuscation can be
generalized into a pattern. We can link together a family of seemingly dispa-
rate events under a single heading, revealing their underlying continuities and
suggesting how similar methods can be applied to other contexts and other
problems. Obfuscation is contingent, shaped by the problems we seek to
address and the adversaries we hope to foil or delay, but it is characterized by
a simple underlying circumstance: unable to refuse or deny observation, we
create many plausible, ambiguous, and misleading signals within which the
information we want to conceal can be lost.
      To illustrate obfuscation in the ways that are most salient to its use and
development now, and to provide a reference for the rest of the book, we have
selected a set of core cases that exemplify how obfuscation works and what it
can do. These cases are organized thematically. Though they aren't suited to a
simple typology, we have structured them so that the various choices particu-
lar to obfuscation should become clear as you read. In addition to these cases,
we present a set of brief examples that illustrate some of obfuscation’s other
applications and some of its more unusual contexts. With these cases and
explanations, you will have an index of obfuscation across all the domains in
which we have encountered it. Obfuscation—positive and negative, effective
and ineffective, targeted and indiscriminate, natural and artificial, analog and
digital—appears in many fields and in many forms.
    1 CORE CASES
  1.1 Chaff: defeating military radar
  During the Second World War, a radar operator tracks an airplane over
  Hamburg, guiding searchlights and anti-aircraft guns in relation to a phosphor
  dot whose position is updated with each sweep of the antenna. Abruptly, dots
 that seem to represent airplanes begin to multiply, quickly swamping the
  display. The actual plane is in there somewhere, impossible to locate owing to
 the presence of “false echoes.”!
        The plane has released chaff—strips of black paper backed with alumi-
 num foil and cut to half the target radar’s wavelength. Thrown out by the pound
 and then floating down through the air, they fill the radar screen with signals.
 The chaff has exactly met the conditions of data the radar is configured to
 look for, and has given it more “planes,” scattered all across the sky, than it
 can handle.
       This may well be the purest, simplest example of the obfuscation
 approach. Because discovery of an actual airplane was inevitable (there
 wasn't, at the time, a way to make a plane invisible to radar), chaff taxed the
 time and bandwidth constraints of the discovery system by creating too many
 potential targets. That the chaff worked only briefly as it fluttered to the ground
 and was not a permanent solution wasn’t relevant under the circumstances.
 It only had to work well enough and long enough for the plane to get past the
 range of the radar.
       As we will discuss in part Il, many forms of obfuscation work best as
time-buying “throw-away” moves. They can get you only a few minutes, but
sometimes a few minutes is all the time you need.
       The example of chaff also helps us to distinguish, at the most basic level,
between approaches to obfuscation. Chaff relies on producing echoes—
imitations of the real thing—that exploit the limited scope of the observer.
(Fred Cohen terms this the “decoy strategy.”2) As we will see, some forms of
obfuscation generate genuine but misleading signals—much as you would
protect the contents of one vehicle by sending it out accompanied by several
other identical vehicles, or defend a particular plane by filling the sky with
other planes—whereas other forms shuffle genuine signals, mixing data in an
effort to make the extraction of patterns more difficult. Because those who
scatter chaff have exact knowledge of their adversary, chaff doesn’t have to do
either of these things.


8
                                                                       CHAPTER    1
      If the designers of an obfuscation system have specific and detailed
knowledge of the limits of the observer, the system they develop has to work
for only one wavelength and for only 45 minutes. If the system their adversary
uses for observation is more patient, or if it has a more comprehensive set of
Capacities for observation, they have to make use of their understanding of the
adversary’s internal agenda—that is, of what useful information the adver-
sary hopes to extract from data obtained through surveillance—and under-
mine that agenda by manipulating genuine signals.
      Before we turn to the manipulation of genuine signals, let's look at a very
different example of flooding a channel with echoes.

 1.2 Twitter bots: filling a channel with noise
The two examples we are about to discuss are a study in contrasts. Although
producing imitations is their mode of obfuscation, they take us from the
Second World War to present-day circumstances, and from radar to social
networks. They also introduce an important theme.
      In chapter 3, we argue that obfuscation is a tool particularly suited to the
“weak”—the situationally disadvantaged, those at the wrong end of asym-
metrical power relationships. It is a method, after all, that you have reason to
adopt if you can’t be invisible—if you can’t refuse to be tracked or surveilled,
if you can’t simply opt out or operate within professionally secured networks.
This doesn’t mean that it isn’t also taken up by the powerful. Oppressive or
coercive forces usually have better means than obfuscation at their disposal.
Sometimes, though, obfuscation becomes useful to powerful actors—as it did
in two elections, one in Russia and one in Mexico. Understanding the choices
faced by the groups in contention will clarify how obfuscation of this kind can
be employed.
      During protests over problems that had arisen in the 2011 Russian parlia-
mentary elections, much of the conversation about ballot-box stuffing and
other irregularities initially took place on LiveJournal, a blogging platform that
had originated in the United States but attained its greatest popularity in
Russia—more than half of its user base is Russian.? Though LiveJournal is
quite popular, its user base is very small relative to those of Facebook's and
Google's various social systems; it has fewer than 2 million active accounts."
Thus, LiveJournal is comparatively easy for attackers to shut down by means
of distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack—that is, by using computers



CORE CASES                                                                       9
  scattered around the world to issue requests for the site in such volume that
 the servers making the site available are overwhelmed and legitimate users
 can't access it. Such an attack on LiveJournal, in conjunction with the arrests
 of activist bloggers at a protest in Moscow, was a straightforward approach to
 censorship.” When and why, then, did obfuscation become necessary?
       The conversation about the Russian protest migrated to Twitter, and the
 powers interested in disrupting it then faced a new challenge. Twitter has an
 enormous user base, with infrastructure and security expertise to match. It
 could not be taken down as easily as LiveJournal. Based in the United States,
 Twitter was in a much better position to resist political manipulation than Live-
 Journal's parent company. (Although LiveJournal service is provided by a
 company set up in the U.S. for that purpose, the company that owns it, SUP
 Media, is based in Moscow.*) To block Twitter outright would require direct
 government intervention. The LiveJournal attack was done independently, by
 nationalist hackers who may or may not have the approval and assistance of
 the Putin/Medvedev administration.’ Parties interested in halting the political
 conversation on Twitter therefore faced a challenge that will become familiar
 as we explore obfuscation’s uses: time was tight, and traditional mechanisms
for action weren't available. A direct technical approach—either blocking
Twitter within a country or launching a worldwide denial-of-service attack—
wasn't possible, and political and legal angles of attack couldn’t be used.
 Rather than stop a Twitter conversation, then, attackers can overload it
with noise.
       During the Russian protests, the obfuscation took the form of thousands
of Twitter accounts suddenly piping up and users posting tweets using the
same hashtags used by the protesters.* Hashtags are a mechanism for group-
ing tweets together; for example, if |add #obfuscation to a tweet, the symbol
# turns the word into an active link—clicking it will bring up all other tweets
tagged with #obfuscation. Hashtags are useful for organizing the flood of
tweets into coherent conversations on specific topics, and #1pHyMoasbyas
(referring to Triumfalnaya, the location of a protest) became one of several
tags people could use to vent their anger, express their opinions, and organize
further actions. (Hashtags also play a role in how Twitter determines “trend-
ing” and significant topics on the site, which can then draw further attention to
what is being discussed under that tag—the site’s Trending Topics list often
draws news coverage.’) °



10                                                                   CHAPTER 1
      If you were following #rpuymqaspbnas, you would have seen tweet after
tweet from Russian activists spreading links to news and making plans. But
those tweets began to be interspersed with tweets about Russian greatness,
or tweets that seemed to consist of noise, gibberish, or random words and
phrases. Eventually those tweets dominated the stream for #rpuymcanpuas,
and those for other topics related to the protests, to such a degree that tweets
relevant to the topic were, essentially, lost in the noise, unable to get any
attention or to start a coherent exchange with other users. That flood of
new tweets came from accounts that had been inactive for much of their exis-
tence. Although they had posted very little from the time of their creation until
the time of the protests, now each of them was posting dozens of times
an hour. Some of the accounts’ purported users had mellifluous names,
such as imelixyvyg, wygufahij, and hihexig; others had more conventional-
seeming names, all built on a firstname_lastname model—for example,
latifah_xander.'°
      Obviously, these Twitter accounts were “Twitter bots’—programs pur-
porting to be people and generating automatic, targeted messages. Many of
the accounts had been created around the same time. In numbers and in fre-
quency, such messages can easily dominate a discussion, effectively ruining
the platform for a specific audience through overuse—that is, obfuscating
through the production of false, meaningless signals.
      The use of Twitter bots is becoming a reliable technique for stifling Twitter
discussion. The highly contentious 2012 Mexican elections provide another
example of this strategy in practice, and further refined."' Protesters opposed
to the front-runner, Enrique Pefia Nieto, and to the Partido Revolucionario
Institucional (PRI), used #marchaAntiEPN as an organizing hashtag for the
purposes of aggregating conversation, structuring calls for action, and arrang-
ing protest events. Groups wishing to interfere with the protesters’ organizing
efforts faced challenges similar to those in the Russian case. Rather than
thousands of bots, however, hundreds would do—indeed, when this case
was investigated by the American Spanish-language TV network Univision,
only about thirty such bots were active. Their approach was both to interfere
with the work being done to advance #marchaAntiEPN and to overuse
that hashtag. Many of the tweets consisted entirely of variants of “#marchaAn-
tiEPN #marchaAntiEPN #marchaAntiEPN #marchaAntiEPN #marchaAntiEPN
#marchaAntiEPN.” Such repetition, particularly by accounts already showing



CORE CASES                                                                      11
 suspiciously bot-like behavior, triggers systems within Twitter that identify
 attempts to manipulate the hashtagging system and then remove the
 hashtags in question from the Trending Topics list. In other words, because the
 items in Trending Topics become newsworthy and attract attention, spammers
and advertisers will try to push hashtags up into that space through repetition,
so Twitter has developed mechanisms for spotting and blocking such
activity.
      The Mexican-election Twitter bots were deliberately engaging in bad
behavior in order to trigger an automatic delisting, thereby keeping the impact
of #marchaAntiEPN “off the radar” of the larger media. They were making the
hashtag unusable and removing its potential media significance. This was
obfuscation as a destructive act. Though such efforts use the same basic tactic
as radar chaff (that is, producing many imitations configured to hide the real
thing), they have very different goals: rather than just buying time (for example,
in the run-up to an election and during the period of unrest afterward), they
render certain terms unusable—even, from the perspective of a sorting algo-
rithm, toxic—by manipulating the properties of the data through the use of
false signals.

 1.3 CacheCloak: location services without location tracking
 CacheCloak takes an approach to obfuscation that is suited to location-based
 services (LBSs).'? It illustrates two twists in the use of false echoes and imita-
tions in obfuscation. The first of these is making sure that relevant data can
still be extracted by the user; the second is trying to find an approach that
can work indefinitely rather than as a temporary time-buying strategy.
       Location-based services take advantage of the locative capabilities of
mobile devices to create various services, some of them social (e.g., Four-
Square, which turns going places into a competitive game), some lucrative
(e.g., location-aware advertising), and some thoroughly useful (e.g., maps and
nearest-object searches). The classic rhetoric of balancing privacy against
utility, in which utility is often presented as detrimental to privacy, is evident
here. If you want the value of an LBS—for example, if you want to be on the
network that your friends are on so you can meet with one of them if you and
that person are near one another—you will have to sacrifice some privacy,
and you will have to get accustomed to having the service provider know
where you are. CacheCloak suggests a way to reconfigure the tradeoff.



12                                                                    CHAPTER 1
     “Where other methods try to obscure the user’s path by hiding parts of it,”
the creators of CacheCloak write, “we obscure the user’s location by surround-
ing it with other users’ paths”"“—that is, through the propagation of ambigu-
ous data. In the standard model, your phone sends your location to the service
and gets the information you requested in return. In the CacheCloak model,
your phone predicts your possible paths and then fetches the results for
several likely routes. As you move, you receive the benefits of locative
awareness—access to what you are looking for, in the form of data cached in
advance of potential requests—and an adversary is left with many possible
paths, unable to distinguish the beginning from the end of a route and unable
to determine where you came from, where you mean to go, or even where you
are. From an observer's perspective, the salient data—the data we wish to
keep to ourselves—are buried inside a space of other, equally likely data.

1.4 TrackMeNot: blending genuine and artificial search queries
TrackMeNot, developed in 2006 by Daniel Howe, Helen Nissenbaum, and
Vincent Toubiana, exemplifies a software strategy for concealing activity with
imitative signals.'> The purpose of TrackMeNot is to foil the profiling of users
through their searches. It was designed in response to the U.S. Department of
Justice’s request for Google’s search logs and in response to the surprising
discovery by a New York Times reporter that some identities and profiles could
be inferred even from anonymized search logs published by AOL Inc.'*
      Our search queries end up acting as lists of locations, names, interests,
and problems. Whether or not our full IP addresses are included, our identities
can be inferred from these lists, and patterns in our interests can be discerned.
Responding to calls for accountability, search companies have offered ways to
address people’s concerns about the collection and storage of search queries,
though they continue to collect and analyze logs of such queries.'’ Preventing
any stream of queries from being inappropriately revealing of a particular per-
son’s interests and activities remains a challenge."
      The solution TrackMeNot offers is not to hide users’ queries from search
engines (an impractical method, in view of the need for query satisfaction), but
to obfuscate by automatically generating queries from a “seed list” of terms.
Initially culled from RSS feeds, these terms evolve so that different users
develop different seed lists. The precision of the imitation is continually refined
by repopulating the seed list with new terms generated from returns to search



CORE CASES                                                                       13
 queries. TrackMeNot submits queries in a manner that tries to mimic real
 users’ search behaviors. For example, a user who has searched for “good
 wi-fi cafe chelsea” may also have searched for “savannah kennels,” “freshly
 pressed juice miami,” “asian property firm,” “exercise delays dementia,” and
 “telescoping halogen light.” The activities of individuals are masked by those
 of many ghosts, making the pattern harder to discern so that it becomes much
 more difficult to say of any query that it was a product of human intention
 rather than an automatic output of TrackMeNot. In this way, TrackMeNot
 extends the role of obfuscation, in some situations, to include plausible
 deniability.

  1.5 Uploads to leak sites: burying significant files
 WikiLeaks used a variety of systems for securing the identities of both visitors
 and contributors. However, there was a telltale sign that could undercut the
 safety of the site: uploads of files. If snoops could monitor the traffic on
 WikiLeaks, they could identify acts of submitting material to WikiLeaks’ secure
 server. Especially if they could make informed guesses as to the compressed
 sizes of various collections of subsequently released data, they could retroac-
 tively draw inferences as to what was transmitted, when it was transmitted,
 and (in view of failures in other areas of technical and operations security) by
 whom it was transmitted. Faced with this very particular kind of challenge,
 WikiLeaks developed a script to produce false signals. It launched in the
 browsers of visitors, generating activity that looked like uploads to the secure
 server.'’ A snoop would therefore see an enormous mob of apparent leakers
 (the vast majority of whom were, in actuality, merely reading or looking
through documents already made available), a few of whom might really be
leakers. It didn’t seek to provide particular data to interfere with data mining
or with advertising; it simply sought to imitate and conceal the movements of
some of its users.
       Even encrypted and compressed data contain pertinent metadata,
however, and the proposal for OpenLeaks—an ultimately unsuccessful variant
on WikiLeaks, developed by some of the disaffected participants in the original
WikiLeaks system—includes a further refinement. After a statistical analysis
of the WikiLeaks submissions, OpenLeaks developed a model of fake uploads
that would keep to the same ratios of sizes of files typically appearing in the
upload traffic of a leak site. Most of the files ranged in size from 1.5 to
                                                                                2


14                                                                  CHAPTER 1
megabytes, though a few outliers exceeded 700 megabytes. If an adversary
can monitor upload traffic, form can be as telling as content, and as useful in
sorting real signals from fake ones. As this example suggests, obfuscation
mechanisms can gain a great deal from figuring out all the parameters that
can be manipulated—and from figuring out what the adversary is looking for,
So as to give the adversary a manufactured version of it.

1.6 False tells: making patterns to trick a trained observer
Consider how the same basic pattern of obfuscation can be called to service in
a context lighter than concealing the work of whistleblowers: poker.
      Much of the pleasure and much of the challenge of poker lies in learning
to infer from expressions, gestures, and body language whether someone is
bluffing (that is, pretending to hold a hand weaker than the one he or she
actually holds) in hopes of drawing a call. Central to the work of studying
one’s opponents is the “tell’—some unconscious habit or tic that an oppo-
nent displays in response to a strong or a weak hand, such as sweating,
glancing worriedly, or leaning forward. Tells are so important in the informa-
tional economy of poker that players sometimes use false tells—that is, they
create mannerisms that may appear to be parts of a larger pattern.’ In
common poker strategy, the use of a false tell is best reserved for a crucial
moment in a tournament, lest the other players figure out that it is inaccurate
and use it against you in turn. A patient analysis of multiple games could
separate the true tells from the false ones, but in the time-bound context of a
high-stakes game the moment of falsehood can be highly effective. Similar
techniques are used in many sports that involve visible communication.
One example is signaling in baseball—as a coach explained to a newspaper
reporter, “Sometimes you're giving a sign, but it doesn’t even mean
anything.””

1.7 Group identity: many people under one name
One of the simplest and most memorable examples of obfuscation, and one
that introduces the work of the group in obfuscation, is the scene in the film
Spartacus in which the rebel slaves are asked by Roman soldiers to identify
their leader, whom the soldiers intend to crucify.”? As Spartacus (played by
Kirk Douglas) is about to speak, one by one the others around him say “I am
Spartacus!” until the entire crowd is claiming that identity.



CORE CASES                                                                   15
       Many people assuming the same identity for group protection (for
 example, Captain Swing in the English agricultural uprisings of 1830, the ubig-
 uitous “Jacques” adopted by the radicals in Dickens's A Tale of Two Cities, or
 the Guy Fawkes mask in the graphic novel V for Vendetta, now associated with
 the hacktivist group known as Anonymous) is, at this point, almost a cliché.
 Marco Deseriis has studied the use of “improper names” and collective identi-
 ties in the effacement of individual responsibility and the proliferation of
 action.” Some forms of obfuscation can be conducted solo: others rely on
 groups, teams, communities, and confederates.

  1.8 Identical confederates and objects: many people in one outfit
 There are many examples of obfuscation by members of a group working in
 concert to produce genuine but misleading signals within which the genuine,
 salient signal is concealed. One memorable example from popular culture is
 the scene in the 1999 remake of the film The Thomas Crown Affair in which the
 protagonist, wearing a distinctive Magritte-inspired outfit, is suddenly in a
 carefully orchestrated mass of other men, dressed in the same outfit, circulat-
 ing through the museum and exchanging their identical briefcases. The
 bank-robbery scheme in the 2006 film Inside Man hinges on the robbers’ all
 wearing painters’ overalls, gloves, and masks and dressing their hostages the
 same way.” Finally, consider the quick thinking of Roger Thornhill, the pro-
tagonist of Alfred Hitchcock's 1959 film North By Northwest, who, in order to
evade the police when his train arrives in Chicago, bribes a redcap (a
baggage handler) to lend him his distinctive uniform, knowing that the crowd
of redcaps at the station will give the police too much of something specific to
look for.”8
      Identical objects as modes of obfuscation are common enough and suffi-
ciently understood to recur in imagination and in fact. The ancilia of ancient
Rome exemplify this. A shield (ancile) fell from the sky—so the legend goes—
during the reign of Numa Pompilius, Rome's second king (753-673 BCE), and
was interpreted as a sign of divine favor, a sacred relic whose ownership
would guarantee Rome's continued imperium.’ It was hung in the Temple of
Mars along with eleven exact duplicates, so would-be thieves wouldn’t know
which one to take. The six plaster busts of Napoleon from which the Sherlock
Holmes story gets its title offers another example. The villain sticks a
                                                                             black
pearl into the wet plaster of an object that not only has five duplicates but
                                                                              also


16                                                                   CHAPTER 1
is one of a larger class of objects (cheap white busts of Napoleon) that are
ubiquitous enough to be invisible.*°
      A real-world instance is provided by the so-called Craigslist robber. At 11
a.m. on Tuesday, September 30, 2008, a man dressed as an exterminator (in a
blue shirt, goggles, and a dust mask), and carrying a spray pump, approached
an armored car parked outside a bank in Monroe, Washington, incapacitated
the guard with pepper spray, and made off with the money.*' When the police
arrived, they found thirteen men in the area wearing blue shirts, goggles, and
dust masks—a uniform they were wearing on the instructions of a Craigslist
ad that promised a good wage for maintenance work, which was to start at
11:15 a.m. at the bank’s address. It would have taken only a few minutes to
determine that none of the day laborers was the robber, but a few minutes was
all the time the robber needed.
      Then there is the powerful story, often retold though factually inaccurate,
of the king of Denmark and a great number of Danish gentiles wearing the
Yellow Star so that the occupying Germans couldn’t distinguish and deport
Danish Jews. Although the Danes courageously protected their Jewish popu-
lation in other ways, the Yellow Star wasn’t used by the Nazis in occupied
Denmark, for fear of arousing more anti-German feeling. However, “there
were documented cases of non-Jews wearing yellow stars to protest Nazi
anti-Semitism in Belgium, France, the Netherlands, Poland, and even Germany
itself.”22 This legend offers a perfect example of cooperative obfuscation:
gentiles wearing the Yellow Star as an act of protest, providing a population
into which individual Jews could blend.”

1.9 Excessive documentation: making analysis inefficient
Continuing our look at obfuscation that operates by adding in genuine but mis-
leading signals, let us now consider the overproduction of documents as a
form of obfuscation, as in the case of over-disclosure of material in a lawsuit.
This was the strategy of Augustin Lejeune, chief of the General Police Bureau
in the Committee of Public Safety, a major instrument in the Terror phase of
the French Revolution. Lejeune and his clerks produced the reports that laid
the groundwork for arrests, internments, and executions. Later, in an effort to
excuse his role in the Terror, Lejeune argued that the exacting, overwhelmingly
detailed quality of the reports from his office had been deliberate: he had
instructed his clerks to overproduce material, and to report “the most minor



CORE CASES                                                                     17
 details,” in order to slow the production of intelligence for the Committee
 without the appearance of rebellion. It is doubtful that Lejeune’s claims are
 entirely accurate (the numbers he cites for the production of reports aren’t
 reliable), but, as Ben Kafka points out, he had come up with a bureaucratic
 strategy for creating slowdowns through oversupply: “He seems to have rec-
 ognized, if only belatedly, that the proliferation of documents and details pre-
 sented opportunities for resistance, as well as for compliance.” In situations
 where one can’t say No, there are opportunities for a chorus of unhelpful
 Yeses—for example, don’t send a folder in response to a request; send a
 pallet of boxes of folders containing potentially relevant papers.

  1.10 Shuffling SIM cards: rendering mobile targeting uncertain
 As recent reporting and some of Edward Snowden’s disclosures have revealed,
 analysts working for the National Security Agency use a combination of
 signals-intelligence sources—particularly cell-phone metadata and data
 from geolocation systems—to identify and track targets for elimination.*° The
 metadata (showing what numbers were called and when they were called)
 produce a model of a social network that makes it possible to identify partic-
 ular phone numbers as belonging to persons of interest; the geolocative prop-
 erties of mobile phones mean that these numbers can be situated, with varying
 degrees of accuracy, in particular places, which can then be targeted by
 drones. In other words, this system can proceed from identification to location
 to assassination without ever having a face-to-face visual identification of a
 person. The closest a drone operator may come to setting eyes on someone
 may be the exterior of a building, or a silhouette getting into a car. In view of
the spotty records of the NSA's cell-phone-metadata program and the drone
strikes, there are, of course, grave concerns about accuracy. Whether one is
concerned about threats to national security remaining safe and active, about
the lives of innocent people taken unjustly, or about both, it is easy to see the
potential flaws in this approach.
      Let us flip the situation, however, and consider it more abstractly from the
perspective of the targets. Most of the NSA’s targets are obligated to always
have, either with or near them, a tracking device (only the very highest-level
figures in terrorist organizations are able to be free of signals-generating
technology), as are virtually all the people with whom they are in contact. The
calls and conversations that sustain their organizations also provide the



18
                                                                     CHAPTER    1
means of their identification; the structure that makes their work possible also
traps them. Rather than trying to coordinate anti-aircraft guns to find a target
somewhere in the sky, the adversary has complete air superiority, able to
deliver a missile to a car, a street corner, or a house. However, the adversary
also has a closely related set of systemic limitations. This system, remarkable
as it is in scope and capabilities, ultimately relies on SIM (subscriber identity
module) cards and on physical possession of mobile phones—a kind of
narrow bandwidth that can be exploited. A former drone operator for the Joint
Special Operations Command has reported that targets therefore take mea-
sures to mix and confuse genuine signals. Some individuals have many SIM
cards associated with their identity in circulation, and the cards are randomly
redistributed. One approach is to hold meetings at which all the attendees put
their SIM cards into a bag, then pull cards from the bag at random, so that who
is actually connected to each device will not be clear. (This is a time-bound
approach: if metadata analysis is sufficiently sophisticated, an analyst should
eventually be able to sort the individuals again on the basis of past calling
patterns, but irregular re-shuffling renders that more difficult.) Re-shuffling
may also happen unintentionally as targets who aren't aware that they are
being tracked sell their phones or lend them to friends or relatives. The end
result is a system with enormous technical precision and a very uncertain rate
of actual success, whether measured in terms of dangerous individuals elim-
inated or in terms of innocent noncombatants killed by mistake. Even when
fairly exact location tracking and social-graph analysis can’t be avoided, using
obfuscation to mingle and mix genuine signals, rather than generating false
signals, can offer a measure of defense and control.

1.11 Tor relays: requests on behalf of others that conceal
personal traffic
Tor is a system designed to facilitate anonymous use of the Internet through a
combination of encryption and passing the message through many different
independent “nodes.” In a hybrid strategy of obfuscation, Tor can be used in
combination with other, more powerful mechanisms for concealing data. Such
a strategy achieves obfuscation partially through the mixing and interleaving
of genuine (encrypted) activity. Imagine a message passed surreptitiously
through a huge crowd to you. The message is a question without any identify-
ing information; as far as you know, it was written by the last person to hold it,



CORE CASES                                                                     19
 the person who handed it to you. The reply you write and pass back vanishes
 into the crowd, following an unpredictable path. Somewhere in that crowd, the
 writer receives his answer. Neither you nor anyone else knows exactly who
 the writer was.
       If you request a Web page while working through Tor, your request will
 not come from your IP address; it will come from an “exit node” (analogous to
 the last person who hands the message to its addressee) on the Tor system,
 along with the requests of many other Tor users. Data enter the Tor system
 and pass into a labyrinth of relays—that is, computers on the Tor network
 (analogous to people in the crowd) that offer some of their bandwidth for the
 purpose of handling Tor traffic from others, agreeing to pass messages sight
 unseen. The more relays there are, the faster the system is as a whole. If you
 are already using Tor to protect your Internet traffic, you can turn your com-
  puter into a relay for the collective greater good. Both the Tor network and the
 obfuscation of individuals on the network improve as more people make use
 of the network.                                      ;
       Obfuscation, Tor’s designers point out, augments its considerable protec-
 tive power. In return for running a Tor relay, “you do get better anonymity
 against some attacks. The simplest example is an attacker who owns a small
 number of Tor relays. He will see a connection from you, but he won't be able
 to know whether the connection originated at your computer or was relayed
 from somebody else.” If someone has agents in the crowd—that is, if
 someone is running Tor relays for surveillance purposes—the agents can't
 read a message they pass, but they can notice who passed it to them. If you
 are on Tor and not running a relay, they know that you wrote the message you
 gave to them. But if you are letting your computer operate as a relay, the
 message may be yours or may be just one among many that you are passing
on for other people. Did that message start with you, or not? The information
is now ambiguous, and messages you have written are safe in a flock of other
messages you pass along. This is, in short, a significantly more sophisticated
and efficient way to render particular data transactions ambiguous and to
thwart traffic analysis by making use of the volume of the traffic. It doesn’t
merely mix genuine signals (as shaking up SIM cards in a bag does, with all
the consequent problems of coordination); it gets each message to its destina-
tion. However, each message can serve to make the sources of other mes-
sages uncertain.



20
                                                                     CHAPTER    1
1.12 Babble tapes: hiding speech in speech
An old cliché about mobsters under threat from the FBI involved a lot of
talking in bathrooms: the splash and hiss of water and the hum of the ventila-
tion fan, so the story went, made conversations hard to hear if the house
was bugged or if someone in the room was wearing a wire. There are now
refined (and much more effective) techniques for defeating audio surveillance
that draw more directly on obfuscation. One of these is the use of so-called
babble tapes.*” Paradoxically, babble tapes have been used less by mobsters
than by attorneys concerned that eavesdropping may violate attorney-client
privilege.
      A babble tape is a digital file meant to be played in the background during
conversations. The file is complex. Forty voice tracks run simultaneously
(thirty-two in English, eight in other languages), and each track is compressed
in frequency and time to produce additional “voices” that fill the entire fre-
quency spectrum. There are also various non-human mechanical noises, and
a periodic supersonic burst (inaudible to adult listeners) engineered specifi-
cally to interfere with the automatic gain-control system of an eavesdropping
device configures itself to best pick up an audio signal. Most pertinent for
present purposes, the voices on a babble tape used by an attorney include
those of the client and the attorney themselves. The dense mélange of voices
increases the difficulty of discerning any single voice.

1.13 Operation Vula: obfuscation in the struggle against Apartheid
We close this chapter with a detailed narrative example of obfuscation
employed in a complex context by a group seeking to get Nelson Mandela
released from prison in South Africa during the struggle against Apartheid.
Called Operation Vula (short for Vul’indlela, meaning Opening the Road), it was
devised by leaders of the African National Congress within South Africa who
were in contact with Mandela and were coordinating their efforts with those of
ANC agents, sympathizers, and generals around the world.
     The last project of this scale that the ANC had conducted had resulted in
the catastrophe of the early 1960s in which Mandela and virtually all of the
ANC’s top leaders had been arrested and the Liliesleaf Farm documents had
been captured and had been used against them in court. This meant that Oper-
ation Vula had to be run with absolutely airtight security and privacy practices.
Indeed, when the full scope of the operation was revealed in the 1990s, it came



CORE CASES                                                                     21
  as a Surprise not just to the South African government and to international
  intelligence services but also to many prominent leadership figures within the
  ANC. People purportedly receiving kidney transplants or recovering from
  motorcycle accidents had actually gone deep underground with new identities
  and then had returned to South Africa, “opening the road” for Mandela's
  release. Given the surveillance inside and outside South Africa, the possible
  compromise of pre-existing ANC communications channels, and the interest
  of spies and law-enforcement groups around the world, Operation Vula had to
  have secure ways of sharing and coordinating information.
        The extraordinary tale of Operation Vula has been told by one of its chief
  architects, Tim Jenkin, in the pages of the ANC’s journal Mayibuye.® It rep-
  resents a superb example of operations security, tradecraft, and managing a
 secure network.
        Understanding when and how obfuscation came to be employed in Oper-
 ation Vula requires understanding some of the challenges its architects faced.
 Using fixed phone lines within South Africa, each linked to an address and a
 name, wasn't an option. The slightest compromise might lead to wiretaps and
 to what we would now call metadata analysis, and thus a picture of the activist
 network could be put together from domestic and overseas phone logs. The
 Vula agents had various coding systems, each of them hampered by the diffi-
 culty and tedium of doing the coding by hand. There was always the temptation
 to fall back on “speaking in whispers over phones again,” especially when
 crises happened and things began moving fast. The operation had to be seam-
 lessly coordinated between South Africa (primarily Durban and Johannesburg)
and Lusaka, London, Amsterdam, and other locations around the world as
agents circulated. Postal service was slow and vulnerable, encrypting was
enormously time consuming and often prone to sloppiness, use of home
phones was forbidden, and coordinating between multiple time zones around
the world seemed impossible.
       Jenkin was aware of the possibilities of using personal computers to
make encryption faster and more efficient. Based in London after his escape
from Pretoria Central Prison, he spent the mid 1980s working on the commu-
nications system needed for Operation Vula, which ultimately evolved into a
remarkable network. Encryption happened on a personal computer,
                                                                        and the
ciphered message was then expressed as a rapid series of tones
                                                                       recorded
onto a portable cassette player. An agent would go to a public pay phone
                                                                             and


22
                                                                     CHAPTER    1
dial a London number, which would be picked up by an answering machine
that Jenkin had modified to record for up to five minutes. The agent would
play the cassette into the mouthpiece of the phone. The tones, recorded on the
cassette’s other side, could be played through an acoustic modem into the
computer and then decrypted. (There was also an “outgoing” answering
machine. Remote agents could call from a pay phone, record the tones for
their messages, and decrypt them anywhere they had access to a computer
that could run the ciphering systems Jenkin had devised.)
     This was already an enormously impressive network—not least because
large parts of its digital side (including a way of implementing error-handling
codes to deal with the noise of playing back messages over international
phone lines from noisy booths) had to be invented from scratch. However, as
Operation Vula continued to grow and the network of operatives to expand, the
sheer quantity of traffic threatened to overwhelm the network. Operatives
were preparing South Africa for action, and that work didn’t leave a lot of time
for finding pay phones that accepted credit cards (the sound of coins dropping
could interfere with the signal) and standing around with tape players. Jenkin
and his collaborators would stay up late, changing tapes in the machines as
the messages poured in. The time had come to switch to encrypted email,
but the whole system had been developed to avoid the use of known, owned
telephone lines within South Africa.
      Operation Vula needed to be able to send encrypted messages to and
from computers in South Africa, in Lukasa, and in London without arousing
suspicion. During the 1980s, while the network we have described was taking
shape, the larger milieu of international business was producing exactly the
kind of background against which this subterfuge could hide itself. The ques-
tion was, as Jenkin put it, “Did the enemy have the capacity to determine which
of the thousands of messages leaving the country every day was a ‘suspicious’
one?” The activists needed a typical user of encrypted email—one without
clear political affiliation—to find out if their encrypted messages could escape
notice in the overall tide of mail. They needed, Jenkin later recalled, to “find
someone who would normally use a computer for communicating abroad and
get that person to handle the communications.”
      They had an agent who could try this system out before they switched
their communications over to the new approach: a native South African who
was about to return to his homeland after working abroad for many years as a



CORE CASES                                                                    23
  programmer for British telecommunications companies. Their agent would
  behave just as a typical citizen sending a lot of email messages every day
 would, using a commercial email provider rather than a custom server and
  relying on the fact that many businesses used encryption in their communica-
 tions. “This was a most normal thing for a person in his position to do,” Jenkin
 recalled. The system worked: the agent’s messages blended in with the ordi-
 nary traffic, providing a platform for openly secret communications that could
 be expanded rapidly.
       Posing as computer consultants, Tim Jenkin and Ronnie Press (another
 important member of the ANC Technical Committee) were able to keep abreast
 of new devices and storage technologies, and to arrange for their purchase
 and delivery where they were needed. Using a combination of commercial
 email providers and bulletin-board services run off personal and pocket com-
 puters, they were able to circulate messages within South Africa and around
 the world, and also to prepare fully formatted ANC literature for distribution.
 (The system even carried messages from Mandela, smuggled out by his
 lawyer in secret compartments in books and typed into the system.) The ordi-
 nary activity of ordinary users with bland business addresses became a
 high-value informational channel, moving huge volumes of encrypted data
from London to Lukasa and then into South Africa and between Vula cells in
that country. The success of this system was due in part to historical
circumstance—personal computers and email (including encrypted email)
had become common enough to avoid provoking suspicion, but not so common
as to inspire the construction of new, more comprehensive digital surveillance
systems such as governments have today.
      The Vula network, in its ultimate stage, wasn't naive about the security of
digital messages; it kept everything protected by a sophisticated encryption
system full of inventive details, and it encouraged its users to change their
encryption keys and to practice good operations security. Within that context,
however, it offers an excellent example of the role obfuscation can play in
building a secure and secret communications system. It illustrates the benefits
of finding the right existing situation and blending into it, lost in the hubbub of
ordinary commerce, hidden by the crowd.




24
                                                                      CHAPTER    1
2 OTHER EXAMPLES
2.1 Orb-weaving spiders: obfuscating animals
Some animals (and some plants too) have ways to conceal themselves or
engage in visual trickery. Insects mimic the appearance of leaves or twigs,
rabbits have countershading (white bellies) to eliminate the cues of shape that
enables a hawk to easily see and strike, and spots on buttterflies’ wings mimic
the eyes of predatory animals.
      A quintessential obfuscator in the animal world is Cyclosa mulmeinensis,
an orb-weaving spider.' This spider faces a particular problem for which
obfuscation is a sound solution: its web must be somewhat exposed in order
to catch prey, but that makes the spider much more vulnerable to attack by
wasps. The spider's solution is to make stand-ins for itself out of remains of
its prey, leaf litter, and spider silk, with (from the perspective of a wasp) the
same size, color, and reflectivity of the spider itself, and to position these
decoys around the web. This decreases the odds of a wasp strike hitting home
and gives Cyclosa mulmeinensis time to scuttle out of harm's way.

2.2 False orders: using obfuscation to attack rival businesses
The obfuscation goal of making a channel noisier can be employed not only to
conceal significant traffic, but also to raise the costs of organization through
that channel—and so raise the cost of doing business. The taxi-replacement
company Uber provides an example of this approach in practice.
      The market for businesses that provide something akin to taxis and car
services is growing fast, and competition for both customers and drivers is
fierce. Uber has offered bonuses to recruit drivers from competing services,
and rewards merely for visiting the company’s headquarters. In New York,
Uber pursued a particularly aggressive strategy against its competitor Get,
using obfuscation to recruit Gett’s drivers.’ Over the course of a few days,
several Uber employees would order rides from Gett, then would cancel those
orders shortly before the Gett drivers arrived. This flood of fruitless orders
kept the Gett drivers in motion, not earning fees, and unable to fulfill many
legitimate requests. Shortly after receiving a fruitless order, or several of
them, a Gett driver would receive a text message from Uber offering him
money to switch jobs. Real requests for rides were effectively obfuscated by
Uber’s fake requests, which reduced the value of a job with Gett. (Lyft, a ride-
 sharing company, has alleged that Uber has made similar obfuscation attacks
 on its drivers.)

 2.3 French decoy radar emplacements: defeating radar detectors
 Obfuscation plays a part in the French government's strategy against radar
 detectors.* These fairly common appliances warn drivers when police are
 using speed-detecting radar nearby. Some radar detectors can indicate the
 position of a radar gun relative to a user's vehicle, and thus are even more
 effective in helping drivers to avoid speeding tickets.
       In theory, tickets are a disincentive to excessively fast and dangerous
 driving; in practice, they serve as a revenue source for local police depart-
 ments and governments. For both reasons, police are highly motivated to
 defeat radar detectors.
      The option of regulating or-even banning radar detectors is unrealistic in
view of the fact that 6 million French drivers are estimated to own them.
Turning that many ordinary citizens into criminals seems impolitic. Without the
power to stop surveillance of radar guns, the French government has taken to
obfuscation to render such surveillance less useful in high-traffic zones by
deploying arrays of devices that trigger radar detectors’ warning signals
without actually measuring speed. These devices mirror the chaff strategy in
that the warning chirps multiply and multiply again. One of them may, indeed,
indicate actual speed-detecting radar, but which one? The meaningful signal is
drowned in a mass of other plausible signals. Either drivers risk getting
speeding tickets or they slow down in response to the deluge of radar pings.
And the civic goal is accomplished. No matter how one feels about traffic cops
or speeding drivers, the case holds interest as a way obfuscation serves to
promote an end not by destroying one’s adversaries’ devices outright but by
rendering them functionally irrelevant.

2.4 AdNauseam: clicking all the ads
In a strategy resembling that of the French radar-gun decoys, AdNauseam, a
browser plug-in, resists online surveillance for purposes of behavioral adver-
tising by clicking all the banner ads on all the Web pages visited by its users.
In conjunction with Ad Block Plus, AdNauseam functions in the background,
quietly clicking all blocked ads while recording, for the user's interest, details
about ads that have been served and blocked.



26                                                                    CHAPTER 2.
      The idea for AdNauseam emerged out of a sense of helplessness: it isn’t
possible to stop ubiquitous tracking by ad networks, or to comprehend the
intricate institutional and technical complexities constituting its socio-technical
backend. These include Web cookies and beacons, browser fingerprinting
(which uses combinations and configurations of the visitor's technology to
identify their activities), ad networks, and analytics companies. Efforts to find
some middle ground through a Do Not Track technical standard have been
frustrated by powerful actors in the political economy of targeted advertising.
In this climate of no compromise, AdNauseam was born. Its design was
inspired by a slender insight into the prevailing business model, which charges
prospective advertisers a premium for delivering viewers with proven interest
in their products. What more telling evidence is there of interest than clicks on
particular ads? Clicks also sometimes constitute the basis of payment to an ad
network and to the ad-hosting website. Clicks on ads, in combination with
other data streams, build up the profiles of tracked users. Like the French
radar decoy systems, AdNauseam isn’t aiming to destroy the ability to track
clicks; instead it functions by diminishing the value of those clicks by obfuscat-
ing the real clicks with clicks that it generates automatically.

2.5 Quote stuffing: confusing algorithmic trading strategies
The term “quote stuffing” has been applied to bursts of anomalous activity on
stock exchanges that appear to be misleading trading data generated to gain
advantage over competitors on the exchange. In the rarefied field of high-
frequency trading (HFT), algorithms perform large volumes of trades far faster
than humans could, taking advantage of minute spans of time and differences
in price that wouldn’t draw the notice of attention of human traders. Timing has
always been critical to trading, but in HFT thousandths of a second separate
profit and loss, and complex strategies have emerged to accelerate your trades
and retard those of your competitors. Analysts of market behavior began to
notice unusual patterns of HFT activity during the summer of 2010: bursts of
quote requests for a particular stock, sometimes thousands of them in a
second. Such activity seemed to have no economic rationale, but one of the
most interesting and plausible theories is that these bursts are an obfuscation
tactic. One observer explains the phenomenon this way: “If you could generate
a large number of quotes that your competitors have to process, but you
can ignore since you generated them, you gain valuable processing time.”


                                                                                 27
OTHER EXAMPLES
 Unimportant information, in the form of quotes, is used to crowd the field of
 salient activity so that the generators of the unimportant information can accu-
 rately assess what is happening while making it more difficult and time con-
 suming for their competitors to do so. They create a cloud that only they can
 see through. None of the patterns in that information would fool or even dis-
 tract an analyst over a longer period of time—it would be obvious that they
 were artificial and insignificant. But in the sub-split-second world of HFT, the
 time it takes merely to observe and process activity makes all the difference.
       If the use of “quote stuffing” were to spread, it might threaten the very
 integrity of the stock market as a working system by overwhelming the phys-
 ical infrastructure on which the stock exchanges rely with hundreds of thou-
 sands of useless quotes consuming bandwidth. “This is an extremely disturbing
 development,” the observer quoted above adds, “because as more HFT
 systems start doing this, it is only a matter of time before quote-stuffing shuts
 down the entire market from congestion.”

 2.6 Swapping loyalty cards to interfere with analysis of
 shopping patterns
 Grocery stores have long been in the technological vanguard when it comes to
 working with data. Relatively innocuous early loyalty-card programs were
 used to draw repeat customers, extracting extra profit margins from people
 who didn’t use the card and aiding primitive data projects such as organizing
 direct mailings by ZIP code. The vast majority of grocers and chains outsourced
the business of analyzing data to ACNielsen, Catalina Marketing, and a few
other companies.’ Although these practices were initially perceived as isolated
and inoffensive, a few incidents altered the perception of purpose from innoc-
uous and helpful to somewhat sinister.
       In 1999, a slip-and-fall accident in a Los Angeles supermarket led to a
lawsuit, and attorneys for the supermarket chain threatened to disclose the
victim's history of alcohol purchases to the court.’ A string of similar cases
over the years fed a growing suspicion in the popular imagination that so-called
loyalty cards were serving ends beyond the allotment of discounts. Soon after
their widespread introduction, card-swapping networks developed. People
shared cards in order to obfuscate data about their purchasing patterns—
initially in ad hoc physical meetings, then, with the help of mailing lists and
online social networks, increasingly in large populations and over
                                                                            wide


28
                                                                     CHAPTER 2
geographical regions. Rob’s Giant Bonus Card Swap Meet, for instance, started
from the idea that a system for sharing bar codes could enable customers of
the DC-area supermarket chain Giant to print out the bar codes of other cus-
tomers and then paste them onto their cards.® Similarly, the Ultimate Shopper
project fabricated and distributed stickers imprinted with the bar code from a
Safeway loyalty card, thereby creating “an army of clones” whose shopping
data would be accrued.? Cardexchange.org, devoted to exchanging loyalty
cards by mail, presents itself as a direct analogue to physical meet-ups held
for the same purpose. The swapping of loyalty cards constitutes obfuscation
as a group activity: the greater the number of people who are willing to share
their cards, and the farther the cards travel, the less reliable the data become.
      Card-swapping websites also host discussions and post news articles
and essays about differing approaches to loyalty-card obfuscation and some
of the ethical issues they raise. Negative effects on grocery stores are of
concern, as card swapping degrades the data available to them and perhaps to
other recipients. It is worth noting that such effects are contingent both on the
card programs and on the approaches to card swapping. For example, sharing
of a loyalty card within a household or among friends, though it may deprive a
store of individual-level data, may still provide some useful information about
shopping episodes or about product preferences within geographic areas. The
value of data at the scale of a postal code, a neighborhood, or a district is far
from insignificant. And there may be larger patterns to be inferred from the
genuine information present in mixed and mingled data.

2.7 BitTorrent Hydra: using fake requests to deter collection
of addresses
BitTorrent Hydra, a now-defunct but interesting and illustrative project, fought
the surveillance efforts of anti-file-sharing interests by mixing genuine
requests for bits of a file with dummy requests." The BitTorrent protocol broke
a file into many small pieces and allowed users to share files with one another
by simultaneously sending and receiving the pieces." Rather than download
an entire file from another user, one assembled it from pieces obtained from
anyone else who had them, and anyone who needed a piece that you had could
get it from you. This many-pieces-from-many-people approach expedited the
sharing of files of all kinds and quickly became the method of choice for
moving large files, such as those containing movies and music.'? To help users



OTHER EXAMPLES                                                                 29
of BitTorrent assemble the files they needed, “torrent trackers” logged IP
addresses that were sending and receiving files. For example, if you were
looking for certain pieces of a file, torrent trackers would point you to the
addresses of users who had the pieces you needed. Representatives of the
content industry, looking for violations of their intellectual property, began to
run their own trackers to gather the addresses of major unauthorized upload-
ers and downloaders in order to stop them or even prosecute them. Hydra
counteracted this tracking by adding random IP addresses drawn from those
previously used for BitTorrent to the collection of addresses found by the
torrent tracker. If you had requested pieces of a file, you would be periodically
directed to a user who didn’t have what you were looking for. Although a small
inefficiency for the BitTorrent system as a whole, it significantly undercut the
utility of the addresses that copyright enforcers gathered, which may have
belonged to actual participants but which may have been dummy addresses
inserted by Hydra. Doubt and uncertainty had been reintroduced to the system,
lessening the likelihood that one could sue with assurance. Rather than
attempt to destroy the adversary’s logs or to conceal BitTorrent traffic, Hydra
provided an “I am Spartacus” defense. Hydra didn’t avert data collection;
however, by degrading the reliability of data collection, it called any specific
findings into question.

2.8 Deliberately vague language: obfuscating agency
According to Jacquelyn Burkell and Alexandre Fortier, the privacy policies of
health information sites use particularly obtuse linguistic constructions when
describing their use of tracking, monitoring, and data collection.'? Conditional
verbs (e.g., “may”), passive voice, nominalization, temporal adverbs (e.g.,
“periodically” and “occasionally’), and the use of qualitative adjectives (as in
“small piece of data”) are among the linguistic constructions that Burkell and
Fortier identify. As subtle as this form of obfuscation may seem, it is recogniz-
ably similar in operation to other forms we have already described: in place of
a specific, specious denial (e.g., “we do not collect user information”) or an
exact admission, vague language produces many confusing gestures of pos-
sible activity and attribution. For example, the sentence “Certain information
may be passively collected to connect use of this site with information about
the use of other sites provided by third parties” puts the particulars of what a
site does with certain information inside a cloud of possible interpretations.



30                                                                   CHAPTER 2
These written practices veer away from obfuscation per se into the more
general domain of abstruse language and “weasel words.”* However, for pur-
poses of illustrating the range of obfuscating approaches, the style of obfus-
cated language is useful: a document must be there, a straightforward denial
isn't possible, and so the strategy becomes one of rendering who is doing
what puzzling and unclear.

2.9 Obfuscation of anonymous text: stopping stylometric analysis
How much in text identifies it as the creation of one author rather than another?
Stylometry uses only elements of linguistic style to attribute authorship to
anonymous texts. It doesn’t have to account for the possibility that only a
certain person would have knowledge of some matter, for posts to an online
forum, for other external clues (such as IP addresses), or for timing. It consid-
ers length of sentences, choice of words, and syntax, idiosyncrasies in format-
ting and usage, regionalisms, and recurrent typographical errors. It was a
stylometric analysis that helped to settle the debate over the pseudonymous
authors of the Federalist Papers (for example, the use of “while” versus
“whilst” served to differentiate the styles of Alexander Hamilton and James
Madison), and stylometry’s usefulness in legal contexts is now well
established.'°
      Given a small amount of text, stylometry can identify an author. And we
mean small—according to Josyula Rao and Pankaj Ratangi, a sample con-
sisting of about 6,500 words is sufficient (when used with a corpus of identi-
fied text, such as email messages, posts to a social network, or blog posts) to
make possible an 80 percent rate of successful identification.'* In the course
of their everyday use of computers, many people produce 6,500 words in a
few days.
      Even if the goal is not to identify a specific author from a pool of known
individuals, stylometry can produce information that is useful for purposes of
surveillance. The technology activist Daniel Domscheit-Berg recalls the
moment when he realized that if WikiLeaks’ press releases, summaries of
leaks, and other public texts were to undergo stylometric analysis it would
show that only two people (Domscheit-Berg and Julian Assange) had been
responsible for all those texts rather than a large and diverse group of volun-
teers, as Assange and Domscheit-Berg were trying to suggest."” Stylometric
analysis offers an adversary a more accurate picture of an “anonymous” or



OTHER EXAMPLES                                                                 31
  secretive movement, and of its vulnerabilities, than can be gained by other
  means. Having narrowed authorship down to a small handful, the adversary is
  in a better position to target a known set of likely suspects.
        Obfuscation makes it practicable to muddle the signal of a public body of
  text and to interfere with the process of connecting that body of text with a
  named author. Stylometric obfuscation is distinctive, too, in that its success is
  more readily tested than with many other forms of obfuscation, whose precise
  effects may be highly uncertain and/or may be known only to an uncooperative
  adversary.
        Three approaches to beating stylometry offer useful insights into obfus-
 cation. The first two, which are intuitive and straightforward, involve assuming
 a writing style that differs from one’s usual style; their weaknesses highlight
 the value of using obfuscation.
        Translation attacks take advantage of the weaknesses of machine trans-
 lation by translating a text into multiple languages and then translating it back
 into its original language—a game of Telephone that might corrupt an author's
 style enough to prevent attribution.'® Of course, this also renders the text less
 coherent and meaningful, and as translation tools improve it may not do a
 good enough job of depersonalization.
       In imitation attacks, the original author deliberately writes a document in
 the style of another author. One vulnerability of that approach has been ele-
 gantly exposed by research.'? Using the systems you would use to identify
texts as belonging to the same author, you can determine the most powerful
 identifier of authorship between two texts, then eliminate that identifier from
the analysis and look for the next-most-powerful identifier, then keep repeat-
ing the same process of elimination. If the texts really are by different people,
accuracy in distinguishing between them will decline slowly, because beneath
the big, obvious differences between one author and another there are many
smaller and less reliable differences. If, however, both texts are by the same
person, and one of them was written in imitation of another author, accuracy
in distinguishing will decline rapidly, because beneath notable idiosyncrasies
fundamental similarities are hard to shake.
       Obfuscation attacks on stylometric analysis involve writing in such a way
that there is no distinctive style. Researchers distinguish between “shallow”
and “deep” obfuscation of texts. “Shallow” obfuscation changes only a small
number of the most obvious features—for example, preference for “while” or



32                                                                    CHAPTER 2
for “whilst.” “Deep” obfuscation runs the same system of classifiers used to
defeat imitation, but does so for the author's benefit. Such a method might
provide real-time feedback to an author editing a document, identifying the
highest-ranked features and suggesting changes that would diminish the
accuracy of stylometric analysis—for example, sophisticated paraphrasing. It
might turn the banalities of “general usage” into a resource, enabling an author
to blend into a vast crowd of similar authors.
      Anonymouth—a tool that is under development as of this writing—is a
step toward implementing this approach by producing statistically bland prose
that can be obfuscated within the corpus of similar writing.”° Think of the car
provided to the getaway driver in the 2011 movie Drive: a silver late-model
Chevrolet Impala, the most popular car in California, about which the mechanic
promises “No one will be looking at you.”' Ingenious as this may be, we
wonder about a future in which political manifestos and critical documents
strive for great rhetorical and stylistic banality and we lose the next Thomas
Paine’s equivalent to “These are the times that try men’s souls.”

2.10 Code obfuscation: baffling humans but not machines
In the field of computer programming, the term “obfuscated code” has two
related but distinct meanings. The first is “obfuscation as a means of protec-
tion’—that is, making the code harder for human readers (or the various
forms of “disassembly algorithms,” which help explicate code that has been
compiled for use) to interpret for purposes of copying, modification, or com-
promise. (A classic example of such reverse engineering goes as follows: Mic-
rosoft sends out a patch to update Windows computers for security purposes;
bad actors get the patch and look at the code to figure out what vulnerability
the patch is meant to address; they then devise an attack exploiting the vulner-
ability they have noticed hitting.) The second meaning of “obfuscated code”
refers to a form of art: writing code that is fiendishly complex for a human to
untangle but which ultimately performs a mundane computational task that is
easily processed by a computer.
      Simply put, a program that has been obfuscated will have the same func-
tionality it had before, but will be more difficult for a human to analyze. Such
a program exhibits two characteristics of obfuscation as a category and a
concept. First, it operates under constraint—you obfuscate because people
will be able to see your code, and the goals of obfuscation-as-protection are



OTHER EXAMPLES                                                               33
 to decrease the efficiency of the analysis (“at least doubling the time needed,”
 as experimental research has found), to reduce the gap between novices and
 skilled analysts, and to give systems that (for whatever reason) are easier to
 attack threat profiles closer to those of systems that are more difficult to
 attack.” Second, an obfuscated program's code uses strategies that are famil-
 iar from other forms of obfuscation: adding significant-seeming gibberish;
 having extra variables that must be accounted for; using arbitrary or deliber-
 ately confusing names for things within the code; including within the code
 deliberately confusing directions (essentially, “go to line x and do y’) that lead
 to dead ends or wild goose chases; and various forms of scrambling. In its
 protective mode, code obfuscation is a time-buying approach to thwarting
analysis—a speed bump. (Recently there have been advances that signifi-
cantly increase the difficulty of de-obfuscation and the amount of time it
requires; we will discuss them below.)
      In its artistic, aesthetic form, code obfuscation is in the vanguard of coun-
terintuitive, puzzling methods of accomplishing goals. Nick Montfort has
described these practices in considerable detail.” For example, because of
how the programming language C interprets names of variables, a program-
mer can muddle human analysis but not machine execution by writing code
that includes the letters o and 0 in contexts that trick the eye by resembling
zeroes. Some of these forms of obfuscation lie a little outside our working
definition of “obfuscation,” but they are useful for illustrating an approach to
the fundamental problem of obfuscation: how to transform something that is
open to scrutiny into something ambiguous, full of false leads, mistaken iden-
tities, and unmet expectations.
       Code obfuscation, like stylometry, can be analyzed, tested, and optimized
with precision. Its functionality is expanding from the limited scope of buying
time and making the task of unraveling code more difficult to something closer
to achieving complete opacity. A recent publication by Sanjam Garg and col-
leagues has moved code obfuscation from a “speed bump” to an “iron wall.”
A Multilinear Jigsaw Puzzle can break code apart so that it “fits together” like
pieces of a puzzle. Although many arrangements are possible, only one
arrangement is correct and represents the actual operation of the code. A
programmer can create a clean, clear, human-readable program and then run
it through an obfuscator to produce something incomprehensible that can
withstand scrutiny for a much longer time than before.



34                                                                    CHAPTER 2
      Code obfuscation—a lively, rich area for the exploration of obfuscation in
general—seems to be progressing toward systems that are relatively easy to
use and enormously difficult to defeat. This is even applicable to hardware:
Jeyavijayan Rajendran and colleagues are utilizing components within circuits
to create “logic obfuscation” in order to prevent reverse engineering of the
functionality of a chip.”

2.11 Personal disinformation: strategies for individual
disappearance
Disappearance specialists have much to teach would-be obfuscators. Many of
these specialists are private detectives or “skip tracers’—professionals in the
business of finding fugitives and debtors—who reverse engineer their own
process to help their clients stay lost. Obviously many of the techniques and
methods they employ have nothing to do with obfuscation, but rather are
merely evasive or concealing—for instance, creating a corporation that can
lease your new apartment and pay your bills so that your name will not be
connected with those common and publicly searchable activities. However, in
response to the proliferation of social networking and online presence, disap-
pearance specialists advocate a strategy of disinformation, a variety of obfus-
cation. “Bogus individuals,” to quote the disappearance consultant Frank
Ahearn, can be produced in number and detail that will “bury” pre-existing
personal information that might crop up in a list of Web search results.”* This
entails creating a few dozen fictitious people with the same name and the
same basic characteristics, some of them with personal websites, some with
accounts on social networks, and all of them intermittently active. For clients
fleeing stalkers or abusive spouses, Ahearn recommends simultaneous pro-
ducing numerous false leads that an investigator would be likely to follow—
for example, a credit check for a lease on an apartment in one city (a lease
that was never actually signed) and applications for utilities, employment
addresses and phone numbers scattered across the country or the world, and
a checking account, holding a fixed sum, with a debit card given to someone
traveling to pay for expenses incurred in remote locations. Strategies sug-
gested by disappearance specialists are based on known details about the
adversary: the goal is not to make someone “vanish completely,” but to put
one far enough out of sight for practical purposes and thus to use up the seek-
er’s budget and resources.



OTHER EXAMPLES                                                               35
 2.12 Apple’s “cloning service” patent: polluting electronic profiling
 In 2012, as part of a larger portfolio purchase from Novell, Apple acquired U.S.
 Patent 8,205,265, “Techniques to Pollute Electronic Profiling.”2” An approach to
 managing data surveillance without sacrificing services, it parallels several
 systems of technological obfuscation we have described already. This “cloning
 service” would automate and augment the process of producing misleading
 personal information, targeting online data collectors rather than private
 investigators.
        A “cloning service” observes an individual's activities and assembles a
  plausible picture of his or her rhythms and interests. At the user’s request, it
 will spin off a cloned identity that can use the identifiers provided to authenti-
 cate (to social networks, if not to more demanding observers) that represents
 a real person. These identifiers might include small amounts of actual confi-
 dential data (a few details of a life, such as hair color or marital status) mixed
 in with a considerable amount of deliberately inaccurate information. Starting
 from its initial data set, the cloned identity acquires an email address from
 which it will send and receive messages, a phone number (there are many
 online calling services that make phone numbers available for a small fee),
 and voicemail service. It may have an independent source of funds (perhaps a
 gift card or a debit card connected with a fixed account that gets refilled from
 time to time) that enables it to make small transactions. It may even have a
 mailing address or an Amazon locker—two more signals that suggest per-
 sonhood. To these signals may be added some interests formally specified by
the user and fleshed out with existing data made accessible by the scraping of
 social-network sites and by similar means. If a user setting up a clone were to
select from drop-down menus that the clone is American and is interested in
photography and camping, the system would figure out that the clone should
be interested in the work of Ansel Adams. It can conduct searches (in
                                                                                the
manner of TrackMeNot), follow links, browse pages, and even make pur-
chases and establish accounts with services (e.g., subscribing to a mailing list
devoted to deals on wilderness excursions, or following National Geographic's
Twitter account). These interests may draw on the user’s actual interests,
                                                                                 as
inferred from things such as the user's browsing history, but may begin
                                                                                  to
diverge from those interests in a gradual, incremental way. (One could
                                                                               also
salt the profile of one’s clone with demographically appropriate activities,
automatically chosen, building on the basics of one’s actual data by
                                                                          selecting


36
                                                                      CHAPTER    2
interests and behaviors so typical that they even out the telling idiosyncrasies
of selfhood.)
      After performing some straightforward analysis, a clone can also take on a
person's rhythms and habits. If you are someone who is generally offline on
weekends, evenings, and holidays, your clone will do likewise. It won't run
continuously, and you can call it off if you are about to catch a flight, so an
adversary will not be able to infer easily which activities are not yours. The
clones will resume when you do. (For an explanation of why we now are
talking about multiple clones, see below.) Of course, you can also select
classes of activities in which your clones will not engage, lest the actors
feigning to be you pirate some media content, begin to search for instructions
on how to manufacture bombs, or look at pornography, unless they must do
so to maintain plausibility—making all one’s clones clean-living, serious-
minded network users interested only in history, charitable giving, and recipes
might raise suspicions. (The reason we have switched from talking about a
singular clone to speaking about multiple clones is that once one clone is up
and running there will be many others. Indeed, imagine a Borgesian joke in
which sufficiently sophisticated clones, having learned from your history,
demography, and habits, create clones of their own—copies of copies.) It is in
your interest to expand this population of possible selves, leading lives that
could be yours, day after day. This fulfills the fundamental goal outlined by the
patent: your clones don’t dodge or refuse data gathering, but in complying
they pollute the data collected and reduce the value of profiles created from
those data.

2.13 Vortex: cookie obfuscation as game and marketplace
Vortex—a proof-of-concept game (of sorts) developed by Rachel Law, an
artist, designer, and programmer*—serves two functions simultaneously: to
educate players about how online filtering systems affect their experience of
the Internet and to confuse and misdirect targeted advertising based on
browser cookies and other identifying systems. It functions as a game, serving
to occupy and delight—an excellent venue for engaging users with a subject
as seemingly dry and abstract as cookie-based targeted advertising. It is, in
other words, a massively multi-player game of managing and exchanging per-
sonal data. The primary activities are “mining” cookies from websites and
swapping them with other players. In one state of play, the game looks like a



OTHER EXAMPLES                                                                37
 few color-coded buttons in the bookmarks bar of your browser that allow you
 to accumulate and swap between cookies (effectively taking on different
 identities); in another state of play, it looks like a landscape that represents
 a site as a quasi-planet that can be mined for cookies. (The landscape repre-
 sentation is loosely inspired by the popular exploration and building game
 Minecraft.)
       Vortex ingeniously provides an entertaining and friendly way to display,
 manage, and share cookies. As you generate cookies, collect cookies, and
 swap cookies with other players, you can switch from one cookie to another
 with a click, thereby effectively disguising yourself and experiencing a different
 Web, a different set of filters, a different online self. This makes targeted
 advertising into a kind of choice: you can toggle over to cookies that present
 you as having a different gender, a different ethnicity, a different profession,
 and a different set of interests, and you can turn the ads and “personalized”
 details into mere background noise rather than distracting and manipulative
components that peg you as some marketer's model of your identity. You can
experience the Web as many different people, and you can make any record of
yourself into a deniable portrait that doesn’t have much to do with you in par-
ticular. In a trusted circle of friends, you can share account cookies that will
enable you to purchase things that are embargoed in your location—for
example, video streams that are available only to viewers in a certain country.
      Hopping from self to self, and thereby ruining the process of compiling
demographic dossiers, Vortex players would turn online identity into a field of
options akin to the inventory screens of an online role-playing game. Instead
of hiding, or giving up on the benefits that cookies and personalization can
provide, Vortex allows users to deploy a crowd of identities while one’s own
identity is offered to a mob of others.

2.14 “Bayesian flooding” and “unselling” the value of online identity
In 2012, Kevin Ludlow, a developer and an entrepreneur, addressed a familiar
obfuscation problem: What is the best way to hide data from Facebook?2’ The
short answer is that there is no good way to remove data, and wholesale
withdrawal from social networks isn’t a realistic possibility for many users.
Ludlow’s answer is by now a familiar one.
     “Rather than trying to hide information from Facebook,” Ludlow wrote, “it
may be possible simply to overwhelm it with too much information.” Ludlow’s



38                                                                    CHAPTER 2
experiment (which he called “Bayesian flooding,” after a form of statistical
analysis) entailed entering hundreds of life events into his Facebook Timeline
over the course of months—events that added up to a life worthy of a
three-volume novel. He got married and divorced, fought cancer (twice), broke
numerous bones, fathered children, lived all over the world, explored a dozen
religions, and fought for a slew of foreign militaries. Ludlow didn’t expect
anyone to fall for these stories; rather, he aimed to produce a less targeted
personal experience of Facebook through the inaccurate guesses to which the
advertising now responds, and as an act of protest against the manipulation
and “coercive psychological tricks” embedded both in the advertising itself and
in the site mechanisms that provoke or sway users to enter more information
than they may intend to enter. In fact, the sheer implausibility of Ludlow’s
Timeline life as a globe-trotting, caddish mystic-mercenary with incredibly
bad luck acts as a kind of filter: no human reader, and certainly no friend or
acquaintance of Ludlow’s, would assume that all of it was true, but the analy-
sis that drives the advertising has no way of making such distinctions.
      Ludlow hypothesizes that, if his approach were to be adopted more
widely, it wouldn’t be difficult to identify wild geographic, professional, or
demographic outliers—people whose Timelines were much too crowded with
incidents—and then wash their results out of a larger analysis. The particular
understanding of victory that Ludlow envisions, which we discuss in the typol-
ogy of goals presented in second part of this book, is a limited one. His Bayes-
ian flooding isn’t meant to counteract and corrupt the vast scope of data
collection and analysis; rather, its purpose is to keep data about oneself both
within the system and inaccessible. Max Cho describes a less extreme version:
“The trick is to populate your Facebook with just enough lies as to destroy the
value and compromise Facebook's ability to sell you”*»—that is, to make your
online activity harder to commoditize, as an act of conviction and protest.

2.15 FaceCloak: concealing the work of concealment
FaceCloak offers a different approach to limiting Facebook's access to per-
sonal information. When you create a Facebook profile and fill in your personal
information, including where you live, where you went to school, your likes
and dislikes, and so on, FaceCloak allows you to choose whether to display
this information openly or to keep it private." If you choose to display the
information openly, it is passed to Facebook's servers. If you choose to keep it



OTHER EXAMPLES                                                               39
private, FaceCloak sends it to encrypted storage on a separate server, where it
may be decrypted for and displayed only to friends you have authorized when
they browse your Facebook page using the FaceCloak plug-in. Facebook never
gains access to it.
      What is salient about FaceCloak for present purposes is that it obfuscates
its method by generating fake information for Facebook's required profile
fields, concealing from Facebook and from unauthorized viewers the fact that
the real data are stored elsewhere. As FaceCloak passes your real data to the
private server, FaceCloak fabricates for Facebook a plausible non-person of a
certain gender, with a name and an age, bearing no relation to the real facts
about you. Under the cover of the plausible non-person, you can forge genuine
connections with your friends while presenting obfuscated data for others.

 2.16 Obfuscated likefarming: concealing indications of manipulation
 Likefarming is now a well-understood strategy for generating the illusion of
 popularity on Facebook: employees, generally in the developing world, will
 “like” a particular brand or product for a fee (the going rate is a few U.S. dollars
for a thousand likes).*? A number of benefits accrue to heavily liked items—
among other things, Facebook's algorithms will circulate pages that show
evidence of popularity, thereby giving them additional momentum.
       Likefarming is easy to spot, particularly for systems as sophisticated as
Facebook's. It is performed in narrowly focused bursts of activity devoted to
liking one thing or one family of things, from accounts that do little else. To
appear more natural, they employ an obfuscating strategy of liking a spread of
pages—generally pages recently added to the feed of Page Suggestions,
which Facebook promotes according to its model of the user's interests.2? The
paid work of systematically liking one page can be hidden within scattered
likes, appearing to come from a person with oddly singular yet characterless
interests. Likefarming reveals the diversity of motives for obfuscation—not, in
this instance, resistance to political domination, but simply provision of a
service for a fee.

2.17 URME surveillance: “identity prosthetics” expressing protest
The artist Leo Selvaggio wanted to engage with the video surveillance of public
space and the implications of facial-recognition software. After considering




40
                                                                        CHAPTER 2
the usual range of responses (wearing a mask, destroying cameras, ironic
attention-drawing in the manner of the Surveillance Camera Players), Selvag-
gio hit on a particularly obfuscating response with a protester’s edge: he pro-
duced and distributed masks of his face that were accurate enough so that
other people wearing them would be tagged as him by Facebook's facial-
recognition software.
     Selvaggio’s description of the project offers a capsule summary of
obfuscation: “[RJather than try to hide or obscure one’s face from the camera,
these devices allow you to present a different, alternative identity to the
camera, my own.”

2.18 Manufacturing conflicting evidence: confounding investigation
The Art of Political Murder: Who Killed the Bishop?—Francisco Goldman's
account of the investigation into the death of Bishop Juan José Gerardi
Conedera—reveals the use of obfuscation to muddy the waters of evidence
collection. Bishop Gerardi, who played an enormously important part in
defending human rights during Guatemala’s civil war of 1960-1996, was mur-
dered in 1998.
      As Goldman documented the long and dangerous process of bringing at
least a few of those responsible within the Guatemalan military to justice for
this murder, he observed that those threatened by the investigation didn’t
merely plant evidence to conceal their role. Framing someone else would be
an obvious tactic, and the planted evidence would be assumed to be false.
Rather, they produced too much conflicting evidence, too many witnesses and
testimonials, too many possible stories. The goal was not to construct an air-
tight lie, but rather to multiply the possible hypotheses so prolifically that
observers would despair of ever arriving at the truth. The circumstances of the
bishop's murder produced what Goldman terms an “endlessly exploitable sit-
uation,” full of leads that led nowhere and mountains of seized evidence, each
factual element calling the others into question. “So much could be made and
so much would be made to seem to connect,” Goldman writes, his italics
emphasizing the power of the ambiguity.**
     The thugs in the Guatemalan military and intelligence services had plenty
of ways to manage the situation: access to internal political power, to money,
and, of course, to violence and the threat of violence. In view of how opaque




OTHER EXAMPLES                                                              41
the situation remains, we do not want to speculate about exact decisions,
but the fundamental goal seems reasonably clear. The most immediately
significant adversaries—investigators, judges, journalists—could be killed,
menaced, bought, or otherwise influenced. The obfuscating evidence and
other materials were addressed to the larger community of observers, a pro-
liferation of false leads throwing enough time-wasting doubt over every aspect
of the investigation that it could call the ongoing work, and any conclusions,
into question.




42                                                                CHAPTER 2
Understanding Obfuscation
3 WHY IS OBFUSCATION NECESSARY?

Where does a wise man hide a leaf? In the forest. But what does he do if there is
no forest? ... He grows a forest to hide it in.
G. K. Chesterton, “The Sign of the Broken Sword”


 3.1 Obfuscation in brief
 Privacy is a complex and even contradictory concept, a word of such broad
 meanings that in some cases it can become misleading, or almost meaning-
 less. It is expressed in law and policy, in technology, philosophy, and in every-
 day conversation. It encompasses a space that runs from a dashboard on a
website—your privacy settings, managed through drop-down menus and
 radio buttons—to an overarching argument about the development of human
society. Privacy is an outmoded idea, some say, a two-century anomaly of
Western industrialization, the interregnum between village life and social
media; privacy makes it possible for us to develop as free-thinking, indepen-
dent individuals; privacy is an expression of bourgeois hypocrisy and bad faith;
privacy is the defense of social diversity ... .' This doesn’t merely show the
ways in which the word is used. A moment's reflection makes clear that
within these uses are divergent concepts. The house of privacy has many
rooms. Some are concerned with the integrity of family life, some with state
oppression (now or in the future), some with the utility and value of data,
and some with a true inner self that can only emerge in anonymity, and
many have intersections and communicating doors.’ This conceptual diversity
carries over into the strategies, practices, technologies, and tactics used to
produce, perform, and protect privacy.’ Elsewhere we have shown how many
of these conceptions can be unified under the banner of contextual integrity,
but here our concern is with the connections between these concerns, as
they are specifically articulated, and with how we can defend ourselves
accordingly.’
      The purpose of this chapter is to describe what obfuscation is and how it
fits into the diverse landscape of privacy interests, threats to those interests,
and methods used to address those threats. Privacy is a multi-faceted concept,
and a wide range of structures, mechanisms, rules, and practices are available
to produce it and defend it. If we open up privacy's tool chest, drawer by meta-
phorical drawer, we find policy and law at the local, national, and global levels;
 provably secure technologies, such as cryptography; the disclosure actions
 and practices of individuals; social systems of confidentiality (for example,
 those of journalists, priests, doctors, and lawyers); steganographic systems;
 collective withholding and omerta on the part of a community; and more. We
 find Timothy May's BlackNet, an application of cryptographic technologies to
 describe a wholly anonymous information marketplace, with untraceable,
 untaxable transactions, that fosters corporate espionage and the circulation of
 military secrets and forbidden and classified materials, with the long-term
 goal of the “collapse of governments.”> We find legal work building on the
 Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution to establish protections
 for communications networks and social sites, endeavoring to strike a balance
 between rights of individual citizens and powers of law enforcement. To this
 diverse kit we will add obfuscation, both as a method in itself and as an
 approach that can be used within and alongside other methods, depending on
the goal. We aim to persuade readers that for some privacy problems obfus-
cation is a plausible solution, and that for some it is the best solution.
      Obfuscation, at its most abstract, is the production of noise modeled on
an existing signal in order to make a collection of data more ambiguous, con-
fusing, harder to exploit, more difficult to act on, and therefore less valuable.
The word “obfuscation” was chosen for this activity because it connotes
obscurity, unintelligibility, and bewilderment and because it helps to distin-
guish this approach from methods that rely on disappearance or erasure.
Obfuscation assumes that the signal can be spotted in some way and adds a
plethora of related, similar, and pertinent signals—a crowd which an individ-
ual can mix, mingle, and, if only for a short time, hide.
      Consider General Sir Arthur St. Clare, the fictional military martyr in G. K.
Chesterton's short story “The Sign of the Broken Sword.” General St. Clare's
men were slaughtered in an ill-considered attack on an enemy camp. Why did
the brilliant strategist attempt an obviously flawed attack on his foe's superior
position? Chesterton's ecclesiastical detective, Father Brown, answers with a
question: “Where does the wise man hide a pebble?” “On the beach,” his friend
replies.° And he hides a leaf in the forest, Brown continues—and if he needs
to hide a body, he must produce many dead bodies among which to hide it. To
protect his secret, General St. Clare slays one man, then conceals him by the
chaos of other dead men, which he creates by commanding a sudden charge
on artillery that has the high ground.



46
                                                                      CHAPTER 3
     Father Brown's rhetorical question was repeated by the Rt. Hon. Lord
Justice Jacob in a 2007 patent case:
     Now it might be suggested that it is cheaper to make this sort of mass dis-
     closure than to consider the documents with some care to decide whether
     they should be disclosed. And at that stage it might be cheaper—just run it
     all through the photocopier or CD maker—especially since doing so is an
     allowable cost. But that isn’t the point. For it is the downstream costs caused
     by over-disclosure which so often are so substantial and so pointless. It can
     even be said, in cases of massive over-disclosure, that there is a real risk
     that the really important documents will get overlooked—where does a wise
     man hide a leaf?’

 From dead soldiers to disclosed documents, we can see that the essence of
obfuscation is in getting things overlooked, and adding to the cost, trouble, and
difficulty of doing the looking.
      Obfuscation can usefully be compared to camouflage. Camouflage is
often thought of as a tool for outright disappearance—think of the scene in
 The Simpsons in which Milhouse imagines putting on his camo outfit and
melting into the greenery, with only his glasses and smile still visible.® In prac-
tice, both natural and man-made camouflage work with a variety of techniques
and goals, only some of which are used to try to vanish from view entirely;
others make use of “disruptive patterns” that hide the edges, outline, orienta-
tion, and movement of a shape with fragments and suggestions of other pos-
sible shapes. Breaking up the outlines doesn’t make a shape disappear
entirely, as when a flounder buries itself in sand or an octopus uses its mantle
to masquerade as a rock. Rather, for situations in which avoiding observation
is impossible—when we move, change positions, or are otherwise exposed—
disruptive patterns and disruptive coloration interfere with assessments of
things like range, size, speed, and numbers. They make the individual harder
to identify and target, and the members of the group more difficult to count.
Many early military uses of camouflage were devoted to making large, hard-
to-hide things such as artillery emplacements difficult to assess accurately
from the air. In situations in which one can’t disappear, producing numerous
possible targets or vectors of motion can sow confusion and buy valuable
time. If obfuscation has an emblematic animal, it is the family of orb-weaving
spiders, Cyclosa mulmeinensis (mentioned in chapter 2), which fill their webs


WHY IS OBFUSCATION      NECESSARY?                                               47
 with decoys of themselves. The decoys are far from perfect copies, but when
 a wasp strikes they work well enough to give the orb-weaver a second or two
to scramble to safety.
      Hannah Rose Shell’s history of camouflage, Hide and Seek: Camouflage,
Photography, and the Media of Reconnaissance, develops the theme of “cam-
ouflage consciousness,” a way of being and acting based on one’s internal
model of the surveillance technology against which one must work.’ Shell
argues that a camoufleur producing patterns, a specialist training soldiers,
and the soldiers on a battlefield were attempting to determine their visibility to
binoculars and telescopic rifle sights, to still and film cameras, to airplanes,
spotters, and satellites, and to act in ways that mitigated that visibility. This
entailed combining research, estimates, modeling, and guesswork to exploit
the flaws and limitations of observational technology. Camouflage, whether
seeking the complete invisibility of mimicry or the temporary solution of hiding
a shape in a mess of other, ambiguous, obfuscating possible shapes, was
always a reflection of the capabilities of the technology against which it was
developed.                                         :
      It is the forms of data obfuscation or information obfuscation that concern
us here—their technical utility for designers, developers, and activists. Under-
standing the moral and ethical roles of such forms of obfuscation means
understanding the data-acquisition and data-analysis technologies they can
challenge and obstruct. It means understanding the threat models, the goals,
and the constraints. Obfuscation is a tool among other tools for the construc-
tion and the defense of privacy, and like all tools it is honed on the purposes it
can serve and the problems it can solve. To lay out the nature of these prob-
lems, we introduce the idea of information asymmetry.

3.2 Understanding information asymmetry: knowledge and power
At this point, let us recall Donald Rumsfeld's famously convoluted explanation
of the calculus of risk in the run-up to the invasion of Iraq: “there are known
knowns, which we know we know; known unknowns, which we know we don’t
know; and unknown unknowns, which we do not know we don’t know.” As
much as this seems like a deliberate logic puzzle, it distinguishes three very
different categories of danger. We can see a surveillance camera mounted on
a streetlight, or concealed in a dome of mirrored glass on the ceiling of a
hallway, and know we are being recorded. We know that we don’t know



48                                                                   CHAPTER 3
 whether the recording is being transmitted only on the site or whether it is
 being streamed over the Internet to some remote location. We know that we
 don’t know how long the recording will be stored, or who is authorized to view
 it—just a security guard watching live, or an insurance inspector in the event
 of a claim, or the police?
      There is a much larger category of unknown unknowns about something
 as seemingly simple as a CCTV recording. We don’t know if the footage can be
 run through facial-recognition or gait-recognition software, for instance, or if
 the time code can be correlated with a credit-card purchase, or with the license
 plate of a car we exited, to connect our image with our identity—in fact, unless
 we are personally involved with privacy activism or security engineering, we
 don’t even know that we don’t know that. Confusing as it is, not only is the
triple negative in this sentence accurate; it also indicates the layers of uncer-
tainty: we aren't aware that we can’t be sure that the video file will not be
 analyzed with predictive demographic tools in order to identify likely criminals
 or terrorists for questioning. This isn’t even the end of the unknowns, all
potentially shaping consequential decisions produced in a dense cloud of our
 ignorance. And that is merely one CCTV camera, its cable or wireless trans-
mission terminating somewhere, in some hard drive, that may be backed up
somewhere else—under what jurisdictions, what terms, what business
arrangements? Multiply this by making a credit-card purchase, signing up for
an email list, downloading a smartphone app (“This app requires access to
your contacts”? “Sure!”), giving a postal code or a birthday or a identification
number in response to a reasonable and legitimate request, and on and on
through the day and around the world.
      It is obvious that information collection takes place in asymmetrical
power relationships: we rarely have a choice as to whether or not we are mon-
itored, what is done with any information that is gathered, or what is done to
us on the basis of conclusions drawn from that information. If you want to take
a train, make a phone call, use a parking garage, or buy some groceries, you
are going to be subject to information gathering and you are going to give up
some or all control over elements of that information. It is rarely a matter of
explicit agreement in a space of complete information and informed choice.
You will have to fill out certain forms in order to receive critical resources or
to participate in civic life, and you will have to consent to onerous terms of
service in order to use software that your job may require. Moreover, the



WHY IS OBFUSCATION      NECESSARY?                                            49
 infrastructure, by default, gathers data on you. Obfuscation is related to this
 problem of asymmetry of power—as the camouflage comparison suggests, it
 is an approach suited to situations in which we can’t easily escape observation
 but we must move and act—but this problem is only the surface aspect of
 information collection, what we know we know. A second aspect, the informa-
 tional or epistemic asymmetry, is a deeper and more pernicious problem, and
 plays more of a role in shaping obfuscation in defense of privacy.
       Brad Templeton, chair of the Electronic Frontier Foundation, has told a
 story of the danger of “time-traveling robots from the future”"' that, with more
 powerful hardware and sophisticated software than we have today, come back
 in time and subject us to total surveillance; they connect the discrete (and, we
 thought, discreet) dots of our lives, turning the flow of our private experience
 into all-too-clear, all-too-human patterns, shining their powerful analytic light
 into the past’s dark corners. Those robots from the future are mercenaries
working for anyone wealthy enough to employ them: advertisers, industries,
 governments, interested parties. We are helpless to stop them as they collate
and gather our histories, because, unlike them, we can’t travel through time
and change our past actions.
      Templeton’s story isn’t science fiction, however. We produce enormous
volumes of data every day. Those data stay around indefinitely, and the tech-
nology that can correlate them and analyze them keeps improving. Things we
once thought were private—if we thought of that at all—become open, visible,
and meaningful to new technologies. This is one aspect of the information
asymmetry that shapes our practices of privacy and autonomy: we don’t know
what near-future algorithms, techniques, hardware, and databases will be
able to do with our data. There is a constantly advancing front of transition
from meaningless to meaningful—from minor life events to things that can
change our taxes, our insurance rates, our access to capital, our freedom to
move, or whether we are placed ona list.
      That is the future unknown, but there are information asymmetries that
should concern us in the present too. Information about us is valuable, and it
moves around. A company that has collected information about us may
connect it with other disparate pools of records (logs of telephone calls,
purchase records, personally identifying information, demographic rosters,
activity on social networks, geolocative data), and may then package that
information and sell it to other companies—or hand it over in response to a



50                                                                   CHAPTER 3
 governmental request or a subpoena. Even if those who run a company
 promise to keep the information to themselves, it may become part of the
 schedule of assets after a bankruptcy and then be acquired or sold off. All the
 work of correlation and analysis is done with tools and training that, for most
 of the people they affect, lie beyond anything more than a superficial under-
 standing. The population at large doesn’t have access to the other databases,
 or to the techniques, the training in mathematics and computer science, or
 the software and hardware that one must have to comprehend what can be
 done with seemingly trivial details from their lives and activities, and how
 such details can potentially provide more powerful, more nearly complete,
 and more revealing analyses than ordinary users could have anticipated—
 more revealing, in fact, than even the engineers and analysts could have
 anticipated.
      Tal Zarsky, one of the major theorists of data mining, has described a
 subtle trap in predictive software—yet another, further step in the asymmetry.
 Predictive systems draw on huge existing datasets to produce predictions of
 human activity: they will make predictions, accurate or inaccurate, which will
 be used to make decisions and produce coercive outcomes, and people will be
punished or rewarded for things they have not yet done. The discriminatory
and manipulative possibilities are clear. However, as Zarsky explains, there is
another layer to these concerns: “A non-interpretable process might follow
from a data-mining analysis which is not explainable in human language.
Here, the software makes its selection decisions based upon multiple vari-
ables (even thousands). ... It would be difficult for the government to provide a
detailed response when asked why an individual was singled out to receive
differentiated treatment by an automated recommendation system. The most
the government could say is that this is what the algorithm found based on
previous cases.”””
      Developing these ideas further, Solon Barocas reveals how vulnerable we
are to data aggregation, analytics, and predictive modeling—now popularly
called “big data.” Big data methods take information we have willingly shared,
or have been compelled to provide, and produce knowledge from inferences
that few—least of all we individual data subjects—could have anticipated.'?It
is not simply that a decision is made and enforced. We can’t even be entirely
sure that we know why a decision is made and enforced, because, in the ulti-
mate unknowable unknown of data collection, those who make the decision



WHY IS OBFUSCATION      NECESSARY?                                            51
 don’t know why it is made and enforced. We are reduced to guessing at the
 inner workings of an opaque operation. We do not understand the grounds for
 judgment. We are in a state of informational asymmetry.
       Insofar as this is an argument built partially on what we don’t—indeed
 can't—know, it runs the risk of being a little abstract. But we can make it
 thoroughly concrete, and discuss a different facet of the problem of informa-
 tion asymmetry, by turning briefly to the subject of risk. Think of “risk” as in
 “credit risk.” As Josh Lauer's research has shown, the management of credit
 was crucial in the history of data collection, dossier production, and data
 mining."* Transformations in the mercantile and social order of the United
 States in the nineteenth century obliged businesses to issue credit to custom-
 ers without having access to the “personal acquaintance and community
 opinion” that formerly had figured in calculations of trust and risk. In the place
 of “personal acquaintance and community opinion,” they relied on credit
 bureaus to collect data that could be used to make informed decisions as to
whether individuals would receive loans, insurance, leases, and other risky
things. By the late 1920s, credit bureaus’ reports and analyses constituted a
private surveillance system on a scale that dwarfed any domestic project con-
ducted by the U.S. government. Several major consequences followed from
this, among them the coercion of character assessment built into one’s “finan-
cial identity” and the rise of targeted marketing as new uses for the accumu-
lated data were invented. One consequence is particularly relevant to our
argument here. That consequence, which really comes into play with the rise
of digital databases and tools, is that credit reporting decreases risk, yes, but
under some circumstances it also exports risk. (These consequences are in the
domain of Anthony Giddens’s “manufactured risks”: dangers produced by the
process of modernization, rather than mitigated by it, and, in turn, requiring
new systems of mitigation.    ')
      In the process of decreasing risk for a lender, an insurance company, or a
business opening a line of credit for a customer, risks are increased for the
individual. One risk is that of identity theft: you have to trust a department
store's subcontractor, whoever that is, to follow immaculate security prac-
tices. Another is the risk of violations of context, such as the store’s selling
data to shady data brokers, sharing data with partners, letting data be acquired
with the rest of a company, or letting data be gathered indiscriminately by
government in the course of some larger data-collection project. This may be



52                                                                    CHAPTER 3
a fair trade, but it is important to remember that risk doesn’t disappear with
data collection—new forms of risk are created and externalized by those who
hold the data. Those risks will be borne by you, and by others whom your data
can be used to better analyze and understand. On a larger scale, the surveil-
lance and data-collection projects our governments launch in the name of
security are always about protection from one class of risks against which the
state must defend, but they produce another class of risks whose danger citi-
zens take on: the risk that dissent will be stifled, the risk that legitimate oppo-
sition will be crushed, or just the risk that accidents will happen and innocent
people will be detained, tracked, exposed, and punished. These are cases in
which increasing the volume and the detail of information collected reduces
risk for some while increasing it for others—an experience of information
asymmetry we encounter every day and believe certain forms of obfuscation
can help to correct.
      “They” (or a range of “they’s) know much about us, and we know little
about them or about what they can do. Situations so asymmetrical in knowl-
edge, power, and risk make effective responses difficult to plan, much less
carry out. These are not the asymmetries of the priest or the busybody in a
small town where people know one another’s business and some people
know more than others. What we describe here is different because of the
convergence of asymmetries: those who know about us have power over us.
They can deny us employment, deprive us of credit, restrict our movements,
refuse us shelter, membership, or education, and limit our access to the
good life.

3.3 The fantasy of opting out
Of course, we still choose to participate in these asymmetrical relationships,
don’t we? For most of these forms of data collection, some of the fault must
lie with the individuals who use services or engage with institutions that offer
unfavorable terms of service and are known to misbehave. Isn’t putting all the
blame on government institutions and private services unfair, when they are
trying to maintain security and capture some of the valuable data produced by
their users? Doesn't this subject the users to classic moral hazard, making
service providers take on the burden of risk and responsibility for choices
that users make? Can't we users just opt out of systems with which we
disagree?



WHY IS OBFUSCATION      NECESSARY?                                              53
       To see to what degree simply opting out is increasingly unreasonable,
 consider a day in the life of a fairly ordinary person in a large city in a stable,
 democratically governed country. She is not in prison or institutionalized, nor
 is she a dissident or an enemy of the state, yet she lives in a condition of per-
 manent and total surveillance unprecedented in its precision and intimacy. As
 soon as she leaves her apartment, she is on camera: while in the hallway and
 the elevator of her building, when using the ATM outside her bank (which pro-
 duces a close-up image time-stamped with her withdrawal record), while
 passing shops and waiting at crosswalks, while in the subway station and on
 the train, while in the lobby, the elevator, and her cubicle in her workplace—and
 all that before lunch. A montage of very nearly every move of her life in the
 city outside her apartment could be assembled, and each step accounted
 for—particularly if she chooses to don her fitness-tracking device. But that
 montage would hardly be necessary: her mobile phone, in the course of its
 ordinary operation of seeking base stations and antennas to keep her con-
nected as she walks, provides a constant log of her position and movements.
Any time she spends in “dead zones” without’ phone reception can also be
accounted for: her subway pass logs her entry into the subway, and her
radio-frequency identification badge produces a record of her entry into the
building in which she works. (If she drives a car, her electronic toll-collection
pass serves a similar purpose, as does automatic license-plate imaging.) If
her apartment is part of a smart-grid program, spikes in her electricity usage
can reveal exactly when she is up and around, turning on lights and ventilation
fans and using the microwave oven and the coffee maker.
       Before we return to the question of opting out, consider how thoroughly
the systems mentioned in the preceding paragraph are embedded in our hypo-
thetical ordinary person's everyday life, far more invasively than mere logs of
her daily comings and goings. Someone observing her could assemble in
forensic detail her social and familial connections, her struggles and interests,
and her beliefs and commitments. From Amazon purchases and Kindle high-
lights, from purchase records linked with her loyalty cards at the drugstore
and the supermarket, from Gmail metadata and chat logs, from search-history
and checkout records from the public library, from Netflix-streamed movies,
and from activity on Facebook and Twitter, dating sites, and other social net-
works, a very specific and personal narrative is clear. The mobile device in her
pocket, the fitness-tracking device around her wrist, and the Event Data



54                                                                     CHAPTER 3
 Recorder installed in her car follow her when she is on the move. When even
 some of the data are pooled and correlated with data produced by others like
 her, powerful demographic inferences and predictions can be made. We know
 our subject with a thoroughness that would be the envy of any secret-police
 agent of a few decades ago—and with relatively little effort, as our subject
 spies on herself for us.
       lf the apparatus of total surveillance that we have described here were
deliberate, centralized, and explicit, a Big Brother machine toggling between
cameras, it would demand revolt, and we could conceive of a life outside the
totalitarian microscope. But if we are nearly as observed and documented as
any person in history, our situation is a prison that, although it has no walls,
bars, or wardens, is difficult to escape.
      Which brings us back to the problem of “opting out.” For all the dramatic
language about prisons and panopticons, the sorts of data collection we
describe here—the kinds to which obfuscation is a response—are, in demo-
cratic countries, still theoretically voluntary. But the costs of refusal are high
and getting higher: a life lived in ramifying social isolation, using any pay
phones you can find (there are half as many in New York City as there were just
five years ago) or mobile “burners,” able to accept only very particular forms
of employment, living far from centers of business and commerce, without
access to many forms of credit, insurance, or other significant financial instru-
ments, not to mention the minor inconveniences and disadvantages—long
waits at road toll cash lines, higher prices at grocery stores, inferior seating on
airline flights—for which disclosure is the unspecified price.'¢ It isn’t possible
for everyone to live on principle; as a practical matter, many of us must make
compromises in asymmetrical relationships, without the control or consent
for which we might wish. In those situations—everyday twenty-first-century
life—there are still ways to carve out spaces of resistance, counterargument,
and autonomy. They are weapons of the weak.

3.4 Weapons of the weak: what obfuscation can do
The political scientist James C. Scott went to “Sedaka,” a pseudonymized
village in Malaysia, to answer a question that has engaged historians, anthro-
pologists, and activists of all stripes: How do people who lack the commonly
recognized means of political recourse—votes, money, violence—engage in
resistance?”” Peasants, sharecroppers, and corvée laborers have their work



WHY IS OBFUSCATION      NECESSARY?                                              55
 captured and surplus extracted from it, whether as grain, cash, various forms
 of debt, or time in uncompensated occupations. Only rarely can the peasants
 risk a confrontation with the forces that take advantage of them. They have
 fewer resources on which to draw, in order to make dramatic and historically
 memorable stands against injustice, than skilled industrial workers in urban
 centers have. Scott was interested in an empirical question: What do peasants,
 in the face of obviously unjust actions, do? The answer was a list of ordinary,
 everyday, eminently practical ways of taking action and talking back, which
 Scott gathered under the heading “weapons of the weak.” These join the rich
 and varied accounts of resisting and keeping some measure of autonomy in
the balance between consent and outright refusal—most notably, in regard to
surveillance, in the work of Gary Marx."
       It is obvious, but still worth saying, that we do not intend a one-to-one
comparison between the people chronicled by Scott and, generally, the users
of obfuscation. Nor do we see obfuscation as having precisely the same set of
limitations and properties as Scott's concept. For purposes of this book, we
are inspired by fundamental themes in Scott's idea: we can better understand
acts of obfuscation within a context of unavoidable relationships between
people and institutions with large informational and power asymmetries. To
begin, we observe the necessarily small and additive nature of many of these
“weapons”—obfuscation and the ones Scott observes—reflecting their role in
an ongoing and open-ended set of social and political arrangements, rather
than an overturning world revolution. Instead of a mass invasion of inequitably
distributed land, the approach is to squat or poach. Pilfering and thumb-on-
the-scale fraud (the phenomenon large retailers euphemistically call “mer-
chandise shrinkage”) are fractional versions of the project of the re- allocation
of needful things. The response to orders is not some cinematic refusal, but
foot dragging, slowdowns, feigned ignorance, deliberate stupidity, and the
pretense of compliance. Finally, and most important for our purposes, rather
than overt backtalk or heroic here-we-stand speeches there is the evasive
muttering, gossip, and slander of what Scott terms the hidden transcript."
      It is likely that every reader of this book has turned away from a superior
(occupational, filial, legal, religious, or otherwise) and subvocally muttered
dissent. Perhaps the dissent takes place wholly in the mind; perhaps one
dares a barely audible murmur, meant for oneself alone; perhaps it is shared
in privacy among subordinate groups. (As Scott points out, powerful groups



56                                                                   CHAPTER 3
 also have hidden transcripts—ways of accumulating and maintaining power
 that can’t be generally discussed or disclosed.) Dissent in a workplace may
 take the form of gossip, jokes, anecdotes, or stories that make it possible to
 criticize the order of power without speaking outright. Dissent creates a space
 in which the dignity and relative autonomy of the speaker can exist, even as it
 accomplishes other things. An assertion is made, however covertly, that one is
 not what one may publicly appear to be.
       With that outline in place, we will lay out a few quick distinctions. No
 reasonable analogy can be made between one of the peasants Scott studied
 and an obfuscator who is installing a browser extension or running a Tor relay;
 the breadth of resources available to one and the other—the structures and
 infrastructures—and the mechanisms of coercion and control they face do not
 allow for simple comparisons. As our summary here suggests, though, part of
 what Scott accomplishes is broadening the spectrum of responses to oppres-
 sion and coercion that we take into account. It’s not just armed uprising or
 nothing at all, and no one is merely passive. There are very different degrees
 of access to the power, wealth, status, and other components of autonomy and
 redress, but we push back when and where we can. Taking up this thread, we
can look to one of the perennial questions about digital privacy: Why don’t
people use powerful, verifiably reliable, openly audited, robust protection
systems, such as end-to-end public-key encryption of their messages—
“strong” cryptography? Why not use the optimal system?
       We do not want to argue that they shouldn't. Quite the opposite! There
are, however, times, circumstances, populations, and events in which the
strong system, the optimal system, isn’t possible, accessible, desirable, or
some combination of the three. Situations arise in which we are obligated to
be visible, in which we need to be visible, or want to be visible (whether to
friends or compatriots, or as an act of public protest or presence) and still we
want to muddy our tracks as best we can. Sometimes we don't have a choice
about having our data collected, so we may as well (if we feel strongly about
it) put a little sand in the gears. When doing work for government or when
developing software, we may have to gather data to provide service, but still
seek to do right by our users and to protect their interests from future groups
who don’t share our good intentions. In those moments, under those con-
straints, we often are stuck with weaker systems, or strong systems with a
few weak components, and are, ourselves, “weak.”



WHY IS OBFUSCATION     NECESSARY?                                            57
      We want to follow Scott but take his work in a slightly different direction
as we broaden the spectrum of responses to situations involving data surveil-
 lance and obfuscation. There is real utility in an obfuscation approach, whether
that utility lies in bolstering an existing strong privacy system, in covering up
some specific action, in making things marginally harder for an adversary, or
even in the “mere gesture” of registering our discontent and refusal. An obfus-
cation approach offers expressive and functional—though sometimes
fragile—methods of protest and evasion that are accessible to a range of
actors but are particularly important for actors who lack access to other
methods or wish to complement them. Thus we apply the concept of “weapons
of the weak.”
      Before we turn, in the next section, to the kinds of situations in which
obfuscation may be useful, one more bit of explanation is necessary to avoid
confusion: “Strong” forces can, and do, use obfuscation techniques. Consider
some of the examples cited in the book thus far: corporate over-disclosure of
documents in legal cases, anticompetitive tricks by companies, the manufac-
turing of evidence, and some military camouflage technologies. The weak
need to be invisible, to escape notice, but being invisible can also be advanta-
geous to the strong. Our argument is one of relative utility. Let's put this
bluntly: If you have access to wealth, the law, social sanction, and force, if you
have the whole vocabulary of strong systems at your disposal, on the advan-
tageous side of the asymmetry of power, and can retain top lawyers and hire
sharp programmers, why bother with obfuscation? If you have diplomatic
pouches and NSA-secured phone lines, you need not waste your time shuffling
SIM cards and making up identities. Obfuscation does sometimes come in
handy for powerful actors with strong systems for privacy already in place,
and we discuss that aspect accordingly, but it is a tool more readily adopted by
those stuck with a weak system.

3.5 Distinguishing obfuscation from strong privacy systems
So far, we have contended that there are times when optimal, “strong” security
and privacy practices aren't practical or available for individuals and groups.
This is not an argument against other systems and practices; it is merely an
acknowledgment that there are circumstances in which obfuscation may
provide an appropriate alternative or could be added to an existing technology




58                                                                    CHAPTER 3
 or approach. Obfuscation can serve a function akin to the hidden transcript,
 concealing dissent and covert speech and providing an opportunity to assert
 one's sense of autonomy—an act of refusal concealed within a gesture of
 assent—or can provide more straightforward tools for protest or obscurity.
There are situations in which many people may periodically find themselves
 obligated to give things up, with uncertain consequences and without a clear
 mechanism for reasserting control—moments when obfuscation can play a
 role, providing not a comprehensive military-grade data-control solution
 (though it may be usefully combined with such a solution) but an intuitive
 approach to throwing up a bit of smoke.
      Explaining what obfuscation is requires us to clarify what it is not and
what empty spaces it fills (as Scott’s “weapons of the weak” fill the space
between consent and insurrection). It requires us to discuss what obfuscation
accomplishes that other services and systems don’t accomplish, and what
it costs in difficulty, wasted data, and wasted time. In the context of data pro-
tection via optimal technology, business best practice, or legislation and gov-
ernmental intervention, what makes obfuscation necessary? In view of the
costs obfuscation can impose, why should one turn to it? Describing these
costs, and making our argument in light of them, will clarify obfuscation
in general before we frame it in terms of the ethical and political concerns (in
chapter 4) and then in terms of designing for specific goals and outcomes
(in chapter 5).
      We have already addressed one of the alternatives from which obfusca-
tion must distinguish itself: individuals’ opting out of any platform, service, or
interaction that would misuse their data. This is a solution that seems to be
free of moral compromise—they disagree and therefore decline, causing no
trouble. Though such opting out may be possible for a very narrow range of
possible users and uses, it isn’t a practical or reasonable choice for all. Mar-
tyrdom is rarely a productive choice in a political calculus; as straightforward
as the rational-actor binary of opting in or out may be, a choice between
acceptance and dropping off the edge of the (networked) earth isn’t really a
choice at all. We often end up in compromised situations, trying to make the
best decision from a narrow menu of options that are problematic to various
degrees and in various ways. The user who makes consistently perfect choices
about data security and privacy is, like the perfectly rational economic agent,




WHY !S OBFUSCATION      NECESSARY?                                             59
more likely to be found in theory than in practice, and in practice such a person
would be a strange balance between a technologist of great sophistication and
a Luddite refusenik.

 What about relying on businesses to adopt best practices for their customers?
 Of course, the users are not the only part of the data-acquisition equation. The
 companies involved could resolve many of the concerns users have, rendering
 obfuscation moot. A well-designed opt-out policy could offer fine-tuned
 control of the processes of aggregation and analysis, allowing you to make
 choices that lay between the extremes of refusal and compliance. It would
 enable one to receive certain benefits in return for a degree of use, and it
 would specify that data could be gathered or deployed only in certain contexts,
 only for certain purposes, and for only a set period of time. That might offer
 genuine options for users to evaluate. However, private-sector efforts of this
 kind are hampered by the fact that companies, for good reasons and bad, are
the major strategic beneficiaries of data mining. The present-day consumer
economy runs on data—surveys, conversion analysis, customer-retention
analysis, demography, targeted advertising, and data collected at the point of
sale that feed back through the entire supply chain, from the just-in-time pro-
duction facility to the trend-spotting system.” Whether the particular company
in question is in the business of gathering, bundling, and selling individual data
(as DoubleClick and Acxiom are), whether it has used data generated and pro-
vided by its customers to improve its operations (as Amazon and Wal-Mart
have), whether it is based on user-data-driven advertising revenue (as Google
is), or whether it subcontracts the analysis of consumer data for purposes of
spotting credit, insurance, or rental risks, it isn't in a company’s interest to
support general restraints on access to this information.2'
      Owing to the competitive disadvantage associated with general restraints
on access to information, any individual company risks losing the returns on
data about customers, clients, consumers, even patients. Web publishers—
particularly those who must answer to shareholders—are terrified to leave
the value that can be derived from personal information “on the table,” unex-
ploited. Further, the liquidity and portability of data renders any piecemeal
strategy of relinquishment highly problematic, because material of little con-
sequence when in the hands of one company can result in a serious breach of
privacy when in the hands of another company that has access to a richer


60                                                                   CHAPTER 3
or better-managed database. For companies in the information services
industry, or companies utilizing data to promote their competitive edge, con-
sumers’ chagrin and occasional fines and slaps on the wrist are a small
enough cost of doing business, and such companies fight fiercely to retain
access to the “standing reserve” of personal data.”2

What about relying on government to enact and enforce better laws?
 Isn’t government supposed to be the venue where interests are balanced and
 values and political principles protected? This raises another question against
 which obfuscation must justify itself: Why are businesses having to invent
 data-collection and data~-management practices on their own? Surely such
 practices should be defined and enforced by governments.
       Indeed, regulation and law have historically been central bulwarks of per-
 sonal privacy, from the Fourth Amendment of the U.S. Constitution to the
 European Union's data-protection requirements and directives. Our laws prob-
 ably will be the eventual site of the conversation in which we answer, as a
 society, hard questions about the harvesting and stockpiling of personal infor-
 mation. But they operate slowly, and whatever momentum propels agents of
government and law in the direction of protecting privacy in the public interest
itis amply counterbalanced by opposing forces of corporations and other insti-
tutional actors, including government itself.
       In the world after Snowden, it has become clear that, for many national-
security, espionage, and law-enforcement organizations, having a population
already predisposed to disclose to companies huge volumes of information
about themselves that can either be subpoenaed or covertly exploited is all to
the good.” Poorly designed and managed social platforms create an efficiently
self-spying population, doing their own wiretapping gratis with photos
uploaded with their EXIF metadata intact and with detailed social chit-chat
waiting to be subjected to data-mining algorithms.
      Particularly in the United States, people will have to ask careful and
demanding questions about any governmental project to reform data-
collection rules and practices. Enormous quantities of personal data are
already in circulation. Ever-increasing amounts of freely provided personal
data are packaged and sold, while the patient and uncertain work of legislation
and judicial decision unfolds slowly, with some forward steps and some back-
ward steps. The rate of progress doesn’t inspire great optimism. This brings us


WHY !S OBFUSCATION      NECESSARY?                                            61
back to the question with which we began: Since technologies have generated
the context and the parameters of many of these problems, why can’t superior
technologies solve them?

What about relying on superior technological solutions?
Powerful, thoughtful, well-designed systems have been produced to preserve
and enhance privacy, be it in data mining, surfing or searching the Web, or
transmitting confidential information. Yet the situation remains imperfect.
Producing tools for detecting data provenance, properly anonymizing data-
sets, generating contextual awareness, and providing secure, confidential
communication poses serious technical challenges. Potential systems like
these also face resistance from well-heeled business interests and govern-
mental organizations that would rather we used inferior, badly implemented,
and poorly adopted (and adapted) systems. Furthermore, no matter how
convincing the technical developments and standards, adoption by societal
actors whose organizations and institutions mediate many flows of data is
fraught with politics. Even on the individual scale, difficulties persist, as Arvind
Narayanan notes in his study of the use of “Pragmatic Crypto” (as distinct from
“Cypherpunk Crypto,” a techno-determinist project to wholly reshape society
through encryption)—adoption is fraught with complex engineering and
usability issues for the developers.” None of these problems diminish the
accomplishments or the utility of privacy technologies, from Tor to Off-the-
Record (OTR) messaging to email encryption toolkits such as Gnu Privacy
Guard (GPG). Yet the combination of technical accomplishments, law and reg-
ulation, industry best practice, and user choice leaves great, neglected, unpro-
tected empty spaces, like a Venn diagram in negative, in which obfuscation
comes into its own.
      As we will discuss later in more practical detail, obfuscation is, in part, a
troublemaking strategy. Although privacy is served by the constraints of law
and regulation, disclosure limits imposed by organizational best practices,
protective technological affordances provided by conscientious developers,
and the exercise of abstinence or opting out, the areas of vulnerability remain
vast. Obfuscation promises an additional layer of cover for these. Obfuscation
obscures by making noise and muddying the waters; it can be used for data
disobedience under difficult circumstances and as a digital weapon for the
informationally weak.


62                                                                      CHAPTER 3
4 |S OBFUSCATION JUSTIFIED?

Be fire with fire; Threaten the threatener and outface the brow.
Shakespeare, King John, 1595


 After a lecture on TrackMeNot,' a member of the audience rose to say that she
 was deeply troubled by the valorization of deceit and dishonesty. To her it
 didn’t seem right to submit search queries that were not of true interest. The
 question of deception has not been the sole source of opposition to obfusca-
 tion; other sources of opposition include wastefulness, free riding, database
 pollution, and violation of terms of service.
       Challenges such as that made by the woman at the lecture were worri-
 some to us: ours was supposed to be the moral high ground, with TrackMeNot
 defending individuals against illegitimate and exploitative information prac-
 tices. But such challenges could not be summarily brushed aside. Because
 obfuscating tactics are often fundamentally adversarial, involving dissimula-
tion and misdirection, the appropriation of resources for unintended or unde-
 sired uses must be explained and justified. In an article titled “A Tack in the
Shoe,” Gary Marx writes: “Criteria are needed which would permit us to speak
of ‘good’ and ‘bad,’ or appropriate and inappropriate efforts to neutralize the
collection of personal data.”’ To use obfuscation because it works, or even
because it is the only approach that works, isn’t enough. Obfuscation, if used,
must be defensible on ethical grounds, and must be compatible with the polit-
ical values of the society in which one lives.
       TrackMeNot exposed many of the ethical issues that can confront not only
developers of obfuscating systems but also users, and as a consequence
exposed a need to distinguish uses that are morally defensible from uses that
are not. Intuition places the Craigslist robber, with his unwilling identically
dressed confederates, among the latter, and the Allies’ radar chaff among the
former, but why? What makes them different? And how might we adapt the
answer to more ambiguous cases? Mere approval or disapproval isn’t suffi-
cient if we are to defend the legitimacy of a particular system; instead, we
must provide systematic reasons why that system avoids moral and political
hazards.
      This chapter prepares designers or users of obfuscation to meet a range
of challenges they are likely to confront. Some of the challenges are ethical,
claiming that obfuscation causes harm or violates ethical rights beyond
general harms. Other challenges are political, suggesting that obfuscation
abridges political rights and values, that it is unfair or unjust, that it redistrib-
utes power in illegitimate ways, or that it is generally at odds with the political
values of surrounding societies or communities.

4.1 Ethics of obfuscation

Dishonesty
It is nearly impossible to avoid charges of dishonesty when the aim of
obfuscation is to mislead and misdirect. Linking obfuscation to the ethics of
lying leads to a vast landscape of philosophical thought that, though beyond
the scope of our book, contributes important insights to our more limited
purpose.
      The classic Kantian position on lying, which holds that it is absolutely
wrong and which famously prescribes truth even in reply to a murderer
seeking to locate an innocent victim, would condemn any use of obfuscation.
Other defenses of lying have been based on more varied and more contingent
ethical positions. Generally, the literature on lying has two strands, one con-
cerned with defining lying and the other with its ethics—whether it is always
wrong, whether it is ever right, and whether, even if wrong, it ever can be
excused. In practice these two strands are interdependent, because a hard line
on the wrongness of lying is softened by a narrow definition. Thomas Aquinas,
for example, allowed prudent dissimulation to pass the ethical test not because
lying is sometimes morally acceptable but because dissimulation sometimes
falls outside of the definition.’ Our guess is that few people are as resolutely
committed to truth-telling as Kant and Aquinas, and that most would condone
lying with appropriate justification, such as preventing egregious harm, acting
under duress, keeping a promise, or achieving other important ends.*
      In many of the cases we have discussed in this book, obfuscation pres-
ents a means of resisting coercion, exploitation, or threat—ends that might
generally legitimize acts of dishonesty. We might say, therefore, that whether
obfuscation, like lying, is morally defensible depends on the legitimacy of its
ends: radar chaff protecting Allied bombers passes the test, but disseminating
malware, robbing a bank, or fixing an election does not, even though we might
admire or chuckle at the ingenuity of those who do such things. We do not



64                                                                      CHAPTER 4
want to overstate the conclusion and say that legitimate ends alone justify
obfuscation, insofar as it is a form of dishonesty; we want to say only that
legitimate ends are a necessary condition for ethical obfuscation.
      Even in the case that someone chooses obfuscation to achieve praisewor-
thy he or she will need to defend this choice against further challenges. After
we have explored some of the other ethical charges aimed against obfusca-
tion, we will return to the question of sufficiency in order to explain what still
is missing from an ethical assessment beyond laudable or even simply accept-
able ends.

Waste
 Critics may say that an obfuscation system is wasteful if it draws on any
 important resources to generate noise. In the case of TrackMeNot, for example,
 some complained about its wasteful use of search engines’ servers, its burden
 on network bandwidth and even its unnecessary draw on electricity. Similarly,
 CacheCloak’ could be faulted for wasting network and mobile-app resources,
 many noise-generating social-network tools for drawing excessively on Face-
 book’s services, and Uber for squandering the effort of drivers responding to
spurious calls. In defense of one’s preferred obfuscation system, one should
 immediately recognize a hidden agenda in any such accusations, for the notion
of waste is thoroughly normative. It presumes standards of acceptable, desir-
able, or legitimate use, consumption, exploitation, or employment of the
resources in question. Only a strong societal consensus around these stan-
dards elevates such charges above mere personal opinion, and only a sound
foundation in factual knowledge lends credibility to the suggestion that any
particular obfuscation system wastes resources.
       When standards are not settled, however, there is greater uncertainty
over the line between use and waste. We might all agree that carelessly
leaving a tap running is a waste of water, but residents of Los Angeles dis-
agree with residents of Seattle over whether daily watering to maintain verdant
lawns in a desert climate is wasteful. To defend TrackMeNot against charges
of wastefulness, we can point out that its network usage is minimal compared
with usage generated by image, audio, and video files, rich information flows
on social networks, and Internet-based communications services. Yet noting
huge differences in scale between the traffic generated by TrackMeNot search
terms and those needed to maintain (say) Bitcoin or World of Warcraft doesn't


IS OBFUSCATION    JUSTIFIED?                                                   65
 address the complaint fully. After all, the cumulative flow of a dripping faucet
 may be far less than the amount of water a daily shower requires, but the
 former may still be judged wasteful because it is unnecessary.
       Whether one considers the noise produced by systems such as Cache-
 Cloak and TrackMeNot wasteful depends not only on the volume of the noise
 but also on one’s values. A defender points out that protecting privacy by pre-
 venting profiling on the basis of search queries is worth the bandwidth—
 certainly more worthwhile than a good number of the videos clogging band-
 width en route from servers to households. Some critics remain doubtful,
 though their doubts are less about wasteful usage of common resources than
 about waste of private ones, such as the server space belonging to providers
 of search engines and mobile apps. Here too, both quantity and legitimacy
 matter. In cases where noise overloads an adversary’s system or, in more
extreme cases, even consumes all available resources, it becomes a denial-
of-service attack and the bar of justification is very high. Unless you can con-
vincingly demonstrate that your target is engaged in oppressive, domineering,
or clearly unfair practices, a debilitating obfuscation attack is difficult to justify.
      In the case where an obfuscating system merely uses but does not debili-
tate a privately owned resource, what counts as legitimate may not be obvious.
Take the case of Web searching. Manually submitted queries, no matter how
frivolous the purpose, seem not to provoke complaints of waste. No one
argues that “ninja turtle” or “fantasy football” is more wasteful of Google's
server resources than, say, “symptoms of Ebola,” although some critics have
said that the automated search queries submitted by TrackMeNot are waste-
ful. We can think of no other reason for such criticism than that TrackMeNot’s
queries run counter to Google's interests, desires, or preferences and that
these, according to critics, trump users’ interests, desires, or preferences for
privacy-seeking obfuscation. Such is the rhetorical struggle between those
who defend obfuscation as a means of protécting its users against illegitimate
information capture, and those who are targets of obfuscation who label such
actions wasteful. The winner of this debate captures the ethical high ground
and transforms a private dispute over conflicting vested interests into a matter
of public morality. But it is important to see, in this instance, that when
defenders of search resources vilify obfuscation as “waste,” they beg the very
question that we, collectively, have not yet properly addressed. In the name
of privacy protection, query obfuscation utilizes private resources without



66                                                                        CHAPTER 4
owners’ authorization, but whether we deem this wasteful or legitimate,
prohibited or allowed, is a political question about the exercise of power and
privilege and a question to which we will return later in the chapter.

Free riding
 Depending on the design of one’s preferred obfuscation system, one may be
 accused of free riding—that is, taking advantage of other people’s willingness
 to submit to the collection, aggregation, and analysis of data or of using ser-
vices provided by data collectors while denying them profit from your personal
 information. In the first instance, the adversary will go after the less costly
target—people who don’t obfuscate—just as predators, according to the
 adage, go after the slower prey. In the second instance, if you use services
 offered by targets such as Facebook and Foursquare in ways that diverge from
the terms of service, you are violating an implied contract and are free riding
not only on people whose behaviors comply with the terms of service but also
on investments made by the providers of the services. This applies, for
instance, to users of ad-blocking browser plug-ins, who can enjoy a quieter,
faster-loading, ad-free Web experience while having access to content under-
written by users who haven't installed ad blockers. Or so the critics suggest.
Cast as free riders, obfuscators appear to be sneaks more than rebels; after
all, when you aspire to the moral high ground, do you want instead to be
someone who games the system by exploiting the ignorance and foolishness
of others? These charges must be taken seriously, but in our view whether
they stick depends on answers to two questions: Is your obfuscation system
(either one you have created or one you are using) freely available to others?
And are people who aren't obfuscating left no worse off as a result of your use
of that system? When the answers to both of those questions are Yes, as holds
for many of the systems we have discussed, we see no exploitation, no moral
wrong. When the answer to either question is No, the situation is complex and
requires further probing. Secretive obfuscation may be excusable if it leaves
non-obfuscators no worse off; obfuscation that disadvantages non-obfuscators
may be justified if it is widely and freely available to all. Though further justifi-
cation is needed in both scenarios, the case that poses the most difficult
questions is closed, secretive obfuscation that results in disadvantage to
non-obfuscators.




IS OBFUSCATION     JUSTIFIED?                                                     67
      These difficult questions plunge us into philosophical debates about
moral responsibility. Even in the worst case, you might redirect blame to the
targets of your obfuscating system: the data gatherers. You may ask “Who
is taking advantage of whom?” Returning to the metaphor of predator and
prey, you can argue “Don’t blame me for being fleet footed; it is the predator,
after all, who is responsible for the demise of its victims.” Though you
expose your slower compatriots to higher odds of capture, surely blame
accrues primarily to the predator. This leaves a stalemate of mutual recrim-
ination, the data collector accusing the obfuscator of free riding on services
and the obfuscator accusing the data collector of free riding on personal
information.
      In the dominant economy of the Internet, individual users enjoy free ser-
vices, which are sustained by the value extracted from information about
those users by ad networks and by other third-party data aggregators. Unlike
traditional commercial market-based exchanges, where a price is explicitly
paid for goods or services, the economy into which the Internet has settled is
based on the capture of information by indirect, subtle, and often well-hidden
means. The informational price—effectively a blank check—is anything but
free, according to experts whose commentaries have inspired our own
thoughts on this matter.° When relinquishment of personal information with no
reasonable account of its use is a necessary condition for receiving a service,
when it is disproportionate to need (as in over-collection), and when it is inap-
propriate (as when it violates contextual expectations), such a price is exploit-
ative and the practice is oppressive. Furthermore, when traditional institutional
protections aren't effective in addressing practices such as these, the obfusca-
tor who has been accused of free riding may justly challenge the presumptive °
entitlements of the entrenched system, in which naive users succumb to rhe-
torical trickery that engages them in terms of exchange they have had little
hand in setting.’ Each party has an interest in setting terms for the exchange of
valuable resources, but which interests are favored must be fairly settled or,
says the obfuscator, this is a claim that doesn’t warrant respect.
      This argument doesn’t make all information obfuscation legitimate and
defensible against the charge of free riding; it does so only when other moral
requirements are met and the question of free riding hinges on who is entitled
to surplus value generated by the interactions of individual users with service
providers collecting information on them. In other words, after you have



68                                                                  CHAPTER 4
satisfied yourself that your system meets other ethical criteria, such as worthy
ends, questions that remain about conflicting interests and desires or about
fair distribution of benefits and entitlements enter the realms of economic and
political analysis, taken up below.

Pollution, subversion, and system damage
The charge of data pollution is as vexing as it is unavoidable. Obfuscation,
 defined as the insertion of noise, invites a parallel to pollution—making
 something impure or unclean. Someone who taints water, soil, or air with toxic
 chemicals, particulates, or waste can be roundly criticized because environ-
 mental integrity is highly valued not only as an ideal but also as a practical
 goal. However, critics drawing on the normative clout of environmental pollu-
tion aren't coolly observing that obfuscation clutters a data repository; they
are alleging that it contaminates a data environment whose integrity is prized.
There is, however, a difference. In most present-day societies, the value of the
natural environment is presumed and an action that has been shown to pollute
it is considered reprehensible. But unless one can make an explicit case that a
data assemblage is worthy of protection, a claim for its integrity begs the
question.
       Even environmental integrity isn’t absolutely valued and has been traded
off against other values, such as security, commerce, and property rights.
Analogously, in order for a charge of data pollution to stick, a data assemblage
must be shown to hold greater value than whatever the obfuscator aims to
protect. Simply revealing negative consequences for a database is, once again,
to beg the ethical question. It comes down to this: Data pollution is unethical
only when the integrity of the data flow or data set in question is ethically
required. Moreover, whether the integrity of the data outweighs other values
and interests at stake must be explicitly settled. When what is in question is
whether the interests of a data collector are negatively affected by obfusca-
tion, ethical questions can be settled only by establishing that these interests
are of general value and that they override the interests of the obfuscator.
When there are no clear moral grounds favoring the respective, conflicting
interests (or preferences) of a data collector and an obfuscator, a political
resolution, or perhaps a market-based resolution, may be the best one can
hope for.




IS OBFUSCATION    JUSTIFIED?                                                  69
      If there is genuine public interest in the integrity of particular data flows
or data sets, and if obfuscation negatively affects the system as a whole, the
burden shifts to the obfuscator to justify his or her actions. For example, one
may justly challenge the obfuscator who diminishes the integrity of a popula-
tion health database when so doing reduces the potential public benefits it can
provide. But even in a case such as this, we should assess whether the price
an individual pays for the benefit of others or in the public interest is fair. If
individuals are coerced to contribute, it should be with assurances that how
the information will be used, where it will travel, and how it will be secured
will, at the very least, be in line with familiar principles of fair information
practice. In other words, the ethical argument hinges on two considerations:
whether the data in question are of genuine public and common interest and
how much individuals are asked to sacrifice on behalf of such interests.
Keeping both of these considerations in sight recognizes that the integrity of a
data assemblage—even one deemed valuable—is not absolute, and data
controllers have the burden of defending the public importance of the assem-
blage (and associated practices) as well as the legitimacy of any burdens it
might impose on individual data subjects.
      In the discussion thus far, we have not differentiated among the three
terms “pollution,” “subversion,” and “system damage.” You might want to
consider which of the three is relevant when striving to ensure an ethically
defensible system. Obfuscating systems that pollute or subvert only the
obfuscators’ data trail pose fewer ethical challenges than those that also
affect other data subjects, and even fewer than those that interfere with a
system's general functioning, as in a denial of service. A careful assessment
would involve asking questions similar to those we have discussed above—
questions concerning respective harms, entitlements, societal welfare and
proportionality—about data collection as wel as about data obfuscation in
relation to legitimate ends.

4.2 From ethics to politics
Ends and means
Since obfuscation almost always involves dissemblance, unauthorized uses of
system resources, or impairment of functionality, appreciating obfuscation’s
intended ends, aims, purposes, or goals, is crucial to evaluating its moral



70                                                                    CHAPTER 4
standing. Although some ends might seem unequivocally good and others
unequivocally bad, a vast middle ground exists that encompasses merely
unproblematic ends (e.g., foiling supermarket surveillance) and ends that are
somewhat controversial (e.g., enabling peer-to-peer file sharing). In these
zones of ethical ambiguity or flexibility, politics and policy come into play.
       Ends, however, are only part of the picture—necessary but not sufficient
conditions. Ethical theory and common sense demand that means, too, be
defensible, and, as the saying warns, ends may not justify all means. Whether
means are acceptable may rest on numerous ethical factors but, as often, may
depend on the interaction of ends with various contingent and contextual
factors, whose consideration resides in the zone of the political.
       Recognizing that certain disputes over ethical issues are best resolved
politically doesn’t necessarily remove them from ethical consideration entirely
when one takes a view, such as Isaiah Berlin's, of political philosophy as moral
inquiry, “applied to groups and nations; and indeed, mankind as a whole.”® In
some instances, disagreements over the ethics of obfuscation that reduce to
disagreements over clashing ends and values may yet be amenable to purely
ethical resolutions, such as the resolution Kant seems to have found when he
prioritized truth over preventing murder. But disagreements over ends may not
always be accessible to purely ethical reasoning. In these cases, resolution
becomes a matter for social policy because how these disagreements are
settled affects the constitution or shape of the society in which they are
embedded. Ethical questions such as those requiring societal resolution have
inspired political philosophers through the ages—from Plato to Hobbes and
Rousseau to the present—who have sought to compare and evaluate political
systems, to identify political properties and modes of decision making that
characterize good societies, and to articulate political principles of justice,
fairness, and decency. When we conclude that answers to ethical questions
must be answered politically, because they are about the distribution of power,
authority, and goods in society, we still have ethics on our minds. We do not
mean any society; we mean societies opposed to tyranny and striving to be
good, just, and decent in the ways that great philosophers, critical thinkers,
and political leaders have idealized in word and action. With this in mind, let us
revisit the issues of dishonesty (dissimulation), waste, free riding, pollution,
and system damage arising in the context of obfuscation.




IS OBFUSCATION    JUSTIFIED?                                                   71
        As we worked through the issue of waste, we imagined clashes of oppo-
 nents parrying back and forth, one accusing the other of wasteful activity and
 the other insisting that the activity in question constituted a legitimate use.
 This was the case when critics accused TrackMeNot users of wasting band-
 width with searches that were of no genuine interest and TrackMeNot users
 responded that they weren't wasting bandwidth but rather were using it to
 promote legitimate privacy claims. Similarly, one who is accused of polluting
 a dataset or impairing a system's data-mining capacity counters that the
 purpose of the dataset or data mining is not one that warrants societal protec-
 tion, or at least not one that should trump the obfuscator’s evasion of
 surveillance.
        Generally, asserting that data obfuscation impairs and damages a data-
 base or compromises a system, or that it overuses or wastes a common
 resource, doesn't entitle one to call the obfuscation unethical unless one can
 clearly explain how the data store or system in question furthers societal
goals more important than contrary goals the obfuscator seeks to promote.
 Rarely are these conflicting ends explicitly or systematically addressed in
ways that call on data collectors to justify the value of their activity. To under-
stand the criterion of ends, you would ask about the purposes or values served
by data collection—database or information flow—and the same for the
obfuscating activities. Further, you would ask how these ends feature within
broader political commitments of the collective—society, nation, etc. Thus far,
we seem to give great leeway to the Transportation Security Administration's
pursuit and assembly of personal information profiles insofar as its purposes
are to provide security for travelers. Accordingly, we might be less tolerant of
individuals who obfuscate in this context even for the purposes of protecting
privacy, the point being that ends should make a difference in our reactions
both to the ethics of data collection and to obfuscation.
       But means matter, too. Even good ends may not justify all means. In law
and policy, we are often asked to consider proportionality—for example,
demanding that the punishment should fit the crime. Although an obfuscator
must be challenged to justify means that are disruptive, even damaging, surely
it is fair also to challenge the target. You may decide to install TrackMeNot not
because you object to the basic practice of logging search queries but because
you object to unacceptable extremes such as holding data with too much
detail, for too long, without appropriate limits on use. Keeping data in order to



72                                                                    CHAPTER 4
 improve search functions, even to match contextual ads to queries, may seem
acceptable, but isn’t it grossly disproportionate to a search engine's core func-
tion to hold data indefinitely in order to refine behavioral advertising and to
 match search histories with other online activity so as to profile people too
 personally, too precisely, too intimately? Such questions are relevant to all the
extreme forms of information surveillance, with online surveillance a particu-
 lar case in which ubiquitous tracking of online behavior seems wildly dispro-
portionate as a means, insofar as it serves only the parochial ends of
commercial advertising, even if this tracking slightly improves the efficacy of
the ads. But the obfuscator, too, must answer the challenges of proportional-
ity, and in quite concrete terms. Thus, we may agree that the ends of Track-
MeNot are legitimate, but still want to regulate the volume of noise—say, to
foil profiling but not to disable a search engine entirely with denial-of-service
attacks. Drawing an exact line between proportional and disproportional is
never easy, but the intuition that there is a line, even if it must be drawn case
by case, is robust and deep.
       Proportionality suggests normative standards for particular pairs of
means and ends and pairs of actions and reactions, but means may also be
measured by comparative standards, such as whether their cost is lower than
that of alternatives. Utilitarian thinking is a case in point, demanding not only
that the happiness yielded by actions or social policies under consideration
should be greater than the unhappiness, or that the benefits should exceed the
costs, but also that the actions or policies should yield the optimal proportion
among available alternatives. Where obfuscation involves pulling the wool
over someone's eyes, spoiling a dataset, or impairing the functioning of a
system, even to achieve laudable ends, the ethical obfuscator still should
investigate whether other means are as readily available with lesser moral
costs. We can ask whether the costs associated with different forms of obfus-
cation vary significantly, but we also can ask whether other means might
achieve the same goals without the costs we have been considering thus far.
      The question of whether less disruptive but equally or more effective
alternatives to obfuscation can be found is worth asking—although in chapter
3, where we reviewed some of the standard approaches to resisting troubling
data-surveillance practices, we found little cause for optimism. Opting out,
suggested by critics who say “If you don’t like this practice, you can always
choose not to engage,” may be feasible when it comes to nifty mobile apps,



IS OBFUSCATION JUSTIFIED?                                                      73
 digital games, and various forms of social media, but inconvenient and expen-
 sive when itcomes to online shopping, EZ Pass, and Frequent Flyer programs—
 and forgoing many vectors of surveillance—mobile phones, credit cards,
 insurance, motor vehicles, public transportation—is now nearly infeasible for
 many people.
       Other alternatives, including corporate best practices and legal regula-
tion, though promising in theory, are limited in practice. For structural reasons
having to do with radically misaligned interests and the proverbial folly of
leaving the fox to guard the henhouse, meaningful limits on data practice
aren't likely to be set by corporate actors. Further, a history of unsuccessful
attempts to have various industries regulate their respective data practices
leaves little hope for meaningful reform. Although governmental legislation
has also been variably effective,’ its effects haven’t reached the commercial
sector, particularly when it comes to regulating online and mobile tracking.
Despite dogged efforts and the intense commitment of the Federal Trade Com-
mission, the Department of Commerce’s National Telecommunications and
Information Administration, and other government agencies, general progress
has been minimal. For example, notice and consent expressed in privacy pol-
icies remain the dominant mechanisms for protecting privacy online, despite
decisive evidence that they are incomprehensible to data subjects, are
expressed ambiguously, are continuously revised, and have not constrained
the degree and scope of data collection and use in practice. Further, by most
accounts, concerted efforts to establish a Do-Not-Track standard for Web
browsing were sabotaged by the advertising industry,'° and the Snowden rev-
elations'' have revealed that the U.S. government and other governments have
long been conducting mass surveillance. Individuals have good reason to
question whether their privacy interests in appropriate gathering and use of
information will be secured any time soon by conventional means.

Justice and fairness
So far, we have shown that when obfuscators and their critics disagree
over the ethics of obfuscation, their disagreements sometimes boil down to
clashes over ends and values. The critic accuses the obfuscator of violating
legitimate ends; the obfuscator accuses the target of precisely the same.
Clashes such as these would benefit from public airing and deliberation in the




74                                                                   CHAPTER 4
 political arena, something we strongly support. But in our discussion of ethics
 of obfuscation, we also identified clashes that concerned conflicting interests
 and preferences more than competing ends and values. A clear instance of
this emerged in our discussion of free riding. Charged with unseemly behavior,
 obfuscators may point to the terms of interaction unilaterally set by data col-
 lectors, which enable the seizure by these data collectors of surplus value
 generated during the course of the interaction. In relation to peers, complaints
 of free riding have opened tricky questions, such as whether blame is more
 appropriately assigned to an obfuscator who may have exposed peers to
 even greater scrutiny or disadvantage or to the agents of that scrutiny or
disadvantage.
       A purely ethical resolution of such claims and counterclaims might not be
possible when, taken in isolation, they amount to favoring either the obfusca-
tor’s interests and preferences or those of the obfuscator’s target. Within
a broader societal context, however, disputes over whose preferences and
interests are given greatest credence are deeply political. They recognize
certain entitlements over others, and in so doing they often bring about sys-
tematic allocation or reconfiguration of power, authority, and goods as well as
of burdens and subjection. These are among the questions of justice and fair-
ness that, for centuries, have troubled political philosophers when resolving
clashes over what values trump other values and whose rights count more
than the rights of others. Beyond rights and values, however, societies have
sought principles to govern the distribution of a wide range of goods, to ame-
liorate deeply unfair, unjust, and indecent outcomes, rather than leaving it to
brute competition among actors (individuals, institutions, and organizations),
or to the fiat of incumbency as the strong incumbents would prefer.
      To guide our reasoning about just and fair distribution of goods (power,
wealth, authority, etc.), we have dipped into recent writings in political philoso-
phy. We beg our readers’ forbearance as we sample from a vast disciplinary
tradition for insights that will help us address the standoff we have identified
between target and obfuscator in all its particularities. It might seem unnec-
essary to drill down to first principles when technologically advanced,
liberal, and progressive democracies would already presumably have inte-
grated such principles into their laws and regulations. This would mean that
we would need only to refer to existing law and regulation for answers to
political questions concerning privacy and obfuscation. It is, however,



IS OBFUSCATION     JUSTIFIED?                                                   75
 precisely because existing laws and policies have not, or not yet, adequately
 confronted overwhelming gaps in privacy protection that the need exists to
 refer to fundamental principles for better answers.
        Returning to situations in which obfuscators’ resistance confounds a tar-
 get's will or interests, we ask how these considerations of justice might guide
 our assessment. John Rawls, in A Theory of Justice,'’2 demands as a basic
 requirement that the obfuscation practices in question not violate or erode
 basic rights and liberties. This requirement calls into question obfuscating
 systems relying on deception, system subversion, and exploitation that have
 the potential to violate rights of property, security, and autonomy. This princi-
 ple establishes a presumption against such systems unless strong counter-
 vailing claims of equal or greater weight can clearly be demonstrated,
 including autonomy, fair treatment, freedom of speech, and freedom of politi-
 cal association—generally freedoms associated with a right to privacy. The
 first principle makes short work of obfuscation as used by criminals to mask
 their attacks and confuse their trails.
   _ Fornuanced cases in which neither adversary holds a clear ethical advan-
tage in their competing claims, Rawls’ second principle, that of maximin, is
 relevant. This principle demands that a just society should favor “the alterna-
tive the worst outcome of which is superior to the worst outcomes of the
others.”'? In practical terms this means that when weighing policy options, a
just society should not necessarily look to equalize the standing of different
individuals or groups, but where this is not possible or makes no sense should
focus on the plight of those on the lower end of the socioeconomic spectrum,
ensuring that whatever policy is chosen is one that maximizes outcomes for
these stakeholders. A just society's policies, in other words, should maximize
the minimum.
       Returning to earlier cases, let us now consider the debate over wasted
resources—not common resources, which we have already addressed, but
privately owned resources, as when obfuscation purportedly wastes Face-
book's resources with misleading profiles. Here service providers and owners
of resources declare that, because proprietary rights allow them to set terms
of use at will and to their advantage, unauthorized actions, by definition, make
unethical or wasteful use of their services or resources. Obfuscators, by con-
trast, claim that they are weakened, exploited, made vulnerable, and compro-
mised, and that they are merely acting to rectify an imbalance of control,



76                                                                   CHAPTER 4
 power, and advantage and to reduce risk and ambiguity. As was noted earlier,
 how we evaluate the competing claims affects whether we deem obfuscating
 activity, such as TrackMeNot’s generating of fake queries, wasteful or legiti-
 mate, prohibited or allowed. Where no obvious ethical issue is at stake, these
 political choices about the exercise of power and privilege are subject to the
 maximin principle of justice. How this plays out will depend on details of spe-
 cific instances—for example, concrete differences in the properties of Track-
 MeNot, Vula, and Russian nationalist Twitterbots, as well as the contexts in
 which they operate.
       In relation to free riding, Rawls’ second principle forces a question about
 whether the data services whose terms enable them to capture surplus value
 from personal information are entitled to that surplus value. It allows us to see
 that the entitlements of profit and control that these firms have unilaterally
 asserted through their terms of service are, in fact, open to redistribution
 through the adoption of different social policies. Obfuscators aren’t free riding
 if the disadvantage of a particular engagement is excessive and unfair, and if
 the only claims they may be violating are those asserted by service providers
 under a regime that doesn’t fully recognize its implications for information
flows newly enabled by sociotechnical systems. A similar point applies to pol-
 lution. Although there are some who presume in favor of data collectors
merely on the grounds that they have collected and assembled data and hence
are entitled to its integrity, we believe that no charge of pollution will stick
unless societal worth can be demonstrated. If that can’t be done, an argument
is needed to support the claim that any value should accrue only or mainly to
the data collectors; it can’t simply be presumed. Though it is true that individ-
uals using obfuscation to take cover may diminish the purity of a data pool,
impose costs on data gatherers, or deny data gatherers the benefits of surplus
generated through collection, aggregation, and analysis of data, a full picture
considers the value of the data and the legitimacy of data gatherers’ claims.
When there are charges of free riding or when there are charges of pollution,
private claims of data owners and counterclaims of obfuscators are viewed as
conflicts of preferences or interests. In our view, seeking resolution by point-
ing to property rights begs the question of the extent of these rights in the fluid
environment of technology and data. This issue remains open to political
negotiation and adjustment. General prosperity and societal welfare should be
considered, ideally in light of Rawls’ second principle.



IS OBFUSCATION    JUSTIFIED?                                                    77
      Assignment of blame and moral responsibility may also be assessed
politically. When considering liability for free riding and data pollution, we have
argued that, although the obfuscator is a causal agent in both those cases,
moral responsibility may nevertheless reasonably accrue to the target of
obfuscation unless the target’s activities and business or data practices are
beyond reproach. Considerations of justice apply as much to fair distribution of
costs as they do to fair distribution of benefits."
      In the various theories of justice offered by political philosophers, includ-
ing Rawls, there is a fairly uniform idea of those on the bottom end of the
socioeconomic spectrum toward whom great concern is directed. In highlight-
ing various ways in which the maximin principle is relevant to the political
standing of obfuscation, we have presumed traditional or standard views of
what it means to be better off or worse off—powerful or weak, rich or poor,
well or poorly educated, healthy or sick—remain relevant. To those dimen-
sions of inequality, our theme of informational asymmetries of power and of
knowledge adds two dimensions of difference between haves and have-nots,
crucial to the maximin principle.'°

Informational justice and the asymmetries of power and knowledge
Circumstances surrounding the obfuscating systems we introduced in part | of
this book are typically characterized by both asymmetries of power and asym-
metries of knowledge. The power differential between individuals and the cor-
porate and governmental institutions and organizations that place them under
surveillance, capture information about their activities, and subsequently
assemble it and mine it is clear. The judging, preying eye of unspecified, digital
publics'* also may train its disciplining gaze on individuals. Although, as we
demonstrated in part |, obfuscation can be and has been used by the more
powerful against the less powerful, the more powerful usually have more
direct ways to impose their will. Obfuscation is generally not as strong or
certain as these more direct methods, and it is only rarely adopted by powerful
actors—and then usually to evade the notice of other powerful actors.”
Stronger actors have less of a need to resort to obfuscation because they have
better methods available if they want to hide something—among them secret
Classifications, censorship, trade secrets, and threats of state violence. So let
us consider the less powerful members of society who may reach for obfusca-
tion to even the odds.


78                                                                    CHAPTER4
       To people who are not well off or politically influential and not in a position
 to refuse terms of engagement, to people who aren't technically sophisticated
 or Savvy enough to utilize strong encryption, and to people who want discounts
 at the supermarket, free email accounts, and cheap mobile phones, obfusca-
 tion offers some measure of resistance, obscurity, and dignity, if not a perma-
 nent reconfiguration of control or an inversion of the entrenched hierarchy. As
 Anatole France put it, “the law, in its majestic equality, forbids the rich as well
 as the poor to sleep under bridges and steal bread.”"® For those whom circum-
 stance and necessity oblige to give up data about themselves—those who
 most need the shelter of the bridge, however ad hoc and unsatisfying it may be
 in comparison with a proper house—obfuscation provides a means of redress.
       What we have called power asymmetries map closely onto traditional
 vectors of power—wealth, social class, education, race, and so forth. In today's
 data-driven societies, epistemic or information asymmetries are highly conse-
 quential. Obfuscation may provide cover against known, specific threats, but
 also may offer protection against lurking but poorly understood threats from
 uncertain sources (government or corporate), whose presence we sense but
 about which we know little. We suspect these “others” are able to capture
 information that we generate and emanate as we move about online, engage
 in transactions online and off, work, communicate, and socialize, but precisely
what information they capture, where they send it, how it then is used, and the
logic of its impact on us we simply do not know. This is the nature of the epis-
temic asymmetry in its most extreme form. Under these circumstances,
obfuscation may seem like flailing about in the dark, but it offers some hope
against the unknown knowers.
       Obfuscating against direct exertions of power and control is resistance of
a familiar kind, but the shield that obfuscation may promise against lurking,
unknown adversaries calls to mind a different political threat. In his book
Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government, Philip Pettit prefers a
definition of freedom not as actual non-interference but as non-domination—
that is, security against arbitrary interference: “not just that people (or other
actors, such as governments or corporations) with a power of arbitrary inter-
ference probably will not exercise it, but that the agents in question lose that
power: they are deprived of the capacity to exercise it, or at least their capacity
to exercise it is severely reduced.”!? Viewed from the weak side of the epis-
temic asymmetry, we may be aware that information about us and information



IS OBFUSCATION     JUSTIFIED?                                                      79
 emanating from our activities, online and off, is accessible to those higher up
 onthe scale, oftenin the form of rationalized information assemblages—profiles
 that can be used to control us directly or indirectly and to decide what we can
 and can’t have and where we can and can’t go. As societies embrace the
 promise of big-data analytics, and as correlation and clustering assume a
 dominant role in decision making, individuals may increasingly be subjected to
 decisions that “work” statistically but don’t “make sense.”” Our freedom is
 compromised not only when we are prevented from having or doing what we
 want, but also when others have the capacity to exercise this power in ways
 that we don’t understand and that we experience as arbitrary. Domination is
 precisely this, according to Pettit. Republicanism doesn’t preclude non-
 arbitrary subjection to suitable forms of law and government; it requires only
that individuals be secure against arbitrary interference, “controlled by the
arbitrium—the will or judgment—of the interferer: to the extent, in particular,
that it is not forced to track the interests and ideas of those who suffer the
interference.”2"
      Those on the wrong side of the power and knowledge asymmetries of an
information society are, as we have argued, effectively class members of its
less well-off —subjects of surveillance, uncertain how it affects their fates,
and lacking power to set terms of engagement. Consequently, in developing
policies for a society deemed just according to Rawls’ two principles,” those
on the wrong side of the asymmetries should be allowed the freedom to assert
their values, interests, and preferences through obfuscation (in keeping with
ethical requirements), even if this means impinging on the interests and pref-
erences of those on the right side of knowledge and power asymmetries.
Thus, having seen to the ethics requirements of the first principle, according to
the second, maximin principle, social policy aimed at resolving conflicting
interests and preferences inherent in cases we have discussed should take
heed of the important work these are doing potentially to raise the standing of
those on the losing end of entrenched power and knowledge asymmetries.

For the welfare of others
We end this section with what may well be the toughest challenge confronting
data obfuscation: whether it can be tolerated when it aims at systems that
promise societal benefits extending beyond the individual subjects them-
selves. As we enter deeper and deeper into the epistemic and decision-making


80
                                                                    CHAPTER 4
paradigm of big data, and as hope is stoked by its potential to serve the
common good, questions arise concerning the obligation of individuals to par-
ticipate.” Obfuscators may be faulted for being unwilling to pay costs for ben-
efits, failing to pitch in for the sake of the common good. But what exactly is
the extent of this obligation, and its limits? Are individuals obligated to pay
whatever is asked, succumb to any terms of service, and pitch in even if there
is a cost? Do sufferers from a rare disease, for example, owe it to others to
participate in studies, and to allow data about them to be integrated into sta-
tistical analyses in which the size of N improves the results? And what if there
is acost?
      The plight of the ethical obfuscator resembles that of the ethical citizen
expected to contribute to the common good by, say, paying taxes or serving in
the military. Some might say, equivalently, that we must fulfill an obligation
not only by contributing to the common store of data but also by doing so
honestly, accurately, and conscientiously. Even if there is some sense of obli-
gation, what principles govern its shape, particularly if there is risk or cost
associated with it? Ethics, generally, doesn’t require supererogation, and
liberal democracies don’t demand or condone the sacrifice of innocent indi-
viduals, even a few, for the benefit of the majority. Where to draw the line?
What principles of justice offer guidance on these matters?
      Jeremy Waldron observed that after the terrorist attacks of September
11, 2001 citizens were asked to allow the balance of security and liberty to be
tipped in favor of security.” Although it isn’t unusual for social policy to require
tradeoffs—one value, one right against another or others—Waldron reminds
us that such tradeoffs must be made wisely with fastidious attention to conse-
quences. One particular consequence is the distributional impact; losses and
gains, costs and benefits should be borne fairly among individuals and between
groups. Waldron’s worry is that when we say that we collectively give up a
measure of freedom in return for our collective security there is an important
elision: some individuals or groups suffer a disproportionate loss of freedom
for the security benefit of all, or, as sometimes happens with tradeoffs in
general, may even be excluded entirely from the collective benefits. Generaliz-
ing this warning to questions about paying for the collective good with indi-
vidual data prompts us to consider not only the total sum of costs over benefits
but also who is paying the cost and who is enjoying the benefits. Often, com-
panies defend data avarice by citing service improvements or security but are



1S OBFUSCATION JUSTIFIED?                                                        81
 vague about crucial details—for example, whether existing customers and
 data contributors are supporting new ones who haven't pitched in, and what
 proportion of the value extracted accrues to “all” and what proportion to the
 company. These questions must be answered in order to address questions
 about the nature and extent of the obligations data subjects have to contribute
 to the common data store.

Risk and data
The language of risk frequently crops up in hailing the promise of big data for
the good of all. Proponents would have us believe that data will help reduce
 risks of terror and crime, of inefficacious medical treatment, of bad credit deci-
sions, of inadequate education, of inefficient energy use, and so forth. These
claims should persuade or even compel individuals to give generously of
information, as we graciously expose the contents of our suitcases in airports.
By the logic of these claims, obfuscators are unethical in diminishing, depriv-
ing, or subverting the common stock. Persuasive? Irrefutable? Yet here, too,
justice demands attention to distribution and fairness: who risks and who ben-
efits? We do not flatly reject the claims, but until these questions are answered
and issues of harm and costs are addressed there can be no such obligation.
Take, for example, the trivial and ubiquitous practice of online tracking for the
purpose of behavioral advertising. Ad networks claim that online tracking
and behavioral advertising reduce the “risk” of costly advertising to unsuitable
targets or to targeting attractive offers to unprofitable customers. Risk reduc-
tion it may indeed be, but information contributions by all are improving the lot
only of a few, primarily the ad networks providing the service, possibly the
advertisers, and perhaps the attractive customers they seek to lure. We made
a similar point above when we discussed data aggregation for the purpose of
reducing credit fraud: that citing risk reduction often oversimoplifies a picture in
which risk may not be reduced overall, or even if it is reduced, not reduced for
all. What actually occurs is that risk is shifted and redistributed. We offer
similar cautions against inappropriate disclosure of medical information,
which may increase risk for some information subjects while decreasing it for
others; or collecting and mining data for the purposes of price discrimination,
imposing risks on consumers under surveillance while reducing risks for mer-
chants who engage in schemes of data profiling.




82                                                                     CHAPTER 4
In sum
Data obfuscation raises important ethical challenges that anyone designing or
using obfuscating systems would do well to heed. We have scrutinized the
challenges and explored contexts and conditions that are relevant to their
adjudication in ethical terms. But we also have discovered that adjudicating
ethical challenges often invokes considerations that are political and expedi-
ent. Politics comes into play when disputes hinge on disagreements over the
relative importance of societal ends and relative significance of ethical and
societal values. It also comes into play when addressing the merits of compet-
ing non-moral claims, the allocation of goods, and the distribution of risks.
When entering the realms of the political, obfuscation must be tested against
the demands of justice. But if obfuscators are so tested, so must we test the
data collectors, the information services, the trackers, and the profilers. We
have found that breathless rhetoric surrounding the promise and practice of
data does not say enough about justice and the problem of risk shifting.
Incumbents have embedded few protections and mitigations into the edifices
of data they are constructing. Against this backdrop, obfuscation offers a
means of striving for balance defensible when it functions to resist domination
of the weaker by the stronger. A just society leaves this escape hatch open.




1S OBFUSCATION JUSTIFIED?                                                    83
 5 WILL OBFUSCATION WORK?

  How can obfuscation succeed? How can the efforts of a few individuals gener-
  ating extraneous data work against well-funded, determined institutions, let
 alone against such behemoths of data as Google, Facebook, Axciom, and the
 National Security Agency? Encountering these doubts again and again, we
 have come to see that when people ask about particular instantiations of
 obfuscation, or obfuscation generally “But does it work?” the reasonable
 answer is “Yes, but it depends.” It depends on the goals, the obfuscator, the
 adversary, the resources available, and more. These, in turn, suggest means,
 methods, and principles for design and execution.
       The typical scenario we imagined earlier involves individuals functioning
 within information ecosystems often not of their own making or choosing.
 Against the designers, operators, managers, and owners of these ecosys-
 tems, individual data subjects stand in an asymmetric relation of knowledge,
 power, or both. Although these individuals are aware that information about
 them or produced by them is necessary for the relationship, there is much that
 they don’t know. How much is taken? What is done with it? How will they be
 affected? They may grasp enough about the ecosystems in which they are
wittingly or unwittingly enrolled, from Web searching to facial recognition, to
 believe or recognize that its practices are inappropriate, but, at the same time,
 recognize that they aren't capable of reasonably functioning outside it, or of
 reasonably inducing change within it.
       Whether obfuscation works—whether unilateral shifting of terms of
engagement over personal information is fulfilled by a particular obfuscation
project—may seem to be a straightforward question about a specific problem-
solving technique, but upon closer scrutiny it is actually several questions.
Whether obfuscation works depends on characteristics of the existing circum-
stances, the desired alteration in terms,’what counts as fulfillment of these
desires, and the architecture and features of the particular obfuscation project
under consideration. This is why answering the question “Does it work?” with
“It depends” isn’t facetious; instead it is an invitation to consider in systematic
terms what characteristics of an information ecosystem make it one in which
obfuscation could work. Beyond these considerations, we seek to map design
possibilities for obfuscation projects into an array of diverse goals that the
instigators and users of-such projects may have.



84
                                                                      CHAPTER 5
     Therefore, we have to answer two questions with this chapter. We can
take the question “Will obfuscation work?” in the sense “How can obfuscation
work for me and my particular situation?” or in the sense “Does obfuscation
work in general?” We will respond to both questions. The overall answer is
straightforward: Yes, obfuscation can work, but whether it does and to what
extent depends on how it is implemented to respond to a threat, fulfill a goal,
and meet other specific parameters. This chapter presents a set of questions
that we think should be addressed if obfuscation is to be applied well.

5.1 Obfuscation is about goals
In the world of security and privacy theory, it is by now well established that
the answer to every “Does it work?” question is “It depends.” To secure some-
thing, to make it private or safe or secret, entails tradeoffs, many of which we
have already discussed. Securing things requires time, money, effort, and
attention, and adds organizational and personal friction while diminishing con-
venience and access to many tools and services. Near-total freedom from
digital surveillance for an individual is simple, after all: just lead the life of an
undocumented migrant laborer of the 1920s, with no Internet, no phones, no
insurance, no assets, riding the rails, being paid off the books for illegal
manual work. Simple, but with a very high cost, because the threat model of
“everything” is ludicrously broad. When we think of organizational security
tradeoffs, we can think of the “Cone of Silence” in the spy-movie-parody tele-
vision series Get Smart.' Used for conducting top secret meetings, the Cone
works so well that the people in it can’t hear one another—it is perfectly
private and amusingly useless.’
      Threat models lower the costs of security and privacy by helping us
understand what our adversaries are looking for and what they are capable of
finding, so that we can defend against those dangers specifically.’ If you know
that your organization faces a danger that includes sophisticated attacks on its
information security, you should fill in all the USB ports on the organization's
computers with rubber cement and keep sensitive information on “airgapped”
machines that are never connected to the network. But ifyou don’t believe that
your organization faces such a danger, why deprive people of the utility of USB
sticks? Obfuscation in general is useful in relation to a specific type of threat,
shaped by necessary visibility. As we have emphasized throughout, the obfus-
cator is already exposed to some degree—visible to radar, to people



                       WORK?                                                      85
WILL OBFUSCATION
  scrutinizing public legal filings, to security cameras, to eavesdropping, to Web
  search providers, and generally to data collection defined by the terms of
  service. Furthermore, he or she is exposed, to a largely unknown degree, at
 the wrong side of the information asymmetry, and this unknown exposure is
 further aggravated by time—by future circulation of data and systems of anal-
 ysis. We take this visibility as a starting point for working out the role that
 obfuscation can play.
        To put that another way, we don’t have a best-practices threat model
 available—in fact, an obfuscator may not have sufficient resources, research,
 or training to put such a model together. We are operating from a position of
 weakness, obligated to accept choices we should probably refuse. If this is the
 case, we have to make do (more on that below) and we must have a clear
 sense of what we want to accomplish. Consider danah boyd’s research on
 American teenagers’ use of social media. Teens in the United States are
 subject to an enormous amount of scrutiny, almost all of it without their
 consent or control (parents, school, other authority figures). Social media
 would seem to make them subject to even more. They are exposed to scrutiny
 by default—in fact, it is to their benefit, from a privacy perspective, to appear
 to be visible to everyone. “As teens encounter particular technologies, they
 make decisions based on what they're trying to achieve,” boyd writes,“ and
 what they are trying to achieve is often to share content without sharing
 meaning. They can’t necessarily create secret social spaces for their
community—parents can and do demand passwords to their social-network
accounts and access to their phones. Instead, they use a variety of practices
that assume everyone can see what they do, and then behave so that only a
few people can understand the meaning of their actions. “Limiting access to
meaning,” boyd writes, “can be a much more powerful tool for achieving
privacy than trying to limit access to the content itself.”> Their methods don't
necessarily use obfuscation (they lean heavily on subtle social cues, references,
and nuance to create material that reads differently to different audiences, a
practice of “social steganography”), but they emphasize the importance of
understanding goals. The goal is not to disappear or to maintain total
informational control (which may be impossible); it is to limit and shape the
community that can accurately interpret actions that everyone can see.
       Much the same is true of obfuscation. Many instances and practices
that we have gathered under that heading are expressions of particular goals



86
                                                                     CHAPTER 5
that take discovery, visibility, or vulnerability as a starting point. For all the
reasons we have already discussed, people now can’t escape certain kinds of
data collection and analysis, so the question then becomes “What does the
obfuscator want to do with obfuscation?” The answer to that question gives us
a set of parameters (choices, constraints, mechanisms) that we can use to
shape our approach to obfuscation.

5.2 | want to use obfuscation ...
A safe that can’t be cracked does not exist. Safes are rated in hours—in how
long it would take an attacker (given various sets of tools) to open them.° A
safe is purchased as a source of security in addition to other elements of secu-
rity, including locked doors, alarms, guards, and law-enforcement personnel.
A one-hour safe with an alarm probably is adequate in a precinct where the
police reliably show up in twenty minutes. If we abstract this a little bit, we can
use it to characterize the goals of obfuscation. The strength of an obfuscation
approach isn’t measured by a single objective standard (as safes are) but in
relation to a goal and a context: to be strong enough. It may be used on its own
or in concert with other privacy techniques. The success of obfuscation is
always relative to its purposes, and to consideration of constraints, obstacles,
and the un-level playing field of epistemic and power asymmetries.
      When gathering different obfuscation examples, we observed that there
was convergence around general aims and purposes that cropped up numer-
ous times, even though a single system could be associated with several ends
or purposes and even though intermediate ends sometimes served as means
to achieve other ends. There are subtler distinctions, too, but we have simpli-
fied and unified purposes and ends into goals to make them more readily
applicable to design and practice. They are arranged roughly in order of inclu-
sion, from buying time to expressing protest. Interfering with profiling, the fifth
goal, can include some of the earlier goals, such as providing cover, within it,
and can be in turn contained by expressing protest (the sixth goal). (Since vir-
tually all obfuscation contributes to the difficulty of rapidly analyzing and pro-
cessing data for surveillance purposes, all the higher-order goals include the
first goal: buying time.) As you identify the goal suited to your project, you
ascend a ladder of complexity and diversity of possible types of obfuscation.
      Skeptical readers—and we all should be skeptical—will notice that we
are no longer relying heavily on examples of obfuscation used by powerful



WILL OBFUSCATION      WORK?                                                     87
groups for malign ends, such as the use of Twitter bots to hamper election
protests, the use of likefarming in social-network scams, or inter-business
corporate warfare. We want this section to focus on how obfuscation can be
used for positive purposes.
      If you can answer the questions in the previous chapter to your satisfac-
tion, then this chapter is intended for you. We begin with the possibility that you
want to use obfuscation to buy some time.

... to buy some time
Did radar chaff “work”? After all, it fluttered to the ground in minutes, leaving
the sky again open for the sweep of the beam—but of course by then the plane
was already out of range.
      The ephemeral obfuscation systems meant to buy time are, in a sense,
elegantly simple, but they require a deep appreciation of intricate physical,
scientific, technical, social, and cultural surroundings. Success doesn’t require
that one buy a particular amount of time, or the longest time possible; it
requires only that one buy just enough time. Using identical confederates, or
even just slowing the process of going through documents, dealing with
bureaucracy, or sorting true from false information, can work toward this end,
Most obfuscation strategies work best in concert with other techniques of
privacy protection or protest, but this is particularly true of time-buying
approaches, which rely on other means of evasion and resistance already
being in place—and a very clear sense of the adversary. (See the questions in
section 5.3.)

... to provide cover
This subsection and the next are related but distinct, with a substantial overlap.
They approach the same problem from different sides: keeping an adversary
from definitively connecting particular activities, outcomes, or objects to an
actor. Obfuscation for cover involves concealing the action in the space of
other actions. Some approaches can be implemented to withstand scrutiny;
others rely on the cover provided by context to escape observation. Think of
babble tapes, which bury a message in dozens of channels of voices: we know
that the speaker is speaking, but we don’t know what is being said. Or think of
the approach that Operation Vula ultimately settled on: not simply encrypted



88                                                                    CHAPTER 5
email, but encrypted email that would perfectly fit the profile of banal interna-
tional business. The communications of ANC operatives could take on cover as
an additional layer of protection (along with crypto and superb operational
security) by using the traffic of other messages similar to theirs to avoid obser-
vation. One method assumes scrutiny, and the other strives to be ignored;
each is suited to its situation.

... for deniability
If providing cover hides the action in the space of other actions, providing deni-
ability hides the decision, making it more difficult to connect an action and
an actor with certainty. One of the benefits of running a Tor relay is the addi-
tional layer of confusion it creates: is this traffic starting with you, or are you
just passing it along for someone else? (TrackMeNot has a similar mecha-
nism; we will discuss it in greater detail in the subsection on interference with
profiling.) Likewise, consider the use of simulated uploads to leak sites, which
make it harder to determine definitively that a certain file was uploaded during
a session by some particular IP address. Finally, think of something as simple
as shuffling SIM cards around: it doesn’t conceal the activity of carrying phones
and placing calls, but makes it more difficult to be certain that it’s this person
with this phone at any time. Though providing deniability blurs a bit with pro-
viding cover and with preventing individual observation, it is particularly
useful when you know that your adversary wants to be sure that it has the
right person.

... to prevent individual exposure
This somewhat unusual goal may at first sound generic (don’t all obfuscation
approaches want to prevent individual observation?), but we mean something
very specific by it. Certain obfuscation approaches are well suited to achieving
the positive social outcome of enabling individuals, companies, institutions,
and governments to use aggregate data while keeping the data from being
used to observe any particular person. Privacy-preserving participatory
sensing can collect valuable aggregate data about traffic flows without reveal-
ing anything reliable about one particular vehicle. CacheCloak retains the sig-
nificant social utility of location-based mobile services while preventing the
providers of those services from tracking the users (and leaving open other



WILL OBFUSCATION      WORK?                                                      89
 avenues to making money). Pools for the swapping of loyalty cards give
 grocery and retail chains most of the benefits they were hoping for (the cards
 are driving business their way and providing useful demographic data, postal
 codes, or data on purchases) but prevent them from compiling dossiers on
 specific shoppers.

... to interfere with profiling
Another rung up the ladder of comprehensiveness, anti-profiling obfuscation
may interfere with observation of individuals or with analysis of a group, may
provide cover or deniability, or may raise the cost (in time and money) of the
business of data. It may leave aggregate useful data intact or may pack it with
ambiguity, reasonable lies, and nonsense.
      Vortex was a cookie-swapping system that enabled users to hop between
identities and profiles. Had it been widely implemented beyond the prototype
stage, it would have rendered online profiling for advertising purposes useless.
The various “cloning” and disinformation services we have described offer
similar tools for making profiling less reliable. TrackMeNot provides search-
query deniability (e.g., was that query about “Tea Party join” or “fluffy sex toys”
from you, or not?) under the larger goal of rendering search profiles in general
less reliable. Which queries can you trust? Which queries define the cluster
into which the searcher fits? Against which queries should you serve ads,
and what user activity and identities should you provide in response to a
subpoena?

... to express protest
Of course, TrackMeNot is a gesture of protest, as are many of our other
examples—for example, card-swapping activists and crowds in Guy Fawkes
masks. Many obfuscation strategies can meet or contribute to goals already
mentioned while also serving to register discontent or refusal. A pertinent
question to ask of your obfuscation approach is whether it is intended to keep
you unnoticed, to make you seem innocuous, or to make your dissent known.

5.3 Is my obfuscation project ...
Now that you have a sense of your goals, we can turn to four remaining ques-
tions that build on the goals and shape the components of an obfuscation



90                                                                     CHAPTER 5
project. As was true of the six goals, there is some overlap between these
questions. They will determine how an obfuscation system works, but they are
not perfectly distinct, and they have some effect on each other. We have sepa-
rated them according to the roles they play in implementing obfuscation.

... individual, or collective?
Can your obfuscation project be carried out effectively by one person, or does
it require collective action? One person wearing a mask is more easily identi-
fied and tracked than someone not wearing a mask, but a hundred people
wearing the same mask become a crowd of collective identity, and that makes
individual attribution of actions difficult. Some obfuscation projects can be
used by an individual or by a small group but will become more effective as
more people join in. The reverse could also be true (see “known or unknown,”
below): a technique that relies on blending in and not being noticed—that
functions by avoiding scrutiny—will become far more vulnerable if widely
adopted.
       Two consequences will follow from your answer to the question this sub-
section asks.
       First, an obfuscation technique that builds on collective action can spur
adoption through the “network effect.” If the technique becomes more reliable
or more robust for all existing users as more users join, you can think about
the design from the perspective of crossing that threshold where significant
gains for joining become apparent and you can spark widespread use. Does
your technique require some number of users before it will be really effective?
If it does, how will you get it to that point? This is an opportunity to think about
whether the technique can “scale”—whether it can continue to provide utility
once it is being rapidly taken up in large numbers. This also bears on usability:
a technique that requires a number of users to succeed should have a lot of
thought put into how immediately useable, understandable, and friendly it is.
Ifyour obfuscation requires a number of users, then the plan must include how
to get them. The Tor project, for example, has recognized the need for greater
accessibility to non-expert users.
     Second, a technique that relies on relative obscurity—on not being widely
adopted, or on not being something that an adversary is looking for—benefits
from exclusivity.




WILL OBFUSCATION      WORK?                                                      91
 ... known, or unknown?
 Some obfuscation methods use their ability to blend into the innocuous data
 they generate to avoid scrutiny; others use it to escape scrutiny. For the goals
 you want to accomplish, can your method work if your adversary knows it is
 being employed, or if your adversary is familiar in detail with how it works?
       For many techniques that merely buy time, the answer doesn’t matter.
 For example, whether or not the adversary’s radar operator thinks a large
 number of dots represent real airplanes makes no difference to the adver-
sary’s ability to coordinate a counterattack. As long as the radar operator is
slowed down for ten minutes, the obfuscation provided by chaff is a success.
More complex obfuscation methods can accomplish different goals depending
on whether or not the adversary knows they are being used. For example, if
AdNauseam activity isn’t known to the adversary, it works to foil profiling,
filling the record of advertising clicks with indiscriminate, meaningless activ-
ity. If it is known, it both frustrates the work of profiling the individual and
develops a protest role—a known gesture of, mocking refusal. (Build a sur-
veillance machine to get me to click a few ads? I'll click all of them!)
      However, in some cases the distinction matters and must be accounted
for. If your goal is to render a database less effective or less valuable in the
long term, so that your adversary continues to use it and thus is acting on
misleading or false information, you want sources of plausible obfuscation to
remain unknown so they can’t be selected and expunged or countered. Forms
of obfuscation that function primarily as acts of public protest need their
obfuscating nature to be made explicit so they can stand as refusal rather than
compliance.

... selective, or general?
This is the most complex of the questions, with four different implications that
must be considered.
      Each of the goals discussed above, to one degree or another, relies on an
understanding of the adversary against which obfuscation is directed. Often
this understanding—whether it is formalized as a threat model or whether it
is informed guesswork—is fragmentary, missing important components, or
otherwise compromised. What first interested us in obfuscation was its use by
people who often lacked precise mastery of the challenge they faced to their



92                                                                  CHAPTER    5
privacy: it was proprietary, or classified, or it relied on technologies and tech-
niques they could not comprehend, or the “adversaries” included other people
freely giving up their data, or the problem existed both in the present and in
possible future vulnerabilities. In addition to having a clear understanding of
the limits of obfuscation—that, knowing one’s adversary—we must bear in
mind what we don’t know, and beware of relying on any one technique alone
to protect sensitive information. This raises the question of how directed a
particular obfuscation strategy is. Is it a general attempt at covering one’s
tracks, or is the obfuscating noise that you produce tailored to a particular
threat about which you have some knowledge? A few further questions follow
from your answer to this.
      First, is your obfuscation approach directed at a specific adversary, or is
it directed at anyone who might be gathering and making use of data about
you? Is there a specific point of analysis you are delaying or preventing, or are
you just trying to kick up as much dust as you can? The strategy outlined in the
“cloning” patent that Apple acquired is an example of the latter: producing
many variants of the user, all generating plausible data, for anyone who might
be collecting. If you know your adversary and know your adversary’s tech-
niques and goals, you can be much more precise in your obfuscation.
      If you know your adversary, a second question arises: Is that adversary
targeting you (or a select group), or are you subject to a more general aggre-
gation and analysis of data? If the former, you must find ways to selectively
misrepresent your data. The latter possibility offers a different task for the
obfuscator: the production of misleading data can take a significantly wider-
ranging form, resembling data on what may be many individuals.
      This, in turn, raises a third question: Is your technique supposed to provide
selective benefit, or general benefit? In view of how much of the work of data
surveillance is not about scrutinizing individuals but rather is about using
inferences derived from larger groups, your method might work to obfuscate
only your own tracks, or it might work to render overall profiles and models
less reliable. Each of those possibilities presents its own distinct difficulties.
For example, if TrackMeNot functions effectively, it has the capacity to cast
doubt not only on the obfuscator’s profile but also on the profiles of others in
the dataset.
     Thinking about beneficiaries raises a fourth question: Is your goal to
produce data of general illegibility, so no one knows or needs to know what is



WILL OBFUSCATION WORK?                                                          93
real and what is obfuscation? Or is it to produce obfuscated data that an adver-
sary can’t get any value from (or can get only diminished value from), but that
tell the truth to those who need to know what is real? Think of FaceCloak, a
system that keeps Facebook from gaining access to personal data by provid-
ing it with meaningless noise while keeping the actual, salient personal and
social data available to one’s friends. Or consider a system designed to pre-
serve socially valuable classes of data — derived from the census, for example,
in order to allocate resources effectively or to govern efficiently, while pre-
venting the identification of individual data subjects within them. Creating a
selectively readable system is far more challenging than simply making
generally plausible lies, but a selectively readable system offers wider benefits
along with privacy protection, and the difficulties involved in creating it are a
challenge that should be accounted for at the outset of a project.

... Short-term, or long-term?
 Finally, over how long a time span should your project be effective? The goal
of buying time is a starting place for answering this question. If you want to
confuse the situation for only ten minutes, that’s one thing; if you want to
render some database permanently unreliable, untrustworthy, and valueless
for inference or prediction, that's much harder. A major component of the
information asymmetry that obfuscation helps to address is temporal—the
“time-traveling robots from the future” problem we discussed in chapter 3.
Certain data may be innocuous now, but a change in context, a change in own-
ership, or tools or laws can make the same data dangerous. Does your tech-
nique have to work only for now, and only for one outrage, one company, and
one technique of collection and analysis, or does it have to ruin the data so that
they can’t be trusted in the future or for other purposes? The former isn’t easy
but is relatively straightforward. The latter involves a much broader set of
challenges. It is worthwhile to consider this question now, at the development
Stage, so as not to be caught out after a technique has been widely adopted
and you realize that it was provisional, or that it was particular to a company
bound by certain national laws that no longer apply.

With these six goals and four questions in mind, we can assess the
fundamentals—and some of the pitfalls—of putting together an obfuscation
strategy. Of course, the questions won't end with these. As viable practice, as


94                                                                   CHAPTER 5
a powerful and credible response to oppressive data regimes, obfuscation will
be well served by conditions that will enable it to develop and thrive. These
include the following:
¢ Progress in relevant sciences and engineering Develop methods in statis-
tics, cryptography, systems engineering, machine learning, system security,
networking, and threat modeling that address questions like: how much noise,
what kind of noise, how to tailor for the target of noise, how to protect against
attack, and for what specific problems is obfuscation the right solution?
e Progress in relevant social sciences, theory, and ethics Address questions
about what individuals want and need in their uses of obfuscating systems,
and to engage in sound normative assessments of proposed systems.
¢ Progress in technology policy and regulation Safeguard open and public
standards and protocols that allow developers of obfuscating systems access
to and engagement with critical infrastructure; encourage large, public facing
systems to offer open APIs to developers of obfuscating systems; and refuse
enforcement of Terms of Service that prohibit reasonable obfuscating systems.
Obfuscation, in its humble, provisional, better-than-nothing, socially contin-
gent way, is deeply entangled with the context of use. Are you creating a per-
sonal act of refusal, designed to stand on its own as a gesture of protest,
whether or not it actually makes data collection less useful? Are you using
obfuscation as one element in a larger suite of privacy-protection tools tailored
to a group and an adversary—obfuscation that has to work verifiably in rela-
tion to a specific data-analysis strategy? Perhaps you are applying obfuscation
at the level of policy, or to data collection that requires more effort to misuse,
so as to increase the cost of indiscriminate surveillance. Or perhaps you are
developing or contributing to software that can provide a service with a layer
of obfuscation that makes it difficult to do anything but provide the service. You
may have access to considerable technical, social, political, and financial
resources, or you may be filling out forms, dealing with institutions, or inter-
acting online without much choice in the matter. With all of those different
possibilities, however, the issues raised by our goals and questions are general
to obfuscation projects across different domains, and working through them
provides a starting point for getting your obfuscation work out into the world,
where it can begin doing good by making noise.




WILL OBFUSCATION      WORK?                                                     95
ee
       reine
     wiry as
— . toe
      nies




                                    aie aea.
               oun
          ion aa M
                                          Byes


                     Ae
                                   re
                                   TR
                                      oan
                                      7   :                             : —   pad
               = an wala venue aeNRE I
                 Phase 1% Sopa cay ae tam
         ei mscMata ie wrtids NiilehCd, iM "
                                  ut Sh     Sage




                              -           as ie   saul        .        ei
                     aa       tavdeal ehaS               Wy       ae

               ?          i               a              Bate6hsae con
EPILOGUE




We didn’t invent obfuscation. We started out with a tool for the specific purpose
of interfering with search-query logs, then recognized that it did something we
could see all around us. We undertook the task of naming it and clarifying its
most important parts so it could be generalized, and so it could serve as the
beginnings of a method that can play a role in addressing some of the most
intractable privacy challenges of information technologies, communications
networks, and data collection and analysis. Once we started looking, we were
amazed by the range of applications we uncovered. In part | of this book, we
offered a compendium of the possibilities.
       In part II, we laid out the concept of data obfuscation as a strategy for
privacy protection, the ethical issues obfuscation raises, and some salient
questions to ask of any obfuscation project. Throughout, we took care to
emphasize that obfuscation is an addition to the privacy toolkit, not a replace-
ment for one or all of the tools on which we already rely. It has a role to play
as part of a rich network of tools, theories, frameworks, skills, and equipment
that enable us to respond to present-day threats to privacy. We have only
begun the work by naming, identifying, and defining. This book is a collection
of starting points for understanding and making use of obfuscation. There is
much more to be learned from practice, from doing.
      We have described cases of obfuscation working in concert with other
approaches to privacy protection and how obfuscation may be integrated with
law, social media, policy and encryption to augment the effectiveness of these
alternatives. Given the range of obfuscation goals, from buying time to foiling
profiling to protesting, can we develop different models of success with quan-
tifiable metrics? Of course, obfuscation is shaped by its relationship to an
adversary, but most of the situations in which it is used involve various kinds
and degrees of uncertainty—uncertainty about what can be done with data,
about how these capabilities expand when data sets are combined, and the
 other mysteries inherent in the information asymmetries that characterize
 everyday life. For obfuscation projects specifically seeking to provide deni-
 ability or cover, or to interfere with profiling (especially over the longer term),
 can we develop optimal obfuscation methods under different kinds of uncer-
 tainty? Can we take sophisticated present-day methods of data analysis, such
 as advanced neural networks and deep learning, and use them to develop
 more effective obfuscation strategies? We have identified common goals and
 have uncovered crucial questions, but are there best practices for putting
 obfuscation into play that apply across different obfuscation projects? These
 are questions to be answered with further research and application. Others
 will follow as the utility of obfuscation makes evident its promise, at least until
 such time as the need for firmer and fairer approaches to regulating appropri-
 ate data practices is properly addressed.
       There is no simple solution to the problem of privacy, because privacy
 itself is a solution to societal challenges that are in constant flux. Some are
 natural and beyond our control; others are technological and should be within
our control but are shaped by a panoply of complex social and material forces
with indeterminate effects. Privacy does not mean stopping the flow of data; it
means channeling it wisely and justly to serve societal ends and values and
the individuals who are its subjects, particularly the vulnerable and the disad-
vantaged. Privacy should sustain the freedoms and autonomous pursuits that
fuel positive engagement with one another and with the collective. Innumera-
ble customs, concepts, tools, laws, mechanisms, and protocols have evolved
to achieve privacy, so conceived, and it is to that collection that we add obfus-
cation to sustain privacy as an active conversation, a struggle, and a choice.
       Having considered obfuscation through cases, instances, explanations,
and ethical questions, and having considered its effectiveness and its fitness
for various purposes, you may want to set the book aside and consider imple-
menting obfuscation, in software or in policy, for a project you run or a project
you resist—to create a crowd and vanish into it, for your benefit, the benefit of
others, and the benefit of learning by doing.




98
                                                                        EPILOGUE
NOTES




CHAPTER      1

1. Meir Finkel, On Flexibility: Recovery from Technological and Doctrinal Surprise on
the Battlefield (Stanford University Press, 2011), 125.

2. Fred Cohen, “The Use of Deception Techniques: Honeypots and Decoys,” in Hand-
book of Information Security, volume 3, ed. Hossein Bidgoli (Wiley, 2006), 646.

3. Kirill Maslinsky, Sergey Koltcov, and Olessia Koltslova, “Changes in the Topical
Structure of Russian-Language LiveJournal: The Impact of Elections 2011,” Research
Paper WP BPR 14/SOC/2013, National Research University, Moscow, 3. For recent data
on the proportion of LiveJournal users by country, see http://www.alexa.com/siteinfo/
livejournal.com.

4. The LiveJournal statistics cited here are from http://www.livejournal.com/stats.
bml. (This site is no longer available.)

5. Simon   Shuster, “Why Have Hackers Hit Russia’s Most Popular Blogging
Service?”  time.com, April 7, 2011 (http://content.time.com/time/world/article/
0,8599,2063952,00.html). (The number of Russian accounts cited in the article appears
to be the total number of accounts rather than the number of active accounts. We
believe activity to be a more meaningful measure.)

6. Yekaterina Parkhomenko and Arch Tait, “Blog Talk,” Index on Censorship 37 (Febru-
ary 2008): 174-178 (doi:10.1080/03064220701882822).

7. Suren Gazaryan, “Russia: Control From the Top Down,” Enemies of the Internet,
March 11, 2014 (http://12mars.rsf.org/2014-en/2014/03/11/russia-repression-from
-the-top-down/).

8. Brian Krebs, “Twitter Bots Drown Out Anti-Kremlin Tweets,” Krebs on Security,
December 11, 2008 (http://krebsonsecurity.com/2011/12/twitter-bots-drown-out
-anti-kremlin-tweets/).
 9. Ann Friedman, “Hashtag Journalism,” Columbia Journalism Review #realtalk blog,
 May 29, 2014 (http://www.cjr.org/realtalk/hashtag_journalism.php?page=all).

 10. “Twitterbots,” Krebs on Security          (http://krebsonsecurity.com/wp-content/
 uploads/2011/12/twitterbots1.txt).

 11. Manuel Reda, “Mexico: Twitterbots Sabotage Anti-PRI Protest,” Fusion, May 21,
 2012 _ (http://thisisfusion.tumblr.com/post/23287767289/twitterbots-attack-anti-pri
 -protest-mexico).

12. For a more direct application of Twitter spam in the Mexican election that skirts
this rule, see Mike Orcutt, “Twitter Mischief Plagues Mexico's Election,” MIT Technology
Review, June 21, 2014 (http://www.technologyreview.com/news/428286/twitter
 -mischief-plagues-mexicos-election/).

 13. Joseph Meyerowitz and Romit R. Choudhury, “Hiding Stars with Fireworks: Loca-
tion Privacy through Camouflage,” in Proceedings of the 15th Annual International Con-
ference on Mobile Computing and Networking (ACM, 2009).

 14. Ibid., 1.

15. Daniel Howe and Helen Nissenbaum, “TrackMeNot: Resisting Surveillance in Web
Search,” in Lessons From the Identity Trail: Anonymity, Privacy and Identity in a Net-
worked Society, ed. lan Kerr, Carole Luckock, and Valerie Steeves (Oxford University
Press, 2009), 417.

16. For the AOL search logs event, see Michael Barbaro and Tom Zeller Jr., “A Face Is
Exposed for AOL Searcher No. 4417749,” New York Times, August 9, 2006. For the
Department of Justice's Google request, see the original subpoena: Gonzales v. Google,
Inc., Case (Subpoena) CV 06-8006MISC JW (N.D. Cal.). http://www.google.com/press/
images/subpoena_20060317.pdf, and the consequent ruling: American Civil Liberties
Union v. Gonzalez, Case 98-5591 (E.D. Pa.) (http://www.google.com/press/images/
ruling_20060317.pdf).                          :
17. Note, for instance, that the rollout information for Google’s more personalized
search results—building on Google+ information—includes a toggle that enables you
to see your results without the effect of your history of searching the Web. This doesn’t
remove the history, but it presents query history as something that should at least
be optional, and not as an unalloyed good. See Amit Singhal, “Search, Plus Your
World,” Google official blog (http://googleblog. blogspot.com/2012/01/search-pl
                                                                                      us
-your-world.html), January 10, 2012.


100                                                             NOTES TO CHAPTER        1
18. Vincent Toubiana and Helen Nissenbaum, “An Analysis of Google Logs Retention
Policies,” Journal of Privacy and Confidentiality 3, no. 1 (2011): 3-26 (http://repository.
cmu.edu/jpc/vol3/iss1/2/).

19. Andy Greenberg, This Machine Kills Secrets: How WikiLeakers, Cypherpunks, and
Hacktivists Aim to Free the Worla’s Information (Dutton, 2012), 157.

20. Ibid., 293.
21. Phil Hellmuth, Marvin Karlins, and Joe Navarro, Phil Hellmuth Presents Read ‘Em
and Reap (HarperCollins, 2006). (It is interesting to imagine a poker strategy based on
more extensive use of obfuscation—a player generating a constant stream of manner-
isms and typical tells, so that anything involuntary is difficult to parse out—but that
probably would be so irritating as to get a player ejected.)

22. Wesley Remmer, “Learning the Secret Language of Baseball,” Bremerton Patriot,
July 23, 2010 (http://www.bremertonpatriot.com/sports/99124354.html).

23. Spartacus, directed by Stanley Kubrick (Universal Pictures, 1960).

24. Charles Dickens, A Tale of Two Cities (Penguin Classics, 2003); Alan Moore and
David Lloyd, V for Vendetta (Vertigo/DC Comics, 1982).

25. Marco Deseriis, “Lots of Money Because | Am Many: The Luther Blissett Project
and the Multiple-Use Name Strategy,” Thamyris/Intersecting 21 (2011): 65-93.

26. The Thomas Crown Affair, directed by John McTiernan (Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer,
1999).

27. Inside Man, directed by Spike Lee (Universal Pictures, 2006).

28. North by Northwest, directed by Alfred Hitchcock (Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, 1959).

29. Thomas Habinek, The World of Roman Song: From Ritualized Speech to Social
Order (Johns Hopkins University Press, 2005), 10.

30. Arthur Conan Doyle, “The Adventure of the Six Napoleons,” in The Return of Sher-
lock Holmes (Penguin Classics, 2008).

31. Sarah Netter, “Wash. Man Pulls off Robbery Using Craigslist, Pepper Spray,” ABC
News, October 1, 2008 (http://abcnews.go.com/US/story?id=5930862).

32. Jens Lund, with reply by Istvan Deak, “The Legend of King Christian, an Exchange,”
New York Review of Books 30, no. 5 (1990) (http://www.nybooks.com/articles/



NOTES TO CHAPTER         1                                                              101
 archives/1990/mar/29/the-legend-of-king-christian-an-exchange/). (That the specific
 case of the Yellow Star is fictional doesn’t detract in any way from the Danes’ heroic
 history of helping Jews hide and escape during the war.)

 33. Leo Goldberger, ed., The Rescue of the Danish Jews: Moral Courage Under Stress
 (New York University Press, 1987).

 34. Ben Kafka, The Demon of Writing (MIT Press, 2012), 67.

35. Jeremy Scahill and Glenn Greenwald, “The NSA’s Secret Role in the U.S. Assassi-
nation Program,” The Intercept, February 10, 2014 (https://firstlook.org/theinter-
cept/2014/02/10/the-nsas-secret-role/).

36. Tor Project, “Frequently Asked Questions” (https://www.torproject.org/docs/faq.
html.en#BetterAnonymity).

37. State of California vs. Niroula, Case INF 064492 (I.B. Cal.) (http://cryptome.
org/2012/06/babble-tape.pdf).

38. Tim Jenkin, “Talking to Vula,” Mayibuye, May-October 1995 (www.anc.org.za/
show.php?id=4693).

CHAPTER 2

1. Ling Tseng and I.-Min Tso, “A Risky Defence by a Spider Using Conspicuous Decoys
Resembling Itself in Appearance,” Animal Behavior 78, no. 2 (2009): 425-431
(doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2009.05.017).
2. Rip Empson, “Black Car Competitor Accuses Uber of DDoS-Style Attack; Uber
Admits Tactics Are “Too Aggressive,” TechCrunch, January 24, 2014 (http://techcrunch.
com/2014/01/24/black-car-competitor-accuses-uber-of-shady-conduct-ddos
-style-attack-uber-expresses-regret/).

3. “Le Gouvernement Veut Rendre les Avertisseurs de Radars Inefficaces,” Le
                                                                                Monde,
November 29, 2011 (http://www.lemonde.fr/societe/article/2011/1 1/29/les-avertis-
seurs-de-radars-seront-bientot-inefficaces_161 0490_3224.html).

4. “Analysis of the “Flash Crash” Part 4, Quote Stuffing,” Nanex, June 18, 2010 (http://
www.nanex.net/20100506/FlashCrashAnalysis_Part4-1 -Atml).

5. Ibid.




102                                                  NOTES TO CHAPTERS         1 AND2
6. Joab Jackson, “Cards Games: Should Buyers Beware of How Supermarkets Use
“Loyalty Cards” to Collect Personal Data?” Baltimore City Paper, October 1, 2003
(http://www.joabj.com/CityPaper/031001ShoppingCards. html).

7. Robert Ellis Smith, Privacy Journal, March 1999, p. 5.

8. http://epistolary.org/rob/bonuscard/, accessed October 25, 2010.

9. “The Ultimate Shopper,” Cockeyed.com, last updated December 11, 2002 (http://
www.cockeyed.com/pranks/safeway/ultimate_shopper.html).

10. “Hydra Project” (https://code.google.com/p/hydraproject/).

11. For a somewhat technical but accessible overview of BitTorrent that includes a
lucid explanation of trackers, see Mikel Izal, Guillaume Urvoy-Keller, Ernst W.
Biersack, Pascal Felber, Anwar Al Hamra, and Luis Garcés-Erice, “Dissecting BitTor-
rent: Five Months in a Torrent’s Lifetime,” Passive and Active Network Measurement
3015 (2004): 1-11 (doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-24668-8_1).

12. Hendrik Schulze and Klaus Mochalski, “Internet Study 2008/2009,” Ipoque (http://
www.christopher-parsons.com/Main/wp-content/uploads/2009/04/ipoque-inter-
net-study-08-09.pdf).

13. Jacquelyn Burkell and Alexandre Fortier, “Privacy Policy Disclosures of Behav-
ioural Tracking on Consumer Health Websites, Proceedings of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology 50, no. 1 (May 2014): 1-9 (doi: 10.1002/meet.
14505001087_.

14. Viola Ganter and Michael Strube, “Finding Hedges by Chasing Weasels: Hedge
Detection Using Wikipedia Tags and Shallow Linguistic Features,” in Proceedings of
the ACL-UUCNLP Conference Short Papers, 2009 (http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?
id=1667636).

15. David |. Holmes and Richard S. Forsyth, “The Federalist Revisited: New Directions
in Authorship Attribution,” Literary and Linguistic Computing 10, no. 2 (1995): 111-127
(doi: 10.1093/llc/10.2.111).

16. Josyula R. Rao and Pankaj Rohatgi, “Can Pseudonymity Really Guarantee Privacy?”
in Proceedings of the 9th USENIX Security Symposium, 2000 (https://www.usenix.org/
legacy/events/sec2000/full_papers/rao/rao_html/index.html).




NOTES TO CHAPTER 2                                                                  103
 17. Daniel Domscheit-Berg, Inside WikiLeaks: My Time With Julian Assange at the
 World's Most Dangerous Website (Crown, 2011).

 18. Rao and Rohatgi, “Can Pseudonymity Really Guarantee Privacy?”

 19. Moshe Koppel and Jonathan Schler, “Authorship Verification as a One-Class Clas-
 sification Problem,” in Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Machine
 Learning, 2004 (doi: 10.1145/1015330.1015448).
 20. On Anonymouth, see https://www.cs.drexel.edu/~pv42/thebiz/          and_https://
 github.com/psal/anonymouth.

 21. Drive, directed by Nicolas Winding Refn (Film District, 2011).

22. Mariano Ceccato, Massimiliano Di Penta, Jasvir Nagra, Paolo Falcarin, Filippo
Ricca, Marco Torchiano, and Paolo Tonella, “The Effectiveness of Source Code Obfus-
cation: An Experimental Assessment,” in Proceedings of 17th International Conference
on Program Comprehension, 2009 (doi: 10.1109/ICPC.2009.5090041).

23. See Michael Mateas and Nick Monfort, “A Box, Darkly: Obfuscation, Weird
Languages, and Code Aesthetics,” in Proceedings of the 6th Annual Digital Arts and
Culture Conference, 2005 (http://elmcip.net/node/3634).

24, Sanjam Garg, Craig Gentry, Shai Halevi, Mariana Raykova, Amit Sahai and Brent
Waters, “Candidate Indistinguishability Obfuscation and Functional Encryption for all
Circuits,” in Proceedings of IEEE 54th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science, 2013 (doi: 10.1109/FOCS.2013.13).
25. Jeyavijayan Rajendran, Ozgur Sinanoglu, Michael Sam, and Ramesh Karri, “Secu-
rity Analysis of Integrated Circuit Camouflaging,” presented at ACM Conference on
Computer and Communications Security, 2013 (doi: 10.1 145/2508859.25 16656).

26. From an interview with Ahearn: Joan Goodchild, “How to Disappear Completely,”
CSO, May 3, 2011 (http://www.csoonline.com/article/2128377/identity-theft-preven-
tion/how-to-disappear-completely.html).

27. Stephen Carter, “United States Patent: 20070094738 A1l—Techniques to Pollute
Electronic Profiling,” April 26, 2007 (http://www.google.com/patents/US20070094738).

28. Rachel Law, “Vortex” (http://www.milkred.net/vortex/). Much of the detail
                                                                              in this
section is based on conversation with Law and on her presentation in the Tool
                                                                              Work-
shop Sessions at the Symposium on Obfuscation held at New York University in
                                                                              2014.



104                                                            NOTES TO CHAPTER2
29. Kevin Ludlow, “Bayesian Flooding and Facebook Manipulation,” KevinLudlow.
com, May 23, 2012 (http://www.kevinludlow.com/blog/1610/Bayesian_Flooding_and
_Facebook_Manipulation_FB/).

30. Max Cho, “Unsell Yourself—A Protest Model Against Facebook,” Yale Law &
Technology, May 10, 2011 (http://www.yalelawtech.org/control-privacy-technology/
unsell-yourself-%E2%80%94-a-protest-model-against-facebook/).

31. Wanying Luo, Qi Xie, and Urs Hengartner, “FaceCloak: An Architecture for User
Privacy on Social Networking Sites,” in Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE International
Conference on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust (https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/~uhengart/
publications/passat09.pdf).

32. Charles Arthur, “How Low-Paid Workers at ‘Click Farms’ Create Appearance of
Online Popularity,” theguardian.com, August 2, 2013 (http://www.theguardian.com/
technology/2013/aug/02/click-farms-appearance-online-popularity).

33. Jaron Schneider, “Likes or Lies? How Perfectly Honest Business can be Overrun
by Facebook Spammers,” TheNextWeb, January 23, 2004 (http://thenextweb.com/
facebook/2014/01/23/likes-lies-perfectly-honest-businesses-can-overrun
-facebook-spammers/).

34. Leo Selvaggio, “URME Surveillance,” 2014 (http://www.urmesurveillance.com).

35. Francisco Goldman, The Art of Political Murder: Who Killed the Bishop? (Grove,
2008).

36. Ibid., 109.

CHAPTER 3

1. See the following for a brief look at the story of present-day privacy theory: Daniel
J. Solove, Understanding Privacy (Harvard University Press, 2010); Ruth Gavison,
“Privacy and the Limits of the Law,” in Philosophical Dimensions of Privacy: An Anthol-
ogy, ed. Ferdinand David Schoeman (Cambridge University Press, 1984); David Brin,
The Transparent Society (Perseus Books, 1998); Priscilla M. Regan, Legislating Privacy:
Technology, Social Values and Public Policy (University of North Carolina Press, 1995);
Jeffrey H. Reiman, “Driving to the Panopticon: A Philosophical Exploration of the Risks
to Privacy Posed by the Highway Technology of the Future,” Santa Clara High Technol-
ogy Journal 11, no. 1 (1995): 27-44 (http://digitalcommons.law.scu.edu/chtlj/vol11/
iss1/5); Alan F. Westin, “Science, Privacy and Freedom: Issues and Proposals for the



NOTES TO CHAPTERS 2 AND 3                                                           105
 1970's. Part |—the Current Impact of Surveillance on Privacy,” Columbia Law Review
 66, no. 6 (1966): 1003-1050 (http://www. jstor.org/stable/1120997).
2. See the following for diverging theories: Helen Nissenbaum, Privacy in Context:
Technology, Policy and the Integrity of Social Life (Stanford University Press, 2009);
Julie E. Cohen, “Examined Lives: Informational Privacy and the Subject as Object,”
Stanford Law Review 52 (May 2000): 1373-1437 (http://scholarship.law.georgetown.
edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1819&context=facpub); Daniel J. Solove, “A Taxon-
omy of Privacy,” University of Pennsylvania Law Review 154, no. 3 (2006): 477-560
(doi: 10.2307/40041279); Christena E. Nippert-Eng, /slands of Privacy (University of
Chicago Press, 2010); Michael Birnhack and Yofi Tirosh, “Naked in Front of the Machine:
Does Airport Scanning Violate Privacy?” Ohio State Law Journal 74, no. 6 (2013):
1263-1306.

3. See Paul Dourish, “Collective Information Practice: Exploring Privacy and Security
as Social and Cultural Phenomena,” Human-Computer Interaction 21, no. 3 (2006):
319-342 (doi: 10.1207/s15327051hci2103_2); Paul Dourish, Emily Troshynski, and
Charlotte Lee, “Accountabilities of Presence: Refrafning Location-Based Systems,” in
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2008
(doi: 10.1145/1357054.1357133).
4. Helen Nissenbaum, Privacy in Context: Technology, Policy and the Integrity of Social
Life (Stanford University Press, 2009).

9. Kevin Kelly, Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines, Social Systems and the
Economic World (Addison-Wesley, 1994) p. 176.

6. Gilbert Keith Chesterton, “The Sign of the Broken Sword,” in The Innocence of Father
Brown (Cassell, 1947) p. 143.

7. Nichia Corp v. Argos Ltd., Case A3/2007/0572. EWCA Civ 741 (July 19, 2007) (http://
www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2007/741-html).

8. The Simpsons, “The Lemon of Troy,” May 14, 1995.

9. Hanna Rose Shell, Hide and Seek: Camouflage, Photography and the Media of
Reconnaissance (Zone Books, 2012).
10. Donald H. Rumsfeld, February 12, 2002 (11:30 a.m.), “DoD News Briefing—Sec-
retary Rumsfeld and Gen. Myers,” U.S. Department of Defense/Federal News Service,
Inc. (http://www.defense.gov/transcripts/transcript.aspx?transcriptid=2636).



106                                                           NOTES TO CHAPTER 3
11. Brad Templeton, “The Evils of Cloud Computing: Data Portability and Single Sign
On,” presented at BIL Conference, 2009 (http://www.vimeo.com/3946928).

12. Tal Zarsky, “Transparent Predictions,” University of Illinois Law Review 2013, no.
4: 1519-1520.
13. Solon Barocas, “Data Mining and the Discourse on Discrimination,” in Proceedings
of Data Ethics Workshop at ACM Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
New York, 2014.

14. See, in particular, Josh Lauer, “The Good Consumer: Credit Reporting and the
Invention of Financial Identity in the United States, 1840-1940,” Enterprise & Society
11, no. 4 (2010): 686-694 (doi: 10.1093/es/khq091); Lauer, The Good Consumer: A
History of Credit Surveillance and Financial Identity in America (Columbia University
Press, forthcoming).

15. Anthony Giddens, “Risk and Responsibility,” Modern Law Review 62, no. 1 (1999):
1-10 (doi: 10.1111/1468-2230.00188). See also the elaboration of this idea in Ulrich
Beck, Risk Society: Toward a New Modernity (SAGE, 1999).

16. Ben Cohen, “After Sandy, Wired New Yorkers Get Reconnected with Pay Phones,”
Wall Street Journal, October 31, 2012.

17. James C. Scott, Weapons of the Weak: Everyday Forms of Peasant Resistance
(Yale University Press, 1987).

18. For arange of notable responses to surveillance, see the Gary T. Marx, “The Public
as Partner? Technology Can Make Us Auxiliaries as Well as Vigilantes,” /EEE Security
and Privacy 11, no. 5 (2013): 56-61 (doi: http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/
MSP.2013.126); Marx, Undercover: Police Surveillance in America (University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1989); Marx, “Technology and Social Control: The Search for the Illusive
Silver Bullet Continues,” in /nternational Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sci-
ences, second edition (Elsevier, forthcoming); Kenneth A. Bamberger and Deirdre K.
Mulligan, “Privacy Decisionmaking in Administrative Agencies,” University of Chicago
Law Review 75, no. 1 (2008): 75-107 (http://ssrn.com/abstract=1 104728); Katherine J.
Strandburg and Daniela Stan Raicu, Privacy and Technologies of Identity: A Cross-Dis-
ciplinary Conversation (Springer, 2006).

19. Scott elaborates on this concept in depth in Domination and the Arts of Resistance:
Hidden Transcripts (Yale University Press, 1992).




NOTES TO CHAPTER 3                                                                   107
 20. For arguments regarding the development of the idea of the “monetization” of data
 and the role it plays in present-day businesses and institutions, see Gina Neff, “Why Big
 Data Won't Cure Us,” Big Data 1, no. 3 (2013): 117-123 (doi: 10.1089/big.2013.0029);
 Brittany Fiore-Silfvast and Gina Neff, “Communication, Mediation, and the Expectations
 of Data: Data Valences across Health and Wellness Communities,” unpublished manu-
 script (under review at /nternational Journal of Communication).

 21. Google Inc., Securities Exchange Commission Form 10-Q for the period ending
 October 31, 2009 (filed November 4, 2009), p. 23, from SEC.gov (http://www.sec.gov/
Archives/edgar/data/1288776/000119312509222384/d10g.htm).
22. Martin Heidegger, The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays (Garland,
1977).

23. For more on Snowden, see Glenn Greenwald, Ewen MacAskill, and Laura Poitras,
“Edward Snowden: The Whistleblower Behind the NSA Surveillance Revelations,”
theguardian.com, June 11, 2013 (http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/09/
edward-snowden-nsa-whistleblower-surveillance); Ladar Levison, “Secrets, Lies and
Snowden’'s Email: Why |Was Forced to Shut Down Lavabit,” theguardian.com, May 20,
2014 (http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/20/why-did-lavabit-
shut-down-snowden-email); Glenn Greenwald, No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden,
the NSA and the U.S. Surveillance State (Metropolitan Books, 2014); Katherine J.
Strandburg, “Home, Home on the Web and Other Fourth Amendment Implications of
Technosocial Change,” University of Maryland Law Review 70, April 2011: 614-680
(http://ssrn.com/abstract=180807 1).

24. The idea of “kleptography,” in its more expanded definition, is a useful way of
understanding this approach. For the initial, narrower definition—the use of black-box
cryptosystems implemented on closed hardware—see Adam Young and Moti Yung,
“Kleptography: Using Cryptography Against Cryptography,” in Advances in Cryptolo-
gy—Eurocrypt '97, ed. Walter Fumy (Springer, 1997). For the more expansive defini-
tion—persuading your adversary to use a form of cryptography you know you can
break, or using inferior alternatives for reasons of availability or convenience—see
Philip Hallam-Baker, “PRISM-Proof Security Considerations,” Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF) draft 3.4, 2013 (https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-hallambaker
-prismproof-req-00#section-3.4).

25. Arvid Narayanan, “What Happened to the Crypto Dream? Part 2,” /EEE Security
                                                                                and
Privacy 11, no. 3 (2013): 68-71 (doi: http://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/1
                                                                            0.1109/
MSP.2013.75).

108                                                            NOTES TO CHAPTER 3
CHAPTER 4

1. On TrackMeNot, see http://cs.nyu.edu/trackmenot/.

2. Gary T. Marx, “A Tack in the Shoe: Neutralizing and Resisting New Surveillance,”
Journal of Social Issues 59, no. 2 (2003): 369-390 (doi: 10.1111/1540-4560.00069).

3. See James Edwin Mahon, “The Definition of Lying and Deception,” in The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/entries/
lying-definition/); John Finnis, “Aquinas’ Moral, Political and Legal Philosophy,” in The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2014/
entries/aquinas-moral-political/).

4. Sissela Bok, Lying: Moral Choice in Public and Private Life (Vintage Books, 1999).

5. Joseph T. Meyerowitz and Romit Roy Choudhury, CacheCloack, 2009 (http://www.
cachecloak.co.uk/).

6. See also Chris Jay Hoofnagle, Ashkan Soltani, Nathaniel Good, and Dietrich J.
Wambach, “Behavioral Advertising: The Offer You Can't Refuse,” Harvard Law & Policy
Review 6, August (2012): 273-296 (http://ssrn.com/abstract=2137601); Aleecia M.
McDonald and Lorrie F. Cranor, “The Cost of Reading Privacy Policies,” //S 4, no. 3
(2008): 540-565        (http://lorrie.cranor.org/pubs/readingPolicyCost-authorDraft.pdf);
Katherine J. Strandburg,  “Free Fall: The Online Market's Consumer Preference Discon-
nect,” University of Chicago Legal Forum 95 (2013): 95-172 (http://ssrn.com/
abstract=2323961); Chris Jay Hoofnagle and Jan Whittington, “Free: Accounting for the
Costs of the Internet’s Most Popular Price,” UCLA Law Review 61 (2014): 606-670
(http://ssrn.com/abstract=2235962).

7. See Joseph Turow, Chris Jay Hoofnagle, Dierdre K. Mulligan, Nathaniel Good, and
Jens Grossklags, “The Federal Trade Commission and Consumer Privacy in the Coming
Decade,” //S 3, no. 3 (2007): 723-749 (http://ssrn.com/abstract=2365578); Joseph
Turow, The Daily You: How the New Advertising Industry Is Defining Your Identity and
Your Worth (Yale University Press, 2013).

8. Isaiah Berlin, The Crooked Timber of Humanity: Chapters in the History of Ideas
(Princeton University Press, 2013), 2.

9. Daniel J. Solove and Paul M. Schwartz, Privacy Law Fundamentals, second edition
(International Association of Privacy Professionals, 2013).




NOTES TO CHAPTER 4                                                                    109
 10. See Daniel J. Solove, “Privacy Self-Management and the Consent Dilemma,”
 Harvard Law Review 126 (2013): 1880-1903 (http://ssrn.com/abstract=217       1018);
 Lauren E. Willis, “Why Not Privacy by Default?” Berkeley Technology Law Journal 29
 (2014): 61-134 (http://ssrn.com/abstract=2349766); James Grimmelman, “The Sabo-
 tage of Do Not Track,” The Laboratorium, June 19, 2012 (http://laboratorium.net/
 archive/2012/06/19/the_sabotage_of_do_not_track).

 11. For more on Snowden, see Glenn Greenwald, Ewen MacAskill, and Laura Poitras,
“Edward Snowden: The Whistleblower Behind the NSA Surveillance Revelations,”
theguardian.com, June 11, 2013 (http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/09/
edward-snowden-nsa-whistleblower-surveillance); Ladar Levison, “Secrets, Lies and
Snowden’s Email: Why |Was Forced to Shut Down Lavabit,” theguardian.com, May 20,
2014 —(http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/20/why-did-lavabit-
shut-down-snowden-email); Glenn Greenwald, No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden,
the NSA and the U.S. Surveillance State (Metropolitan Books, 2014); Joshua Eaton and
Ben Piven, “Timeline of the Edward Snowden Revelations, theguardian.com, June 5,
2013     (http://america.aljazeera.com/articles/multimedia/timeline-edward-snowden-
revelations.html).

12. John Rawls, A Theory of Justice (Harvard University Press, 1971).

13. Ibid., 173.
14. Arthur Ripstein, Equality, Responsibility and the Law (Cambridge University Press,
1999).

15. Jeroen Van Den Hoven and Emma Rooksby, “Distributive Justice and the Value of
Information: A (Broadly) Rawlsian Approach,” in Information Technology and Moral
Philosophy, ed. John Weckert (Cambridge University Press, 2008), 376.

16. See danah boyd, /t’s Complicated: The Social Lives of Networked Teens (Yale Uni-
versity Press, 2014); Colin Koopman, “Internetworked Publics: The Emerging Political
Conditions of the Internet,” paper presented at Ars Synthetica: The Anthropology of the
Contemporary, Santa Cruz, 2009.

17. Francisco Goldman, The Art of Political Murder: Who Killed the Bishop? (Grove,
2007).
18. Anatole France, The Red Lily (Borgo, 2002), 64.




110                                                           NOTES TO CHAPTER4
19. Philip Pettit, Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government (Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1997), 73, 79.

20. See Viktor Mayer-Schonberger and Kenneth Cukier, Big Data: A Revolution That
Will Transform How We Live, Work and Think (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2013), 94;
Solon Barocas, “Data Mining and the Discourse on Discrimination,” in Proceedings of
Data Ethics Workshop at Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 2014;
Tal Zarsky, “Transparent Predictions,” University of Illinois Law Review 2013, no. 4
(2013): 1519-1520.

21. Pettit, Republicanism, 80, 272.

22. Rawls, A Theory of Justice.

23. Mayer-Schénberger and Cukier, Big Data; Turow, The Daily You.

24. Jeremy Waldron, Torture, Terror and Trade-Offs: Philosophy for the White House
(Oxford University Press, 2012).

25. Turow, The Daily You; Hoofnagle, Soltani, Good, and Wambach, “Behavioral
Advertising.”

CHAPTER 5

1. Get Smart, “Mr. Big,” September 18, 1965.

2. See Cynthia Dwork and Aaron Roth, “The Algorithmic Foundations of Differential
Privacy,” Foundations and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science 9, no. 3-4 (2014):
211-407 (doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/0400000042); Cynthia Dwork, Frank McSherry,
Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith, “Calibrating Noise to Sensitivity in Private Data Analy-
sis,” in Proceedings of the Third Conference on Theory of Cryptography, 2006 (doi:
10.1007/11681878_14).

3. Adam Shostack, Threat Modeling: Designing for Security (Wiley, 2014).

4. danah boyd, It’s Complicated: The Social Lives of Networked Teens (Yale University
Press, 2014), 65.

5. Ibid., 69.

6. Gion Green, “Rating Files, Safes, and Vaults,” in Handbook of Loss Prevention and
Crime Prevention, ed. Lawrence Fennelly (Elsevier, 2012), 358.




NOTES TO CHAPTERS 4 AND 5                                                         111
                                                                                                                                                                on tr
                                                               a         a              r
                                                                                                           uaa                                                                    °
i
                                                      she)
                                                      or} wean
                                                       aes
                                                                             sive
                                                                                            wows aan~
penniott iat Meine Ti CAE
                                                         Lam ra                              7

                             by                   2”                   ers              |
                ¥                           *     ER oe ~ i                                       Seg
            j                               y                  ety           ris              PA
                        1 tape                                     ht bh
            Tied Te tes          Mer
    wt           eles. OL     ap Tee
a                         Sik        he
        :                                   3        °     %  Abo      My
                             ae                   :t Sth Rage
                                                       Fas   GeOe SoraeR.a
                                                                   Sar    '                                                                                                           :             sy
                        lo                                     ~ a AL DP Ye    ess
                                                                        recite ‘aa bes)
                                                                                       Neing
                                                                                          “aly                                                                                    A
                                                                                                                                                                                 mi et

    ®                        m4




                    '




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Falak
                                                                                                                                                                                                            » gercal, Atv
                        0)        Vie                                                                                                                                                                       Bae        i                  a
                        #                                                                                                                                                                                           wi)
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ro wy A
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ae
                                                                                                                                                                                                     , d+)
                                                                                                                                                                                                            eT‘4 . ae rl
                                                               i                        ~         i                                           ~                      x
        ,


                                        ,
                                            she                    eres:     ary                       ‘
                                                                                                                                                  ee
                                                                                                                                                  | ,Aeeate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       he      vet
                        t                             ae                                                                                                Le)                                                                                                     ,

                                                                                                                 e'                               ce                                                                                                   ‘                                            io
                                                                                                                                                                                      ny                                                                       ;                   :
                                                       '
                                                                                                                                              o             &                                   r                                                          "               «                *




                                                           2                                                                                                                                                cia                          rng                       * pid :

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     iy
                                                                                        ‘ie                dy‘           ’               94             ’       <i       ies                            :         in  oS ie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         a? Oo©as dy ales
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Dia
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         cA            a
                                                                                                                     . a,                a,       ee                 r
                                                                                                                                                                    CO                         ni           ry        7 chy                   i7       igng byie rh


                                                                                                                                 i                oat                                                                  é                           =                   :       7
                                                                                                  rt
                                                                                    :         A                              1                     2                             ray;                                      ee                          at                   23


                                                                                            +                                                                                                                         a                   A                        aie
                                                                                                                                     iA                                  ‘                      '                —_—                                   oe



                                                                   :                                             :                                                                                                ~ A ua Me
                                                                              , |                                                                                                                                               at            oa
                                                                                                                                                                                          a                      LARLELP                               oowkad thar an
                                                                                                                                                                                          am        6             -        &         4        ‘,                                       wi
                                                                                                                                                                             a
                                                                                        4                                                                                        LAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                Fa ¥ eek
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1 YOM ther alt |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 te Pe ;
                                                                                                                                                                                                    f       , .            (> ee
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               egg                     <                   Ne a                 Y        py
                                                           ;                                                     it's

                                                           4                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Sew



                                                  *                                                                                                             \
                                                                                                                         a                                           -
                                                                                                                     :                                              Hee
                                                                                                                 ote                                    .           hay

                                                                                                           din                       i                                                    \
                                                                                                           7                         t                  VTEC                               ¥\
                                                                                              ‘                                                         eAS.
                                                                                                           \                                            .                         ‘




                                                                                                                                                                                 Ok
BIBLIOGRAPHY




Bamberger, Kenneth A., and Deirdre K. Mulligan. “Privacy Decisionmaking in Adminis-
trative Agencies.” University of Chicago Law Review 75, no. 1 (2008): 75-107 (http://
ssrn.com/abstract=1 104728).
Barbaro, Michael, and Tom Zeller Jr. “A Face Is Exposed for AOL Searcher No. 4417749.”
New York Times, August 9, 2006.
Barocas, Solon. “Data Mining and the Discourse on Discrimination.” In Proceedings of
Data Ethics Workshop at ACM Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
New York, 2014.
Beck, Ulrich. Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. London: SAGE, 1999.
Berlin, Isaiah. The Crooked Timber of Humanity: Chapters in the History of Ideas. Princ-
eton University Press, 2013.
Birnhack, Michael, and Yofi Tirosh. “Naked in Front of the Machine: Does Airport Scan-
ning Violate Privacy?” Ohio State Law Journal 74, no. 6 (2013): 1263-1306 (http://
ssrn.com/abstract=2234476).
Bok, Sissela. Lying: Moral Choice in Public and Private Life. New York: Vintage
Books, 1999.
boyd, danah. /t’s Complicated: The Social Lives of Networked Teens. New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2014.

Brin, David. The Transparent Society. New York: Perseus Books, 1998.
Burkell, Jacquelyn, and Alexandre Fortier. “Privacy Policy Disclosures of Behavioural
Tracking on Consumer Health Websites.” Proceedings of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology 50, no. 1 (2014): 1-9 (doi:10.1002/
meet.14505001087).
Ceccato, Mariano, Massimiliano Di Penta, Jasvir Nagra, Paolo Falcarin, Filippo Ricca,
Marco Torchiano, and Paolo Tonella. “The Effectiveness of Source Code Obfuscation: An
Experimental Asessment.” In Proceedings of 17th International Conference on Program
Comprehension, 2009 (doi: 10.1109/ICPC.2009.5090041).
 Chesterton, Gilbert Keith. “The Sign of the Broken Sword.” In The Innocence of Father
 Brown. London: Cassell, 1947.
 Cho, Max. “Unsell Yourself—A Protest Model Against Facebook.” Yale Law & Technology
 blog May 10, 2011 (http://www. yalelawtech.org/control-privacy-technology/unsell-
 yourself-%E2%80%94-a-protest-model-against-facebook/).
 Cohen, Fred. “The Use of Deception Techniques: Honeypots and Decoys.” In Handbook
 of Information Security, volume 3, ed. Hossein Bidgoli. Hoboken: Wiley, 2006.
 Cohen, Julie E. “Examined Lives: Informational Privacy and the Subject as Object.”
 Stanford Law Review 52, May (2000): 1373-1437                (http://scholarship.law
 -georgetown.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1819&context=facpub).
Deseriis, Marco. “Lots of Money Because | Am Many: The Luther Blissett Project and
the Multiple-Use Name Strategy.” Thamyris/Intersecting 21 (2011): 65-93.
Domscheit-Berg, Daniel. Inside WikiLeaks: My Time with Julian Assange at the World's
Most Dangerous Website. New York: Crown, 2011.
Dourish, Paul, Emily Troshynski, and Charlotte Lee. “Accountabilities of Presence:
Reframing Location-Based Systems.” In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2008 (doi: 10.1145/1357054.1357133).
Dourish, Paul. “Collective Information Practice: Exploring Privacy and Security as
Social and Cultural Phenomena.” Human-Computer Interaction 21, no. 3 (2006): 319-
342 (doi:10.1207/s15327051hci2103_2).
Dwork, Cynthia, and Aaron Roth. “The Algorithmic Foundations of Differential Privacy.”
Foundations and Trends in Theoretical Computer Science 9, no. 3-4 (2014): 211-407
(doi: 10.156 1/0400000042).
Dwork, Cynthia, Frank McSherry, Kobbi Nissim, and Adam Smith. “Calibrating Noise to
Sensitivity in Private Data Analysis.” In Proceedings of the Third Conference on Theory
of Cryptography, 2006 (doi: 10.1007/11681878_ 14).
Finkel, Meir. On Flexibility: Recovery from Technological and Doctrinal Surprise on the
Battlefield. Stanford University Press, 2011.
Finnis, John. “Aquinas’ Moral, Political and Legal Philosophy.” In The Stanford Encyclo-
pedia of Philosophy, ed. Edward N. Zalta (http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2
                                                                                    014/
entries/aquinas-moral-political/).
Fiore-Silfvast, Brittany and Gina Neff. “Communication, Mediation, and the Expecta-
tions of Data: Data Valences across Health and Wellness Communities.” Under
                                                                            review
at International Journal of Communication.

France, Anatole. The Red Lily. San Bernardino: Borgo, 2002.




114
                                                                       BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ganter, Viola, and Michael Strube. “Finding Hedges by Chasing Weasels: Hedge Detec-
tion Using Wikipedia Tags and Shallow Linguistic Features.” In Proceedings of the ACL-
LJCNLP Conference Short Papers, 2009 (http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1667636).
Garg, Sanjam, Craig Gentry, Shai Halevi, Mariana Raykova, Amit Sahai, and Brent
Waters. “Candidate Indistinguishability Obfuscation and Functional Encryption for all
Circuits.” Presented at IEEE 54th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer
Science, 2013 (doi: 10.1109/FOCS.2013.13).
Gavison, Ruth. “Privacy and the Limits of the Law.” In Philosophical Dimensions of
Privacy: An Anthology, ed. Ferdinand David Schoeman. Cambridge University Press,
1984.
Giddens, Anthony. “Risk and Responsibility.” Modern Law Review 62, no. 1 (1999): 1-
10 (doi:10.1111/1468-2230.00188).
Goldberger, Leo, ed. The Rescue of the Danish Jews: Moral Courage Under Stress. New
York University Press, 1987.
Goldman, Francisco. The Art of Political Murder: Who Killed the Bishop? New York:
Grove, 2007.
Green, Gion. “Rating Files, Safes, and Vaults.” In Handbook of Loss Prevention and
Crime Prevention, ed. Lawrence Fennelly. Oxford: Elsevier, 2012.
Greenberg, Andy. This Machine Kills Secrets: How WikiLeakers, Cypherpunks, and
Hacktivists Aim to Free the World's Information. New York: Dutton, 2012.

Greenwald, Glenn. No Place to Hide: Edward Snowden, the NSA and the U.S. Surveil-
lance State. New York: Metropolitan Books, 2014.
Habinek, Thomas. The World of Roman Song: From Ritualized Speech to Social Order.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2005.
Heidegger, Martin. The Question Concerning Technology and Other Essays. New York:
Garland, 1977.
Hellmuth, Phil Marvin Karlins, and Joe Navarro. Phil Hellmuth Presents Read ‘Em and
Reap. New York: HarperCollins, 2006.
Holmes, David |., and Richard S. Forsyth. “The Federalist Revisited: New Directions in
Authorship Attribution.” Literary and Linguistic Computing 10, no. 2 (1995): 111-127
(doi: 10.1093/llc/10.2.111).
Hoofnagle, Chris Jay, and Jan Whittington. “Free: Accounting for the Costs of the Inter-
net's Most Popular Price.” UCLA Law Review. University of California, Los Angeles.
School of Law 61 (2014): 606-670 (http://ssrn.com/abstract=2235962).




BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                         115
 Hoofnagle, Chris Jay, Ashkan Soltani, Nathaniel Good, and Dietrich J. Wambach.
 “Behavioral Advertising: The Offer You Can't Refuse.” Harvard Law & Policy Review 6,
 August (2012): 273-296 (http://ssrn.com/abstract=2137601).
 Howe, Daniel, and Helen Nissenbaum. “TrackMeNot: Resisting Surveillance in Web
 Search.” In Lessons From the Identity Trail: Anonymity, Privacy and Identity in a Net-
 worked Society, ed. lan Kerr, Carole Luckock, and Valerie Steeves. Oxford University
 Press, 2009.
Izal, Mikel, Guillaume Urvoy-Keller, Ernst W. Biersack, Pascal Felber, Anwar Al Hamra,
and Luis Garcés-Erice. “Dissecting BitTorrent: Five Months in a Torrent’s Lifetime.” In
Passive and Active Network Measurement, ed. Chadi Barakat and lan Pratt. Berlin:
Springer, 2004..
Jenkin, Tim. “Talking to Vula.” Mayibuye, May-October          1995 (www.anc.org.za/
show.php?id=4693).
Kafka, Ben. The Demon of Writing. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2012.
Kelly, Kevin. Out of Control: The New Biology of Machines, Social Systems and the
Economic World. Indianapolis: Addison-Wesley, 1994.
Koopman, Colin. “Internetworked Publics: The Emerging Political Conditions of the
Internet.” Paper presented at Ars Synthetica: The Anthropology of the Contemporary,
Santa Cruz, 2009.
Koppel, Moshe, and Jonathan Schler. “Authorship Verification as a One-Class Classifi-
cation Problem.” In Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Machine
Learning, 2004 (doi: 10.1145/1015330.1015448).
Lane, Julia, Victoria Stodden, Stefan Bender, and Helen Nissenbaum, eds. Privacy,
Big Data, and the Public Good: Frameworks for Engagement. Cambridge University
Press, 2014.
Lauer, Josh. “The Good Consumer: Credit Reporting and the Invention of Financial Iden-
tity in the United States, 1840-1940.” Enterprise and Society 11, no. 4 (2010): 686-694
(doi:10.1093/es/khq091).
Lauer, Josh. The Good Consumer: A History of Credit Surveillance and Financial Identity
in America. New York: Columbia University Press, forthcoming.
Lund, Jens, with reply by Istvan Deak. “The Legend of King Christian: An Exchange.”
New York Review of Books 30, no. 5 (1990) (http://www.nybooks.com/articles/
archives/1 990/mar/29/the-legend-of-king-christian-an-exchange/).
Luo, Wanying, Qi Xie, and Urs Hengartner. “FaceCloak: An Architecture for User Privacy
on Social Networking Sites.” In Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE International Conferenc
                                                                                     e




116                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY
on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust (https://cs.uwaterloo.ca/~uhengart/publications/
passat09 pdf).
Mahon, James Edwin. “The Definition of Lying and Deception.” In The Stanford Encyclo-
pedia of Philosophy, ed. Edward N. Zalta (http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/
entries/lying-definition/).
Marx, Gary T. “A Tack in the Shoe: Neutralizing and Resisting New Surveillance.”
Journal of Social Issues 59, no. 2 (2003): 369-390 (doi:10.1111/1540-4560.00069).
Marx, Gary T. “Technology and Social Control: The Search for the Illusive Silver Bullet
Continues.” In International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences, second
edition. Oxford: Elsevier, forthcoming.
Marx, Gary T. “The Public as Partner? Technology Can Make Us Auxiliaries as Well as
Vigilantes.” /EEE Security and Privacy 11, no. 5 (2013): 56-61 (doi: http://
DO!.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/MSP.2013.126).
Marx, Gary T. Undercover: Police Surveillance in America. Oakland: University of Cali-
fornia Press, 1989.
Maslinsky, Kirill, Sergey Koltcov, and Olessia Koltslova. “Changes in the Topical Struc-
ture of Russian-Language LiveJournal: The Impact of Elections 2011.” Research Paper
WP BPR 14/SOC/2013, National Research University, Moscow, 2013.
Mateas, Michael, and Nick Monfort. “A Box, Darkly: Obfuscation, Weird Languages, and
Code Aesthetics.” In Proceedings of the 6th Annual Digital Arts and Culture Conference,
2005 (http://elmcip.net/node/3634).
Mayer-Schonberger, Viktor, and Kennth Cukier. Big Data: A Revolution That Will Trans-
form How We Live, Work and Think. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2013.

McDonald, Aleecia M., and Lorrie F. Cranor. “The Cost of Reading Privacy Policies.” //S 4,
no.3(2008):540—565 (http://lorrie.cranor.org/pubs/readingPolicyCost-authorDraft.paf).
Meyerowitz, Joseph, and Romit R. Choudhury. “Hiding Stars with Fireworks: Location
Privacy through Camouflage.” In Proceedings of the 15th Annual International Confer-
ence on Mobile Computing and Networking. 2009.

Moore, Alan, and David Lloyd. V for Vendetta. New York: Vertigo/DC Comics, 1982.

Narayanan, Arvid. “What Happened to the Crypto Dream? Part 2.” /EEE Security and
Privacy 11, no. 3 (2013): 68-71 (doi: http://DOI.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/
MSP.2013.75),
Neff, Gina. “Why Big Data Won't Cure Us.” Big Data 1, no. 3 (2013): 117-123 (doi: 10.
1089/big.2013.0029).




BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                          117
 Nippert-Eng, Christena E. /slands of Privacy. University of Chicago Press, 2010.
 Nissenbaum, Helen. Privacy in Context: Technology, Policy and the Integrity of Social
 Life. Stanford University Press, 2009.
 Orcutt, Mike. “Twitter Mischief Plagues Mexico's Election.” MIT Technology Review,
 June 21, 2014 (http://www.technologyreview.com/news/428286/twitter-mischief
 -plagues-mexicos-election/).
 Parkhomenko, Ekaterina, and Arch Tait. “Blog Talk.” Index on Censorship 37, February
 (2008): 174-178 (doi: 10.1080/03064220701882822).
 Pettit, Philip. Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government. Oxford University
 Press, 1997.
Rajendran, Jeyavijayan, Ozgur Sinanogltu, Michael Sam, and Ramesh Karri. “Security
Analysis of Integrated Circuit Camouflaging.” Presented at ACM Conference on Com-
puter and Communications Security, 2013 (doi:10.1145/2508859.25 16656).
Rao, Josyula R., and Pankaj Rohatgi. “Can Pseudonymity Really Guarantee Privacy?” In
Proceedings of the 9th USENIX Security Symposium, 2000 (https://www.usenix.org/
legacy/events/sec2000/full_papers/rao/rao_html/index.html).
Rawls, John. A Theory of Justice. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1971.
Regan, Priscilla M. Legislating Privacy: Technology, Social Values and Public Policy.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1995,
Reiman, Jeffrey H. “Driving to the Panopticon: A Philosophical Exploration of the Risks
to Privacy Posed by the Highway Technology of the Future.” Santa Clara High Technol-
ogy Journal 11, no. 1 (1995): 27-44 (http://digitalcommons.law.scu.edu/chtlj/vol1/
iss 1/5).
Ripstein. Arthur. Equality, Responsibility and the Law. Cambridge University Press,
1999.
Scott, James C. Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts.
                                                                           New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1992.
Shell, Hanna Rose. Hide and Seek: Camouflage, Photography, and the Media of Recon-
naissance. Cambridge: Zone Books, 2012.
Shostack, Adam. Threat Modeling: Designing for Security. Indianapolis: Wiley, 2014.
Solove, Daniel J. “A Taxonomy of Privacy.” University of Pennsylvania Law Review 154,
no. 3 (2006): 477-560 (doi: 10.2307/40041279).




118                                                                   BIBLIOGRAPHY
Solove, Daniel J. “Privacy Self-Management and the Consent Dilemma.” Harvard Law
Review 126 (2013): 1880-1903. http://ssrn.com/abstract=2171018.
Solove, Daniel J. Understanding Privacy. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2010.
Solove, Daniel J., and Paul M. Schwartz. Privacy Law Fundamentals, second edition.
Portsmouth: International Association of Privacy Professionals, 2013.
Strandburg, Katherine J. “Free Fall: The Online Market’s Consumer Preference Discon-
nect.” University of Chicago Legal Forum 95 (2013): 95-172. http://ssrn.com/
abstract=2323961.

Strandburg, Katherine J. “Home, Home on the Web and Other Fourth Amendment
Implications of Technosocial Change.” University of Maryland Law Review 70, April
(2011): 614-680 (http://ssrn.com/abstract=180807 1)>
Strandburg, Katherine J., and Daniela Stan Raicu. Privacy and Technologies of Identity:
A Cross-Disciplinary Conversation. New York: Springer, 2006.
Templeton, Brad. “The Evils of Cloud Computing: Data Portability and Single Sign On.”
Presented at BIL Conference, 2009 (http://www.vimeo.com/3946928).
Toubiana, Vincent, and Helen Nissenbaum. “An Analysis of Google Logs Retention Pol-
icies.” Journal of Privacy and Confidentiality 3, no. 1 (2011): 3-26. http://repository.
cmu.edu/jpc/vol3/iss1/2/.
Tseng, Ling, and |.-Min Tso. “A Risky Defense by a Spider Using Conspicuous Decoys
Resembling Itself in Appearance.” Animal Behaviour 78, no. 2 (2009): 425-431 (doi:
10.1016/j.anbehav.2009.05.017).
Turow, Joseph. The Daily You: How the New Advertising Industry is Defining Your
Identity and Your Worth. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2013.
Turow, Joseph, Chris Jay Hoofnagle, Dierdre K. Mulligan, Nathaniel Good, and Jens
Grossklags. “The Federal Trade Commission and Consumer Privacy in the Coming
Decade.” //S 3, no. 3 (2007): 723-749 (http://ssrn.com/abstract=2365578).
van den Hoven, Jeroen, and Emma Rooksby. “Distributive Justice and the Value of
Information: A (Broadly) Rawlsian Approach.” In Information Technology and Moral
Philosophy, ed. John Wecker. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Waldron, Jeremy. Torture, Terror and Trade-Offs: Philosophy for the White House.
Oxford University Press, 2012.

Westin, Alan F. “Science, Privacy and Freedom: Issues and Proposals for the 1970's.
Part |—the Current Impact of Surveillance on Privacy.” Columbia Law Review 66, no. 6
(1966): 1003-1050 (http://www jstor.org/stable/1120997).




BIBLIOGRAPHY                                                                         119
 Willis, Lauren E. “Why Not Privacy by Default?” Berkeley Technology Law Journal 29
 (2014): 61-134 (http://ssrn.com/abstract=2349766).
 Young, Adam, and Moti Yung. “Kleptography: Using Cryptography Against Cryptography.”
 In Advances in Cryptology—Eurocrypt ‘97, ed. Walter Fumy, 62-74. Berlin: Springer,
 1997,
 Zarsky, Tal. “Transparent Predictions.” University of Illinois Law Review 2013, no. 4:
 1519-1520.




120
                                                                     BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX



Ad Block Plus, 26                    Deniability, 89
Address collection, 29, 30           Disappearance, 35
AdNauseam, 26, 27                    Dishonesty, 64, 65
Ahearn, Frank, 35                    Distributed denial of service
Anonymous text, 31-33                   (DDoS), 9-12
Anonymouth, 33
Apple, 36, 37                        Eavesdropping interference, 20, 21
Asymmetry, 78-80                     Echoes, 8, 9
Audio surveillance, 20, 21           Electronic profiling pollution,
                                        36, 37
Babble tapes, 20, 21                 Encryption, 21-24, 62
Bayesian flooding, 38, 39            Ends v. means, 70-74
Behavioral advertising, 26, 27, 82   Ethics, 30, 60, 61, 63-70, 83
Best practices, 60, 61, 74, 86, 97   Excessive documentation, 17, 18
Big data, 51-53, 82                  Exclusivity, 90, 91
BitTorrent Hydra, 29, 30             Exposure prevention, 89, 90
Barocas, Solon, 51
Bogus individuals, 35                Facebook, 38, 39
boyd, danah, 86                      FaceCloak, 39, 40
Business competitors, 25, 26         Facial-recognition software, 40, 41
                                     Fairness, 74-80
CacheCloak, 23, 65, 66, 89, 90       Fake requests, 29, 30
Camouflage, 25, 47, 48               False leads, 35
Cardexchange.org, 29                 False orders, 25, 26
CCTV recording, 49                   False tells, 15
Chaff, 7-9, 88, 92                   False trades, 27, 28
Cloning service, 36, 37              File-burying, 14
Code obfuscation, 33-35              Freedom, 79, 80
Collective identities, 15, 16        Free riding, 67-69, 75, 77
Concealment, 88, 89
Conflicting evidence, 41, 42         General obfuscation, 92-94
Context of use, 95                   Genuine signals, 8, 9
Cookie manipulation, 37, 38, 90      Goldman, Francisco, 41
Craigslist, 16, 17                   Government regulation, 61, 62
Credit management, 52, 53, 82        Grocery shopping, 28, 29
                                     Group identity, 15, 16
Data collection sales, 60, 61        Guatemalan political struggle, 41
Decoy strategy, 8, 25, 47, 48




INDEX
 Hidden transcript, 56—58                 Overproduction of documents, 17, 18
 High-frequency trading (HFT), 27, 28     Oversupply, 17, 18
 Human analysis limitation, 33-35
                                          Patterns, 7, 15
 Identical confederates and objects,      Personal disinformation, 35
     16, 17                               Plausible deniability, 14
 Identity prosthetics, 40, 41             Political questions, 71, 75-78, 83
 Imitation attacks, 32                    Political uses, 9-12, 90
 Imitations, 9-12                         Pollution, 69, 70, 77
 Implementation questions, 84-90          Power, 9-12, 48-53, 55-58, 78-80
 Information asymmetry, 48-53             Predictive software, 51
                                          Press, Ronnie, 24
Jenkin, Tim, 22-24                       Privacy, 45-48, 50, 58, 61, 62, 72-76,
Justice, 74-80, 83                          87-89
Justification, 63, 64                    Privacy systems, 58-62
                                         Profiling interference, 90
Likefarming, 40                          Protest expression, 90
Linguistic constructions, 30, 31
LiveJournal, 9-10, 9-12                  Quote stuffing, 27, 28
Location-based services (LBSs),
   12413                                 Radar, 7, 8, 26, 88
Loyalty card swapping, 28, 29            Rawls, John, 76-78
Ludlow, Kevin, 38, 39                    Resource limitations, 65-67
Lying, 64, 65                            Robots, 50
                                         Rob's Giant Bonus Card Swap Meet, 29
Marx, Gary, 56, 63                       Russian political struggle, 9-11
Masks, 40, 41
Means v. ends, 70-83                     Scott, James C., 55-57
Medical information, 31, 93-95           Selective obfuscation, 92-94
Mexican political struggle, 11, 12       Selvaggio, Leo, 40, 41
Misleading signals, 8, 9                 Service denial, 9-12
Morality, 70-83                          Shopping pattern tracking, 28, 29
Moral responsibility, 68, 69             Shuffling SIM cards, 18, 19
                                         Social benefits, 80-82
National Security Agency (NSA), 18, 19   Social media, 86
Necessary visibility, 85, 86             Social stenography, 86
Network effect, 90, 91                   South African political struggle, 21-24
                                         Stand-ins, 25
Obfuscation attacks, 32, 33              Stock exchanges, 27, 28
OpenLeaks, 14, 15                        Stylometric analysis attacks, 31-33
Operation Vula, 21-24, 88, 89            Subversion, 69, 70
Opting out, 53-58                        System damage, 69, 70



122
                                                                            INDEX
Taxi-replacement companies, 25, 26
Threat models, 85-87
Time-buying, 8, 88, 92
Tor relays, 19, 20
Total surveillance, 54, 55
TrackMeNot, 13, 14, 36, 63-66, 72, 73,
   77, 89, 90, 92
Translation attacks, 32
Troublemaking, 62
Twitter bots, 9-12

Ultimate Shopper project, 29
Uploads to leak sites, 14, 15
URME surveillance, 40, 41

Vortex, 37, 38, 90

Wastefulness, 65-67, 72, 76, 77
WikiLeaks, 14, 15

Zarsky, Tal, 51




                                         123
INDEX
                                                                                   aa
Pe          aa eae ie                                                               ad dx
‘esis                               Pace de                                        > ae

     may
                     ng SAR
                     0                      ine                <) saad                       tra

                     tera                            ‘Stat                              saree




     *                        ig                     7                                                              :

     ;                                                                                                 x   ee                Heri orto hg
                              acpi                                                                           ;                 Mh al   ee
Weer                                            hh Ci                    ei)                 ‘eae                       ai

                                   By                    ah oul                                        5                     cepe
                               Trae                                oki        bh”            4a
                                                                                                           P|                rw
                 3       Lae                    s                                  PY) ae                                        on

         Rite.                     Saisie                18,             SD                                                  Hae”           ale §
             ¥                                                                                                                        a     5

                                                                                                                                 ae        rei
                                            -                  j                                                             f              orgink


 ;                                                                                                                                         an

                                                                                                                             ee  ee                           LS
                                                                                                                             oo: ee Oe                                 ~~
                         (=                 :                                 ’                                                       ie   wil’       Suter        >        ;

                                                                                                                                  eh       yi pease are _
                                                                                       ahi                                   Fs =                    ee ri"i, al        ;
                                                                                                                                      a iene '                et)
                                                                                       rAd                      ,            pethecsis . é                                  y
                     '                              iin                           om                                             id         re) =
                                                                                                   :                         mimht Pi                   tas

                 slic                       onic Mi, Naa                                     Ss:
          4 eee,                                Va                   cain                                   a

                               Sef                                                     4
 @BFUSCATI@N                                                   TECHNOLOGY/POLITICS -

 A USER'S              GUIDE
 FOR PRIVACY AND PROTEST                    Finn Brunton       | Helen Nissenbaum

 With Obfuscation, Finn Brunton and Helen Nissenbaum mean to start a revolution. They
 are calling us not to the barricades but to our computers, offering us ways to fight
 today’s pervasive digital surveillance—the collecting of our data by governments, cor-
 porations, advertisers, and hackers. To the toolkit of privacy-protecting techniques and
 projects, they propose adding obfuscation: the deliberate use of ambiguous, confusing,
 or misleading information to interfere with surveillance and data-collection projects.
 Brunton and Nissenbaum provide tools and a rationale for evasion, noncompliance,
 refusal, even sabotage—especially for average users, those of us not in a position to
 opt out or exert control over data about ourselves. Obfuscation will teach users to push
 back, software developers to keep their user data safe, and policy makers to avoid
 misusing the data they gather.
       Brunton and Nissenbaum present a guide to the forms and formats that obfus-
 cation has taken and explain how to craft its implementation to suit various goals and
 adversaries. They describe a series of historical and recent examples, including radar
 chaff deployed by World War II pilots, Twitter bots that hobbled the social-media strat-
 egies of popular protest movements, and software that can camouflage users’ search
 queries and stymie online advertising. They go on to consider obfuscation in more
 general terms, discussing why obfuscation is necessary, whether it is justified, how it
 works, and how it can be integrated with other privacy practices and technologies.
 Finn Brunton is Assistant Professor of Media, Culture, and Communication at New
 York University and the author of Spam: A Shadow History of the Internet (MIT Press).
 Helen Nissenbaum is Professor of Media, Culture, and Communication and Computer
 Science at New York University and the author of Privacy in Context. She is one of the
 developers of the TrackMeNot software.
“By mapping out obfuscation tools, practices, and goals, Brunton and Nissenbaum
 provide a valuable framework for understanding how people seek to achieve privacy
 and control in a data-soaked world. This important book is essential for anyone trying
 to understand why people resist and challenge tech norms, including policymakers,
 engineers, and users of technology.”
 danah boyd, author of /t’s Complicated: The Social Lives of Networked Teens
 and founder of Data & Society
“Obfuscation is an intelligently written handbook for subversives. | found the historical
 examples fascinating and the ethical discussion thought-provoking.”
 Lorrie Faith Cranor, Director, CyLab Usable Privacy and Security Laboratory,
 Carnegie Mellon University
“This book presents a fascinating collection of examples of decoys, camouflage, and
 information hiding from the human and animal worlds, with a discussion of how such
 techniques can be used in applications from privacy online through search optimization
 to propaganda and deception. It leads to discussion of informational justice, and the
 extent to which camouflage can perhaps help people hide in plain sight online.”
 Ross Anderson, Professor of Security Engineering, Computer Laboratory,
 University of Cambridge
                                                                    978-0-262-02973-5
THE MIT PRESS

npscatyis mermureorreowo.oey TMAUTM
                                                                              Jo0000
MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
HTTP://MITPRESS.MIT.EDU                          47 80ebe      029735
