HISTORICAL DOCUMENTS
                          [1700]


       DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE
                 IN CONGRESS JULY 4, 1776



THE UNANIMOUS DECLARATION OF THE THIRTEEN
         UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
   WHEN in the Course of human events, it becomes nec-
essary for one people to dissolve the political bands which
have connected them with another, and to assume among
the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station
to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature’s God entitle
them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind re-
quires that they should declare the causes which impel
them to the separation.
   We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men
are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator
with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are
Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness. That to secure
these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, de-
riving their just powers from the consent of the governed.
That whenever any Form of Government becomes destruc-
tive of these ends, it is the Right of the People to alter
or to abolish it, and to institute new Government, laying
its foundation on such principles and organizing its pow-
ers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to
effect their Safety and Happiness. Prudence, indeed, will
dictate that Governments long established should not be
changed for light and transient causes; and accordingly
all experience hath shewn that mankind are more dis-
posed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right
themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are
accustomed. But when a long train of abuses and
usurpations, pursuing invariably the same Object evinces
a design to reduce them under absolute Despotism, it
is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such Govern-
ment, and to provide new Guards for their future security.
Such has been the patient sufferance of these Colonies;

                           539
ø1700¿                DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE


         and such is now the necessity which constrains them to
         alter their former Systems of Government. The history
         of the present King of Great Britain is a history of re-
         peated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object
         the establishment of an absolute Tyranny over these
         States. To prove this, let Facts be submitted to a candid
         world.
            He has refused his Assent to Laws, the most wholesome
         and necessary for the public good.
            He has forbidden his Governors to pass Laws of imme-
         diate and pressing importance, unless suspended in their
         operation till his Assent should be obtained; and when
         so suspended he has utterly neglected to attend to them.
            He has refused to pass other Laws for the accommoda-
         tion of large districts of people, unless those people would
         relinquish the right of Representation in the Legislature,
         a right inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants
         only.
            He has called together legislative bodies at places un-
         usual, uncomfortable, and distant from the dispository of
         their public Records, for the sole purpose of fatiguing
         them into compliance with his measures.
            He has dissolved Representative Houses repeatedly, for
         opposing with manly firmness his invasions on the rights
         of the people.
            He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions,
         to cause others to be elected; whereby the Legislative
         powers, incapable of Annihilation, have returned to the
         People at large for their exercise; the State remaining
         in the mean time exposed to all the dangers of invasion
         from without, and convulsions within.
            He has endeavoured to prevent the population of these
         States; for that purpose obstructing the Laws for Natu-
         ralization of Foreigners; refusing to pass others to encour-
         age their migrations hither, and raising the conditions
         of new Appropriations of Lands.
            He has obstructed the Administration of Justice, by re-
         fusing his Assent to Laws for establishing Judiciary pow-
         ers.
            He has made Judges dependent on his Will alone, for
         the tenure of their offices, and the amount and payment
         of their salaries.


                                     540
             DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE                      ø1700¿


   He has erected a multitude of New Offices, and sent
hither swarms of Officers to harrass our people, and eat
out their substance.
   He has kept among us, in times of peace, Standing
Armies without the Consent of our legislatures.
   He has affected to render the Military independent of
and superior to the Civil power.
   He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdic-
tion foreign to our constitution, and unacknowledged by
our laws; giving his Assent to their Acts of pretended
Legislation:
   For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us:
   For protecting them, by a mock Trial, from punishment
for any Murders which they should commit on the Inhab-
itants of these States:
   For cutting off our Trade with all parts of the world:
   For imposing Taxes on us without our Consent:
   For depriving us in many cases, of the benefits of Trial
by Jury:
   For transporting us beyond Seas to be tried for pre-
tended offences:
   For abolishing the free System of English Laws in a
neighbouring Province, establishing therein an Arbitrary
government, and enlarging its Boundaries so as to render
it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing
the same absolute rule into these Colonies:
   For taking away our Charters, abolishing our most valu-
able Laws, and altering fundamentally the Forms of our
Governments:
   For suspending our own Legislatures, and declaring
themselves invested with power to legislate for us in all
cases whatsoever.
   He has abdicated Government here, by declaring us out
of his Protection and waging War against us.
   He has plundered our seas, ravaged our Coasts, burnt
our towns, and destroyed the lives of our people.
   He is at this time transporting large Armies of foreign
Mercenaries to compleat the works of death, desolation
and tyranny, already begun with circumstances of Cruelty
& perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous ages,
and totally unworthy of the Head of a civilized nation.
   He has constrained our fellow Citizens taken Captive
on the high Seas to bear Arms against their Country,

                           541
ø1700¿                DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE


         to become the executioners of their friends and Brethren,
         or to fall themselves by their Hands.
            He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and
         has endeavoured to bring on the inhabitants of our fron-
         tiers, the merciless Indian Savages, whose known rule
         of warfare is an undistinguished destruction of all ages,
         sexes and conditions.
            In every stage of these Oppressions We have Petitioned
         for Redress in the most humble terms: Our repeated Peti-
         tions have been answered only by repeated injury. A
         Prince, whose character is thus marked by every act
         which may define a Tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of
         a free people.
            Nor have We been wanting in attentions to our British
         brethren. We have warned them from time to time of
         attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable
         jurisdiction over us. We have reminded them of the cir-
         cumstances of our emigration and settlement here. We
         have appealed to their native justice and magnanimity,
         and we have conjured them by the ties of our common
         kindred to disavow these usurpations, which would inevi-
         tably interrupt our connections and correspondence. They
         too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of consan-
         guinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity,
         which denounces our Separation, and hold them, as we
         hold the rest of mankind, Enemies in War, in Peace
         Friends.
            WE, THEREFORE, the REPRESENTATIVES OF THE
         UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, IN GENERAL CONGRESS, As-
         sembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world
         for the rectitude of our intentions, do, in the Name, and
         by authority of the good People of these Colonies, solemnly
         PUBLISH and DECLARE, That these United Colonies are,
         and of Right ought to be FREE AND INDEPENDENT STATES;
         that they are Absolved from all Allegiance to the British
         Crown, and that all political connection between them
         and the State of Great Britain, is and ought to be totally
         dissolved; and that as FREE AND INDEPENDENT STATES,
         they have full Power to levy War, conclude Peace, contract
         Alliances, establish Commerce, and do all other Acts and
         Things which INDEPENDENT STATES may of right do. And
         for the support of this Declaration, with a firm reliance
         on the protection of divine Providence, we mutually pledge

                                    542
                 DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE                             ø1700¿


to each other our Lives, our Fortunes, and our sacred
Honor.
  (The foregoing declaration was, by order of Congress, engrossed, and
                   signed by the following members:)
                                                JOHN HANCOCK.
                            New Hampshire
VOSIAH BARTLETT,                            MATTHEW THORNTON.
WM. WHIPPLE,

                          Massachusetts Bay
SAML. ADAMS,                                ROBT. TREAT PAINE,
JOHN ADAMS,                                 ELBRIDGE GERRY.

                           Rhode Island, etc.
STEP. HOPKINS,                              WILLIAM ELLERY.

                              Connecticut
ROGER SHERMAN,                              WM. WILLIAMS,
SAM’EL HUNTINGTON,                          OLIVER WOLCOTT.

                               New York
WM. FLOYD,                                  FRANS. LEWIS,
PHIL. LIVINGSTON,                           LEWIS MORRIS.

                              New Jersey
RICHD. STOCKTON,                            JOHN HART,
JNO. WITHERSPOON,                           ABRA CLARK.
FRAS. HOPKINSON,

                             Pennsylvania
ROBT. MORRIS,                               JAS. SMITH,
BENJAMIN RUSH,                              GEO. TAYLOR,
BENJA. FRANKLIN,                            JAMES WILSON,
JOHN MORTON,                                GEO. ROSS.
GEO. CLYMER,

                               Delaware
CAESAR RODNEY,                              THO. M’KEAN.
GEO. READ,

                               Maryland
SAMUEL CHASE,                               THOS. STONE,
WM. PACA,                                   CHARLES CARROLL OF
                                             CARROLLTON.




                                 543
ø1700¿                   DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE


                                    Virginia
         GEORGE WITHE,                         THOS. NELSON, Jr.,
         RICHARD HENRY LEE,                    FRANCIS LIGHTFOOT LEE,
         TH. JEFFERSON,                        CARTER BRAXTON.
         BENJA. HARRISON,

                                 North Carolina
         WM. HOOPER,                           JOHN PENN.
         JOSEPH HEWES,

                                 South Carolina
         EDWARD RUTLEDGE,                      THOMAS LYNCH, JUNR.,
         THOS. HEYWARD, JUNR.,                 ARTHUR MIDDLETON.

                                    Georgia
         BUTTON GWINNETT,                      GEO. WALTON.
         LYMAN HALL,

            Resolved, That copies of the Declaration be sent to the
         several assemblies, conventions, and committees or coun-
         cils of safety, and to the several commanding officers of
         the Continental Troops: That it be PROCLAIMED in each
         of the UNITED STATES, and at the HEAD OF THE ARMY.—
         [Jour. Cong., vol. 1, p. 396.]




                                     544
                                 [1701]


            ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION


                     HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
   While the Declaration of Independence was under consideration in
the Continental Congress, and before it was finally agreed upon, meas-
ures were taken for the establishment of a constitutional form of govern-
ment; and on the 11th of June, 1776, it was ‘‘Resolved, That a committee
be appointed to prepare and digest the form of a confederation to be
entered into between these Colonies’’; which committee was appointed
the next day, June 12, and consisted of a member from each Colony,
namely: Mr. Bartlett, Mr. S. Adams, Mr. Hopkins, Mr. Sherman, Mr.
R. R. Livingston, Mr. Dickinson, Mr. McKean, Mr. Stone, Mr. Nelson,
Mr. Hewes, Mr. E. Rutledge, and Mr. Gwinnett. On the 12th of July,
1776, the committee reported a draft of the Articles of Confederation,
which was printed for the use of the members under the strictest injunc-
tions of secrecy.
   This report underwent a thorough discussion in Congress, from time
to time, until the 15th of November, 1777; on which day, ‘‘Articles
of Confederation and Perpetual Union’’ were finally agreed to in form,
and they were directed to be proposed to the legislatures of all the
United States, and if approved by them, they were advised to authorize
their delegates to ratify the same in the Congress of the United States;
and in that event they were to become conclusive. On the 17th of Novem-
ber, 1777, the Congress agreed upon the form of a circular letter to
accompany the Articles of Confederation, which concluded with a rec-
ommendation to each of the several legislatures ‘‘to invest its delegates
with competent powers, ultimately, and in the name and behalf of the
State, to subscribe articles of confederation and perpetual union of the
United States, and to attend Congress for that purpose on or before
the 10th day of March next.’’ This letter was signed by the President
of Congress and sent, with a copy of the articles, to each State legisla-
ture.
   On the 26th of June, 1778, Congress agreed upon the form of a
ratification of the Articles of Confederation, and directed a copy of the
articles and the ratification to be engrossed on parchment; which, on
the 9th of July, 1778, having been examined and the blanks filled,
was signed by the delegates of New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay,
Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, Connecticut, New York, Penn-
sylvania, Virginia, and South Carolina. Congress then directed that a
circular letter be addressed to the States whose delegates were not
present, or being present, conceived they were not authorized to sign
the ratification, informing them how many and what States had ratified
the Articles of Confederation, and desiring them, with all convenient
dispatch, to authorize their delegates to ratify the same. Of these States,

                                   545
ø1701¿                    ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION


         North Carolina ratified on the 21st and Georgia on the 24th of July,
         1778; New Jersey on the 26th of November following; Delaware on
         the 5th of May, 1779; Maryland on the 1st of March, 1781; and on
         the 2d of March, 1781, Congress assembled under the new form of
         government.




                                        546
                                    ø1701¿


            ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION 1


ACT OF CONFEDERATION OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 1701.1
TO ALL TO WHOM THESE PRESENTS SHALL COME, WE THE
   UNDERSIGNED DELEGATES OF THE STATES AFFIXED TO
   OUR NAMES, SEND GREETINGS

   Whereas the Delegates of the United States of America
in Congress assembled did on the 15th day of November
in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred
and Seventy seven, and in the Second Year of the Inde-
pendence of America agree to certain articles of Confed-
eration and perpetual Union between the states of
Newhampshire, Massachusetts-bay, Rhodeisland and
Providence Plantations, Connecticut, New York, New Jer-
sey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North
Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia in the Words fol-
lowing, viz.
‘‘ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION AND PERPETUAL UNION BE-
   TWEEN THE STATES OF NEWHAMPSHIRE, MASSACHUSETTS-
   BAY, RHODEISLAND AND PROVIDENCE PLANTATIONS, CON-
   NECTICUT, NEW YORK, NEW JERSEY, PENNSYLVANIA, DELA-
   WARE, MARYLAND, VIRGINIA, NORTH CAROLINA, SOUTH
   CAROLINA AND GEORGIA

  ARTICLE I. The Stile of this confederacy shall be ‘‘The 1701.2
United States of America.’’
  ARTICLE II. Each State retains its Sovereignty, freedom 1701.3
and independence, and every Power, Jurisdiction and
right, which is not by this confederation expressly dele-
gated to the United States in Congress assembled.
   1 Adopted by the Continental Congress on November 15, 1777, while meeting

at York, Pennsylvania, which served as the site of the National Capital from
September 30, 1777, to June 27, 1778. Ratification of the Articles by the respective
delegates commenced on July 9, 1778, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, but was
not completed until March 1, 1781, when the Articles were signed by the delegates
from Maryland.

                                       547
ø1701.4¿               ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION


  1701.4    ARTICLE III. The said states hereby severally enter into
         a firm league of friendship with each other, for their com-
         mon defence, the security of their Liberties, and their
         mutual and general welfare, binding themselves to assist
         each other, against all force offered to, or attacks made
         upon them, or any of them, on account of religion, sov-
         ereignty, trade, or any other pretence whatever.
  1701.5    ARTICLE IV. The better to secure and perpetuate mutual
         friendship and intercourse among the people of the dif-
         ferent states in this union, the free inhabitants of each
         of these states, paupers, vagabonds and fugitives from
         Justice excepted, shall be entitled to all privileges and
         immunities of free citizens in the several states, and the
         people of each state shall have free ingress and regress
         to and from any other state, and shall enjoy therein all
         the privileges of trade and commerce, subject to the same
         duties, impositions and restrictions as the inhabitants
         thereof respectively, provided that such restrictions shall
         not extend so far as to prevent the removal of property
         imported into any state, to any other state of which the
         Owner is an inhabitant, provided also that no imposition,
         duties or restriction shall be laid by any state, on the
         property of the united states, or either of them.
            If any Person guilty of, or charged with treason, felony
         or other high misdemeanor in any state, shall flee from
         Justice, and be found in any of the united states, he
         shall upon demand of the Governor or executive power,
         of the state from which he fled, be delivered up and re-
         moved to the state having jurisdiction of his offence.
            Full faith and credit shall be given in each of these
         states to the records, acts and judicial proceedings of the
         courts and magistrates of every other state.
  1701.6    ARTICLE V. For the more convenient management of
         the general interest of the united states, delegates shall
         be annually appointed in such manner as the legislature
         of each state shall direct, to meet in Congress on the
         first Monday in November, in every year, with a power
         reserved to each state, to recall its delegates, or any of
         them, at any time within the year, and to send others
         in their stead, for the remainder of the Year.
            No state shall be represented in Congress by less than
         two, nor by more than seven Members; and no person
         shall be capable of being a delegate for more than three
         years in any term of six years; nor shall any person,

                                    548
              ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION                   ø1701.7¿


being a delegate, be capable of holding any office under
the united states, for which he, or another for his benefit
receives any salary, fees or emolument of any kind.
  Each state shall maintain its own delegates in a meet-
ing of the states, and while they act as members of the
committee of the states.
  In determining questions in the united states, in Con-
gress assembled, each state shall have one vote.
  Freedom of speech and debate in Congress shall not
be impeached or questioned in any Court, or place out
of Congress, and the members of congress shall be pro-
tected in their persons from arrests and imprisonments,
during the time of their going to and from, and attendance
on congress, except for treason, felony, or breach of the
peace.
  ARTICLE VI. No state without the Consent of the united 1701.7
states in congress assembled, shall send any embassy to,
or receive any embassy from, or enter into any conference,
agreement, alliance or treaty with any King, prince or
state; nor shall any person holding any office of profit
or trust under the united states, or any of them, accept
of any present, emolument, office or title of any kind
whatever from any king, prince or foreign state; nor shall
the united states in congress assembled, or any of them,
grant any title of nobility.
  No two or more states shall enter into any treaty, con-
federation or alliance whatever between them, without
the consent of the united states in congress assembled,
specifying accurately the purposes for which the same
is to be entered into, and how long it shall continue.
  No state shall lay any imposts of duties, which may
interfere with any stipulations in treaties, entered into
by the united states in congress assembled with any king,
prince or state, in pursuance of any treaties already pro-
posed by congress to the courts of France and Spain.
  No vessels of war shall be kept up in time of peace
by any state, except such number only, as shall be deemed
necessary by the united states in congress assembled, for
the defence of such state, or its trade; nor shall any body
of forces be kept up by any state, in time of peace, except
such number only, as in the judgment of the united states,
in congress assembled, shall be deemed requisite to garri-
son the forts necessary for the defence of such state; but
every state shall always keep up a well regulated and

                          549
ø1701.8¿               ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION


         disciplined militia, sufficiently armed and accoutred, and
         shall provide and constantly have ready for use, in public
         stores, a due number of field-pieces and tents, and a prop-
         er quantity of arms, ammunition and camp equipage.
            No state shall engage in any war without the consent
         of the united states in congress assembled, unless such
         state be actually invaded by enemies, or shall have re-
         ceived certain advice of a resolution being formed by some
         nation of Indians to invade such state, and the danger
         is so imminent as not to admit of a delay, till the united
         states in congress assembled can be consulted: nor shall
         any state grant commissions to any ships or vessels of
         war, nor letters of marque or reprisal, except it be after
         a declaration of war by the united states in Congress
         assembled, and then only against the kingdom or state
         and the subjects thereof, against which war has been so
         declared, and under such regulations as shall be estab-
         lished by the united states in congress assembled, unless
         such state be infested by pirates, in which case vessels
         of war may be fitted out for that occasion, and kept so
         long as the danger shall continue, or until the united
         states in congress assembled shall determine otherwise.
  1701.8    ARTICLE VII. When land-forces are raised by any state
         for the common defence, all officers of or under the rank
         of colonel, shall be appointed by the legislature of each
         state respectively by whom such forces shall be raised,
         or in such manner as such state shall direct, and all
         vacancies shall be filled up by the state which first made
         the appointment.
  1701.9    ARTICLE VIII. All charges of war, and all other expences
         that shall be incurred for the common defence or general
         welfare, and allowed by the united states in congress as-
         sembled, shall be defrayed out of a common treasury,
         which shall be supplied by the several states, in propor-
         tion to the value of all land within each state, granted
         to or surveyed for any Person, as such land and the build-
         ings and improvements thereon shall be estimated accord-
         ing to such mode as the united states in congress assem-
         bled, shall from time to time direct and appoint.
            The taxes for paying that proportion shall be laid and
         levied by the authority and direction of the legislatures
         of the several states within the time agreed upon by the
         united states in congress assembled.

                                    550
              ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION                 ø1701.10¿


   ARTICLE IX. The united states in congress assembled, 1701.10
shall have the sole and exclusive right and power of deter-
mining on peace and war, except in the cases mentioned
in the sixth article—of sending and receiving
embassadors—entering into treaties and alliances, pro-
vided that no treaty of commerce shall be made whereby
the legislative power of the respective states shall be re-
strained from imposing such imposts and duties on for-
eigners, as their own people are subjected to, or from
prohibiting the exportation or importation of any species
of goods or commodities whatsoever—of establishing rules
for deciding in all cases, what captures on land or water
shall be legal, and in what manner prizes taken by land
or naval forces in the service of the united states shall
be divided or appropriated—of granting letters of marque
and reprisal in times of peace—appointing courts for the
trial of piracies and felonies committed on the high seas
and establishing courts for receiving and determining fi-
nally appeals in all cases of captures, provided that no
member of congress shall be appointed a judge of any
of the said courts.
   The united states in congress assembled shall also be
the last resort on appeal in all disputes and differences
now subsisting or that hereafter may arise between two
or more states concerning boundary, jurisdiction or any
other cause whatever, which authority shall always be
exercised in the manner following. Whenever the legisla-
tive or executive authority or lawful agent of any state
in controversy with another shall present a petition to
congress stating the matter in question and praying for
a hearing, notice thereof shall be given by order of con-
gress to the legislative or executive authority of the other
state in controversy, and a day assigned for the appear-
ance of the parties by their lawful agents, who shall then
be directed to appoint by joint consent, commissioners
or judges to constitute a court for hearing and deter-
mining the matter in question: but if they cannot agree,
congress shall name three persons out of each of the
united states, and from the list of such persons each party
shall alternately strike out one, the petitioners beginning,
until the number shall be reduced to thirteen; and from
that number not less than seven, nor more than nine
names as congress shall direct, shall in the presence of
congress be drawn out by lot, and the persons whose
                          551
ø1701.10¿                  ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION


            names shall be so drawn or any five of them, shall be
            commissioners or judges, to hear and finally determine
            the controversy, so always as a major part of the judges
            who shall hear the cause shall agree in the determination:
            and if either party shall neglect to attend at the day
            appointed, without showing reasons, which congress shall
            judge sufficient, or being present shall refuse to strike,
            the congress shall proceed to nominate three persons out
            of each State, and the secretary of congress shall strike
            in behalf of such party absent or refusing; and the judg-
            ment and sentence of the court to be appointed, in the
            manner before prescribed, shall be final and conclusive;
            and if any of the parties shall refuse to submit to the
            authority of such court, or to appear or defend their claim
            or cause, the court shall nevertheless proceed to pro-
            nounce sentence, or judgment, which shall in like manner
            be final and decisive, the judgment or sentence and other
            proceedings being in either case transmitted to congress,
            and lodged among the acts of congress for the security
            of the parties concerned: provided that every commis-
            sioner, before he sits in judgment, shall take an oath
            to be administered by one of the judges of the supreme
            or superior court of the state, where the cause shall be
            tried, ‘‘well and truly to hear and determine the matter
            in question, according to the best of his judgment without
            favour, affection or hope of reward’’: provided also that
            no state shall be deprived of territory for the benefit of
            the united states.
               All controversies concerning the private right of soil
            claimed under different grants of two or more states,
            whose jurisdiction as they may respect such lands, and
            the states which passed such grants are adjusted, the
            said grants or either of them being at the same time
            claimed to have originated antecedent to such settlement
            of jurisdiction, shall on the petition of either party to
            the congress of the united states, be finally determined
            as near as may be in the same manner as is before pre-
            scribed for deciding disputes respecting territorial jurisdic-
            tion between different states.
               The united states in congress assembled shall also have
            the sole and exclusive right and power of regulating the
            alloy and value of coin struck by their own authority,
            or by that of the respective states—fixing the standard
            of weights and measures throughout the united states—
                                         552
               ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION                       ø1701.10¿


regulating the trade and managing all affairs with the
Indians, not members of any of the states, provided that
the legislative right of any state within its own limits
be not infringed or violated—establishing and regulating
post-offices from one state to another, throughout all the
united states, and exacting such postage on the papers
passing thro’ the same as may be requisite to defray the
expences of the said office—appointing all officers of the
land forces, in the service of the united states, excepting
regimental officers—appointing all the officers of the
naval forces, and commissioning all officers whatever in
the service of the united states—making rules for the
government and regulation of the said land and naval
forces, and directing their operations.
   The united states in congress assembled shall have au-
thority to appoint a committee, to sit in the recess of
congress, to be denominated ‘‘A Committee of the States,’’
and to consist of one delegate from each state; and to
appoint such other committees and civil officers as may
be necessary for managing the general affairs of the
united states under their direction—to appoint one of their
number to preside, provided that no person be allowed
to serve in the office of president more than one year
in any term of three years; to ascertain the necessary
sums of Money to be raised for the service of the united
states, and to appropriate and apply the same for defray-
ing the public expences—to borrow money, or emit bills
on the credit of the united states, transmitting every half
year to the respective states an account of the sums of
moneys so borrowed or emitted—to build and equip a
navy—to agree upon the number of land forces, and to
make requisition from each state for its quota, in propor-
tion to the number of white inhabitants in such state;
which requisitions shall be binding, and thereupon the
legislature of each state shall appoint the regimental offi-
cers, raise the men and cloath, arm and equip them in
a soldier like manner, at the expence of the united states;
and the officers and men so cloathed, armed and equipped
shall march to the place appointed, and within the time
agreed on by the united states in congress assembled:
But if the united states in congress assembled shall, on
consideration of circumstances judge proper that any state
should not raise men, or should raise a smaller number
than its quota, and that any other state should raise
                            553
ø1701.11¿               ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION


         a greater number of men than the quota thereof, such
         extra number shall be raised, officered, cloathed, armed
         and equipped in the same manner as the quota of such
         state, unless the legislature of such state shall judge that
         such extra number cannot be safely spared out of the
         same, in which case they shall raise, officer, cloath, arm
         and equip as many of such extra number as they judge
         can be safely spared. And the officers and men so
         cloathed, armed and equipped, shall march to the place
         appointed, and within the time agreed on by the united
         states in congress assembled.
            The united states in congress assembled shall never
         engage in a war, nor grant letters of marque and reprisal
         in time of peace, nor enter into any treaties or alliances,
         nor coin money, nor regulate the value thereof, nor ascer-
         tain the sums and expences necessary for the defence
         and welfare of the united states, or any of them, nor
         emit bills, nor borrow money on the credit of the united
         states, nor appropriate money, nor agree upon the number
         of vessels of war, to be built or purchased, or the number
         of land or sea forces to be raised, nor appoint a com-
         mander-in-chief of the army or navy, unless nine states
         assent to the same; nor shall a question on any other
         point, except for adjourning from day to day be deter-
         mined, unless by the votes of a majority of the united
         states in congress assembled.
            The Congress of the united states shall have power
         to adjourn to any time within the year, and to any place
         within the united states, so that no period of adjournment
         be for a longer duration than the space of six Months,
         and shall publish the Journal of their proceedings month-
         ly, except such parts thereof relating to treaties, alliances
         or military operations as in their judgment require se-
         crecy; and the yeas and nays of the delegates of each
         state on any question shall be entered on the Journal,
         when it is desired by any delegate; and the delegates
         of a state, or any of them, at his or their request shall
         be furnished with a transcript of the said Journal, except
         such parts as are above excepted, to lay before the legisla-
         tures of the several states.
 1701.11    ARTICLE X. The committee of the states, or any nine
         of them, shall be authorized to execute, in the recess
         of congress such of the powers of congress as the united
         states in congress assembled, by the consent of nine
                                     554
               ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION                     ø1701.15¿


states, shall from time to time think expedient to vest
them with; provided that no power be delegated to the
said committee, for the exercise of which, by the articles
of confederation, the voice of nine states in the congress
of the united states assembled is requisite.
   ARTICLE XI. Canada acceding to this confederation, and 1701.12
joining in the measures of the united states, shall be
admitted into, and entitled to all the advantages of this
union: but no other colony shall be admitted into the
same, unless such admission be agreed to by nine states.
   ARTICLE XII. All bills of credit emitted, monies borrowed 1701.13
and debts contracted by, or under the authority of con-
gress, before the assembling of the united states, in pursu-
ance of the present confederation, shall be deemed and
considered as a charge against the united states, for pay-
ment and satisfaction whereof the said united states, and
the public faith are hereby solemnly pledged.
   ARTICLE XIII. Every state shall abide by the determina- 1701.14
tions of the united states in congress assembled, on all
questions which by this confederation are submitted to
them. And the Articles of this confederation shall be invio-
lably observed by every state, and the union shall be
perpetual; nor shall any alteration at any time hereafter
be made in any of them; unless such alteration be agreed
to in a congress of the united states, and be afterward
confirmed by the legislatures of every state.
   AND WHEREAS it has pleased the Great Governor of 1701.15
the World to incline the hearts of the legislatures we
respectively represent in congress, to approve of, and to
authorize us to ratify the said articles of confederation
and perpetual union. KNOW YE that we the undersigned
delegates, by virtue of the power and authority to us
given for that purpose, do by these presents, in the name
and in behalf of our respective constituents, fully and
entirely ratify and confirm each and every of the said
articles of confederation and perpetual union, and all and
singular the matters and things therein contained: And
we do further solemnly plight and engage the faith of
our respective constituents, that they shall abide by the
determinations of the united states in congress assembled,
on all questions, which by the said confederation are sub-
mitted to them. And that the articles thereof shall be

                            555
ø1701.16¿                       ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION


         inviolably observed by the states we respectively represent
         and that the union shall be perpetual.
 1701.16   IN WITNESS whereof we have hereunto set our hands
         in Congress. DONE at Philadelphia in the state of Penn-
         sylvania the ninth Day of July in the Year of our Lord
         one Thousand seven Hundred and Seventy-eight, and in
         the third year of the independence of America.
                    On the part and behalf of the State of New Hampshire.
            JOSIAH BARTLETT,                            JOHN WENTWORTH, JUNR.
                                                          AUGUST 8, 1778.

                   On the part and behalf of the State of Massachusetts Bay.
            JOHN HANCOCK,                               FRANCIS DANA,
            SAMUEL ADAMS,                               JAMES LOVELL,
            ELBRIDGE GERRY,                             SAMUEL HOLTEN.

             On the part and in behalf of the State of Rhode Island and Providence
                                          Plantations.
            WILLIAM ELLERY,                             JOHN COLLINS.
            HENRY MARCHANT,

                      On the part and behalf of the State of Connecticut.
            ROGER SHERMAN,                              TITUS HOSMER,
            SAMUEL HUNTINGTON,                          ANDREW ADAMS.
            OLIVER WOLCOTT,

                          On the part and behalf of the State of New York.
            JAS DUANE,                                  WILLIAM DUER,
            FRAS LEWIS,                                 GOUVR MORRIS.

                     On the part and in behalf of the State of New Jersey.
            JNO WITHERSPOON,                            NATHL SCUDDER, NOV. 26,
                                                         1778.

                      On the part and behalf of the State of Pennsylvania.
            ROBT. MORRIS,                               WILLIAM CLINGAN,
            DANIEL ROBERDEAU,                           JOSEPH REED, JULY 22, 1778.
            JONA BAYARD SMITH,

                          On the part and behalf of the State of Delaware.
            JOHN DICKINSON, MAY 5, 1779,                THO. M’KEAN, FEB. 12, 1779.
            NICHOLAS VAN DYKE,

                          On the part and behalf of the State of Maryland.
            JOHN HANSON, MARCH 1, 1781,                 DANIEL CARROL        DO



                                               556
                 ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION                         ø1701.16¿


            On the part and behalf of the State of Virginia.
RICHARD HENRY LEE,                        JNO HARVIE,
JOHN BANISTER,                            FRANCIS LIGHTFOOT LEE.
THOMAS ADAMS,

         On the part and behalf of the State of North Carolina.
JOHN PENN, JULY 21, 1778,                 JNO WILLIAMS.
CORNS. HARNETT,

         On the part and behalf of the State of South Carolina.
HENRY LAURENS,                            RICHARD HUTSON,
WILLIAM HENRY DRAYTON,                    THOS. HEYWARD, JUNR.
JNO MATHEWS,

            On the part and behalf of the State of Georgia.
JNO WALTON, 24th JULY 1778,               EDWD. LANGWORTHY.
EDWD TELFAIR,




                                 557
                              ø1702¿


                ORDINANCE OF 1787


AN ORDINANCE FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF THE TERRITORY OF
    THE UNITED STATES NORTHWEST OF THE RIVER OHIO
               [THE CONFEDERATE CONGRESS, JULY 13, 1787]

   SECTION 1. Be it ordained by the United States in Con- 1702.1
gress assembled, That the said Territory, for the purpose
of temporary government, by one district, subject, how-
ever, to be divided into two districts, as future cir-
cumstances may, in the opinion of Congress, make it expe-
dient.
   SEC. 2. Be it ordained by the authority aforesaid, That 1702.2
the estates both of resident and non-resident proprietors
in the said territory, dying intestate, shall descend to,
and be distributed among, their children and the descend-
ants of a deceased child in equal parts, the descendants
of a deceased child or grandchild to take the share of
their deceased parent in equal parts among them; and
where there shall be no children or descendants, then
in equal parts to the next of kin, in equal degree; and
among collaterals, the children of a deceased brother or
sister of the intestate shall have, in equal parts among
them, their deceased parent’s share; and there shall, in
no case, be a distinction between kindred of the whole
and half blood; saving in all cases to the widow of the
intestate, her third part of the real estate for life, and
one-third part of the personal estate; and this law relative
to descents and dower, shall remain in full force until
altered by the legislature of the district. And until the
governor and judges shall adopt laws as hereinafter men-
tioned, estates in the said territory may be devised or
bequeathed by wills in writing, signed and sealed by him
or her in whom the estate may be (being of full age),
and attested by three witnesses; and real estates may
be conveyed by lease and release, or bargain and sale,
signed, sealed, and delivered by the person, being of full

                                559
ø1702.3¿                     ORDINANCE OF 1787


         age, in whom the estate may be, and attested by two
         witnesses, provided such wills be duly proved, and such
         conveyances be acknowledged, or the execution thereof
         duly proved, and be recorded within one year after proper
         magistrates, courts, and registers, shall be appointed for
         that purpose; and personal property may be transferred
         by delivery, saving, however, to the French and Canadian
         inhabitants, and other settlers of the Kaskaskies, Saint
         Vincents, and the neighboring villages, who have here-
         tofore professed themselves citizens of Virginia, their laws
         and customs now in force among them, relative to the
         descent and conveyance of property.
  1702.3   SEC. 3. Be it ordained by the authority aforesaid, That
         there shall be appointed, from time to time, by Congress,
         a governor whose commission shall continue in force for
         the term of three years, unless sooner revoked by Con-
         gress; he shall reside in the district, and have a freehold
         estate therein, in one thousand acres of land, while in
         the exercise of his office.
  1702.4   SEC. 4. There shall be appointed from time to time,
         by Congress, a secretary, whose commission shall continue
         in force for four years, unless sooner revoked; he shall
         reside in the district, and have a freehold estate therein,
         in five hundred acres of land, while in the exercise of
         his office. It shall be his duty to keep and preserve the
         acts and laws passed by the legislature, and the public
         records of the district, and the proceedings of the governor
         in his executive department, and transmit authentic cop-
         ies of such acts and proceedings every six months to the
         Secretary of Congress. There shall also be appointed a
         court, to consist of three judges, any two of whom to
         form a court, who shall have a common-law jurisdiction,
         and reside in the district, and have each therein a free-
         hold estate, in five hundred acres of land, while in the
         exercise of their offices; and their commissions shall con-
         tinue in force during good behavior.
  1702.5   SEC. 5. The governor and judges, or a majority of them,
         shall adopt and publish in the district such laws of the
         original States, criminal and civil, as may be necessary,
         and best suited to the circumstances of the district, and
         report them to Congress from time to time, which laws
         shall be in force in the district until the organization
         of the general assembly therein, unless disapproved of

                                    560
                   ORDINANCE OF 1787                        ø1702.9¿


by Congress; but afterwards the legislature shall have
authority to alter them as they shall think fit.
   SEC. 6. The governor, for the time being, shall be com- 1702.6
mander-in-chief of the militia, appoint and commission
all officers in the same below the rank of general officers;
all general officers shall be appointed, and commissioned
by Congress.
   SEC. 7. Previous to the organization of the general as- 1702.7
sembly the governor shall appoint such magistrates, and
other civil officers, in each county or township, as he
shall find necessary for the preservation of the peace and
good order in the same. After the general assembly shall
be organized the powers and duties of magistrates and
other civil officers shall be regulated and defined by the
said assembly; but all magistrates and other civil officers,
not herein otherwise directed, shall, during the continu-
ance of this temporary government, be appointed by the
governor.
   SEC. 8. For the prevention of crimes and injuries, the 1702.8
laws to be adopted or made shall have force in all parts
of the district, and for the execution of process, criminal
and civil, the governor shall make proper divisions there-
of, and he shall proceed, from time to time, as cir-
cumstances may require, to lay out the parts of the dis-
trict in which the Indian titles shall have been extin-
guished, into counties and townships, subject, however,
to such alterations as may thereafter be made by the
legislature.
   SEC. 9. So soon as there shall be five thousand free 1702.9
male inhabitants, of full age, in the district, upon giving
proof thereof to the governor, they shall receive authority,
with time and place, to elect representatives from their
counties or townships, to represent them in the general
assembly: Provided, That for every five hundred free male
inhabitants there shall be one representative, and so on,
progressively, with the number of free male inhabitants,
shall the right of representation increase, until the num-
ber of representatives shall amount to twenty-five; after
which the number and proportion of representatives shall
be regulated by the legislature: Provided, That no person
be eligible or qualified to act as a representative, unless
he shall have been a citizen of one of the United States
three years, and be a resident in the district, or unless

                           561
ø1702.10¿                     ORDINANCE OF 1787


         he shall have resided in the district three years, and,
         in either case, shall likewise hold in his own right, in
         fee-simple, two hundred acres of land within the same:
         Provided also, That a freehold in fifty acres of land in
         the district, having been a citizen of one of the States,
         and being resident in the district, or the like freehold
         and two years’ residence in the district, shall be necessary
         to qualify a man as an elector of a representative.
 1702.10    SEC. 10. The representatives thus elected shall serve
         for the term of two years; and in case of the death of
         a representative, or removal from office, the governor shall
         issue a writ to the county or township, for which he was
         a member, to elect another in his stead, to serve for the
         residue of the term.
 1702.11    SEC. 11. The general assembly, or legislature, shall con-
         sist of the governor, legislative council, and a house of
         representatives. The legislative council shall consist of five
         members, to continue in office five years, unless sooner
         removed by Congress; any three of whom to be a quorum;
         and the members of the council shall be nominated and
         appointed in the following manner, to wit: As soon as
         representatives shall be elected the governor shall appoint
         a time and place for them to meet together, and, when
         met they shall nominate ten persons, resident in the dis-
         trict, and each possessed of a freehold in five hundred
         acres of land, and return their names to Congress, five
         of whom Congress shall appoint and commission to serve
         as aforesaid; and whenever a vacancy shall happen in
         the council, by death or removal from office, the house
         of representatives shall nominate two persons, qualified
         as aforesaid, for each vacancy, and return their names
         to Congress, one of whom Congress shall appoint and
         commission for the residue of the term; and every five
         years, four months at least before the expiration of the
         time of service of the members of the council, the said
         house shall nominate ten persons, qualified as aforesaid,
         and return their names to Congress, five of whom Con-
         gress shall appoint and commission to serve as members
         of the council five years, unless sooner removed. And the
         governor, legislative council, and house of representatives
         shall have authority to make laws in all cases for the
         good government of the district, not repugnant to the prin-
         ciples and articles in this ordinance established and de-
         clared. And all bills, having passed by a majority in the

                                      562
                    ORDINANCE OF 1787                          ø1702.16¿


house, and by a majority in the council, shall be referred
to the governor for his assent; but no bill or legislative
act whatever, shall be of any force without his assent.
The governor shall have power to convene, prorogue, and
dissolve the general assembly, when, in his opinion, it
shall be expedient.
  SEC. 12. The governor, judges, legislative council, sec- 1702.12
retary, and such other officers as Congress shall appoint
in the district, shall take an oath or affirmation of fidelity,
and of office; the governor before the President of Con-
gress, and all other officers before the governor. As soon
as a legislature shall be formed in the district, the council
and house assembled, in one room, shall have authority,
by joint ballot, to elect a delegate to Congress, who shall
have a seat in Congress, with a right of debating, but
not of voting, during this temporary government.
  SEC. 13. And for extending the fundamental principles 1702.13
of civil and religious liberty, which form the basis whereon
these republics, their laws and constitutions, are erected;
to fix and establish those principles as the basis of all
laws, constitutions, and governments, which forever here-
after shall be formed in the said territory; to provide,
also, for the establishment of States, and permanent gov-
ernment therein, and for their admission to a share in
the Federal councils on an equal footing with the original
States, at as early periods as may be consistent with
the general interest:
  SEC. 14. It is hereby ordained and declared, by the 1702.14
authority aforesaid, That the following articles shall be
considered as articles of compact, between the original
States and the people and States in the said territory,
and forever remain unalterable, unless by common con-
sent, to wit:
                         ARTICLE I                             1702.15

  No person, demeaning himself in a peaceable and or-
derly manner, shall ever be molested on account of his
mode of worship, or religious sentiments, in the said terri-
tories.
                        ARTICLE II                             1702.16

  The inhabitants of the said territory shall always be
entitled to the benefits of the writs of habeas corpus,
and of the trial by jury; of a proportionate representation

                            563
ø1702.17¿                       ORDINANCE OF 1787


            of the people in the legislature, and of judicial proceedings
            according to the course of the common law. All persons
            shall be bailable, unless for capital offences, where the
            proof shall be evident, or the presumption great. All fines
            shall be moderate; and no cruel or unusual punishments
            shall be inflicted. No man shall be deprived of his liberty
            or property, but by the judgment of his peers, or the
            law of the land, and should the public exigencies make
            it necessary, for the common preservation, to take any
            person’s property, or to demand his particular services,
            full compensation shall be made for the same. And, in
            the just preservation of rights and property, it is under-
            stood and declared, that no law ought ever to be made
            or have force in the said territory, that shall, in any
            manner whatever, interfere with or affect private con-
            tracts, or engagements, bona fide, and without fraud pre-
            viously formed.
 1702.17                            ARTICLE III
              Religion, morality, and knowledge being necessary to
            good government, and the happiness of mankind, schools
            and the means of education shall forever be encouraged.
            The utmost good faith shall always be observed towards
            the Indians; their lands and property shall never be taken
            from them without their consent; and in their property,
            rights, and liberty they never shall be invaded or dis-
            turbed, unless in just and lawful wars authorized by Con-
            gress; but laws founded in justice and humanity shall,
            from time to time, be made, for preventing wrongs being
            done to them, and for preserving peace and friendship
            with them.
 1702.18                            ARTICLE IV
              The said territory, and the States which may be formed
            therein, shall forever remain a part of this confederacy
            of the United States of America, subject to the Articles
            of Confederation, and to such alterations therein as shall
            be constitutionally made; and to all the acts and ordi-
            nances of the United States in Congress assembled, con-
            formable thereto. The inhabitants and settlers in the said
            territory shall be subject to pay a part of the Federal
            debts, contracted, or to be contracted, and a proportional
            part of the expenses of government to be apportioned on
            them by Congress, according to the same common rule

                                        564
                     ORDINANCE OF 1787                                            ø1702.19¿


and measure by which apportionments thereof shall be
made on the other States; and the taxes for paying their
proportion shall be laid and levied by the authority and
direction of the legislatures of the district or districts,
or new States, as in the original States, within the time
agreed upon by the United States in Congress assembled.
The legislatures of those districts, or new States, shall
never interfere with the primary disposal of the soil by
the United States in Congress assembled, nor with any
regulations Congress may find necessary for securing the
title in such soil to the bona-fide purchasers. No tax shall
be imposed on lands the property of the United States;
and in no case shall non-resident proprietors be taxed
higher than residents. The navigable waters leading into
the Mississippi and Saint Lawrence, and the carrying
places between the same, shall be common highways, and
forever free, as well to the inhabitants of the said territory
as to the citizens of the United States, and those of any
other States that may be admitted into the confederacy,
without any tax, impost, or duty therefor.
                              [Sands v. Manistee River Imp. Co., 123 U.S. 288.]


                         ARTICLE V                                                1702.19

  There shall be formed in the said territory not less
than three nor more than five States; and the boundaries
of the States, as soon as Virginia shall alter her act of
cession and consent to the same, shall become fixed and
established as follows, to wit: The western State, in the
said territory, shall be bounded by the Mississippi, the
Ohio, and the Wabash Rivers; a direct line drawn from
the Wabash and Post Vincents, due north, to the terri-
torial line between the United States and Canada; and
by the said territorial line to the Lake of the Woods and
Mississippi. The middle State shall be bounded by the
said direct line, the Wabash from Post Vincents to the
Ohio, by the Ohio, by a direct line drawn due north from
the mouth of the Great Miami to the said territorial line,
and by the said territorial line. The eastern State shall
be bounded by the last-mentioned direct line, the Ohio,
Pennsylvania, and the said territorial line: Provided, how-
ever, And it is further understood and declared, that the
boundaries of these three States shall be subject so far
to be altered that, if Congress shall hereafter find it expe-
dient, they shall have authority to form one or two States

                             565
ø1702.20¿                      ORDINANCE OF 1787


            in that part of the said territory which lies north of an
            east and west line drawn through the southerly bend or
            extreme of Lake Michigan. And whenever any of the said
            States shall have sixty thousand free inhabitants therein,
            such State shall be admitted, by its delegates, into the
            Congress of the United States, on an equal footing with
            the original States, in all respects whatever; and shall
            be at liberty to form a permanent constitution and State
            government: Provided, The constitution and government,
            so to be formed, shall be republican, and in conformity
            to the principles contained in these articles, and, so far
            as it can be consistent with the general interests of the
            Confederacy, such admission shall be allowed at an earlier
            period, and when there may be a less number of free
            inhabitants in the State than sixty thousand.
 1702.20                           ARTICLE VI
           There shall be neither slavery nor involuntary servitude
         in the said territory, otherwise than in the punishment
         of crimes, whereof the party shall have been duly con-
         victed: Provided always, That any person escaping in the
         same, from whom labor or service is lawfully claimed in
         any one of the original States, such fugitive may be law-
         fully reclaimed, and conveyed to the person claiming his
         or her labor service as aforesaid.
 1702.21   Be it ordained by the authority aforesaid, That the reso-
         lutions of the 23d of April, 1784, relative to the subject
         of this ordinance, be, and the same are hereby, repealed,
         and declared null and void.
           Done by the United States, in Congress assembled, the
         13th day of July, in the year of our Lord 1787, and of
         their sovereignty and independence the 12th.
                                             CHARLES THOMSON,
                                                            Sec’y.




                                       566
                                ø1710¿


                 CONSTITUTION OF THE
               UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


                     HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
   In May 1785, a committee of Congress made a report recommending
an alteration in the Articles of Confederation, but no action was taken
on it, and it was left to the State Legislatures to proceed in the matter.
In January 1786, the Legislature of Virginia passed a resolution pro-
viding for the appointment of five commissioners, who, or any three
of them, should meet such commissioners as might be appointed in
the other States of the Union, at a time and place to be agreed upon,
to take into consideration the trade of the United States; to consider
how far a uniform system in their commercial regulations may be nec-
essary to their common interest and their permanent harmony; and
to report to the several States such an act, relative to this great object,
as, when ratified by them, will enable the United States in Congress
effectually to provide for the same.
   The Virginia commissioners, after some correspondence, fixed the first
Monday in September as the time, and the city of Annapolis as the
place for the meeting, but only four other States were represented,
viz: Delaware, New York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania; the commis-
sioners appointed by Massachusetts, New Hampshire, North Carolina,
and Rhode Island failed to attend. Under the circumstances of so partial
a representation, the commissioners present agreed upon a report (drawn
by Mr. Hamilton, of New York), expressing their unanimous conviction
that it might essentially tend to advance the interests of the Union
if the States by which they were respectively delegated would concur,
and use their endeavors to procure the concurrence of the other States,
in the appointment of commissioners to meet at Philadelphia on the
second Monday of May following, to take into consideration the situation
of the United States; to devise such further provisions as should appear
to them necessary to render the Constitution of the Federal Government
adequate to the exigencies of the Union; and to report such an act
for that purpose to the United States in Congress assembled as, when
agreed to by them and afterwards confirmed by the Legislatures of
every State, would effectually provide for the same.
   Congress, on the 21st of February, 1787, adopted a resolution in favor
of a convention, and the Legislatures of those States which had not
already done so (with the exception of Rhode Island) promptly appointed
delegates. On the 25th of May, seven States having convened, George
Washington, of Virginia, was unanimously elected President, and the
consideration of the proposed constitution was commenced. On the 17th
of September, 1787, the Constitution as engrossed and agreed upon
was signed by all the members present, except Mr. Gerry, of Massachu-

                                   567
ø1710¿                CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES


         setts, and Messrs. Mason and Randolph, of Virginia. The president of
         the convention transmitted it to Congress, with a resolution stating
         how the proposed Federal Government should be put in operation, and
         an explanatory letter. Congress, on the 28th of September, 1787, directed
         the Constitution so framed, with the resolutions and letter concerning
         the same, to ‘‘be transmitted to the several Legislatures in order to
         be submitted to a convention of delegates chosen in each State by the
         people thereof, in conformity to the resolves of the convention.’’
            On the 4th of March, 1789, the day which had been fixed for com-
         mencing the operations of Government under the new Constitution, it
         had been ratified by the conventions chosen in each State to consider
         it, as follows: Delaware, December 7, 1787; Pennsylvania, December
         12, 1787; New Jersey, December 19, 1787; Georgia, January 2, 1788;
         Connecticut, January 9, 1788; Massachusetts, February 6, 1788; Mary-
         land, April 28, 1788; South Carolina, May 23, 1788; New Hampshire,
         June 21, 1788; Virginia, June 25, 1788; and New York, July 26, 1788.
            The President informed Congress, on the 28th of January, 1790, that
         North Carolina had ratified the Constitution November 21, 1789; and
         he informed Congress on the 1st of June, 1790, that Rhode Island had
         ratified the Constitution May 29, 1790. Vermont, in convention, ratified
         the Constitution January 10, 1791, and was, by an act of Congress
         approved February 18, 1791, ‘‘received and admitted into this Union
         as a new and entire member of the United States.’’




                                           568
