                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




Resources


  Declaration of Independence

  Constitution

  Organizational Chart of the U.S. Government

  History of Agency Organizational Changes

  Boards, Commissions, and Committees

  Other International Organizations

  Selected Bilateral Organizations

  Agency Acronyms / Initialisms

  Links to External Websites

  Contact Information / News



The United States Government Manual
For over eight decades, The United States Government Manual has been the "official handbook" of
the Federal Government. This New Deal-era publication was published initially as a loose-leaf
notebook, its pages held in place by three metal rings. The Government Manual is a regularly
updated special edition of the Federal Register. Its contents include leadership tables and
descriptions of agency activities and programs of the executive, judicial, and legislative branches of
Government, as well as activities and programs of quasi-official agencies and international
organizations in which the United States participates as a member.

Portable Document Format (PDF) files of the Government Manual are available for viewing and

downloading on the Government Publishing Office's GovInfo website.


  Featured



      Legislative Branch                  Legislative Branch                                 


       Congress

       Architect of the Capitol

       Congressional Budget Office

       Government Accountability Office

       Government Publishing Office

       Library of Congress

       United States Botanic Garden



      Judicial Branch                      Judicial Branch                                   


      Executive Branch: The PresidentExecutive Branch: The President                         


      Executive Branch: Departments Executive Branch: Departments                            


       Executive
      Executive      Branch:
                Branch:         Independent
                        Independent                Agencies
                                    Agencies and Government    and Government Corporations
                                                            Corporations



      Quasi-Official Agencies         Quasi-Official Agencies                                
          International Organizations   International Organizations   




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT MANUAL


Declaration of Independence
Action of Second Continental Congress, July 4, 1776



IN CONGRESS, July 4, 1776.

The unanimous Declaration of the thirteen united States of America,

When in the Course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to dissolve the
political bands which have connected them with another, and to assume among the powers of
the earth, the separate and equal station to which the Laws of Nature and of Nature's God
entitle them, a decent respect to the opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the
causes which impel them to the separation.

We hold these truths to be self‐evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed
by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the
pursuit of Happiness.‐‐That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men,
deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed, ‐‐That whenever any Form of
Government becomes destructive of these ends, it is the Right of the People to alter or to
abolish it, and to institute new Government, laying its foundation on such principles and
organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their Safety and
Happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that Governments long established should not be
changed for light and transient causes; and accordingly all experience hath shewn, that
mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by
abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long train of abuses and
usurpations, pursuing invariably the same Object evinces a design to reduce them under
absolute Despotism, it is their right, it is their duty, to throw off such Government, and to
provide new Guards for their future security.‐‐Such has been the patient sufferance of these
Colonies; and such is now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former Systems of
Government. The history of the present King of Great Britain is a history of repeated injuries
and usurpations, all having in direct object the establishment of an absolute Tyranny over these
States. To prove this, let Facts be submitted to a candid world.

        He has refused his Assent to Laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the public
        good.
        He has forbidden his Governors to pass Laws of immediate and pressing importance,
        unless suspended in their operation till his Assent should be obtained; and when so
suspended, he has utterly neglected to attend to them.
He has refused to pass other Laws for the accommodation of large districts of people,
unless those people would relinquish the right of Representation in the Legislature, a
right inestimable to them and formidable to tyrants only.
He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable, and distant
from the depository of their public Records, for the sole purpose of fatiguing them into
compliance with his measures.
He has dissolved Representative Houses repeatedly, for opposing with manly firmness
his invasions on the rights of the people.
He has refused for a long time, after such dissolutions, to cause others to be elected;
whereby the Legislative powers, incapable of Annihilation, have returned to the People
at large for their exercise; the State remaining in the mean time exposed to all the
dangers of invasion from without, and convulsions within.
He has endeavoured to prevent the population of these States; for that purpose
obstructing the Laws for Naturalization of Foreigners; refusing to pass others to
encourage their migrations hither, and raising the conditions of new Appropriations of
Lands.
He has obstructed the Administration of Justice, by refusing his Assent to Laws for
establishing Judiciary powers.
He has made Judges dependent on his Will alone, for the tenure of their offices, and the
amount and payment of their salaries.
He has erected a multitude of New Offices, and sent hither swarms of Officers to harrass
our people, and eat out their substance.
He has kept among us, in times of peace, Standing Armies without the Consent of our
legislatures.
He has affected to render the Military independent of and superior to the Civil power.
He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our constitution,
and unacknowledged by our laws; giving his Assent to their Acts of pretended
Legislation:
For Quartering large bodies of armed troops among us:
For protecting them, by a mock Trial, from punishment for any Murders which they
should commit on the Inhabitants of these States:
For cutting off our Trade with all parts of the world:
For imposing Taxes on us without our Consent:
For depriving us in many cases, of the benefits of Trial by Jury:
For transporting us beyond Seas to be tried for pretended offences
For abolishing the free System of English Laws in a neighbouring Province, establishing
therein an Arbitrary government, and enlarging its Boundaries so as to render it at once
an example and fit instrument for introducing the same absolute rule into these
Colonies:
For taking away our Charters, abolishing our most valuable Laws, and altering
fundamentally the Forms of our Governments:
For suspending our own Legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with power to
legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.
       He has abdicated Government here, by declaring us out of his Protection and waging
       War against us.
       He has plundered our seas, ravaged our Coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed the
       lives of our people.
       He is at this time transporting large Armies of foreign Mercenaries to compleat the
       works of death, desolation and tyranny, already begun with circumstances of Cruelty &
       perfidy scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous ages, and totally unworthy the Head of
       a civilized nation.
       He has constrained our fellow Citizens taken Captive on the high Seas to bear Arms
       against their Country, to become the executioners of their friends and Brethren, or to
       fall themselves by their Hands.
       He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavoured to bring on the
       inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian Savages, whose known rule of warfare,
       is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and conditions.

In every stage of these Oppressions We have Petitioned for Redress in the most humble terms:
Our repeated Petitions have been answered only by repeated injury. A Prince whose character
is thus marked by every act which may define a Tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.

Nor have We been wanting in attentions to our Brittish brethren. We have warned them from
time to time of attempts by their legislature to extend an unwarrantable jurisdiction over us.
We have reminded them of the circumstances of our emigration and settlement here. We have
appealed to their native justice and magnanimity, and we have conjured them by the ties of our
common kindred to disavow these usurpations, which, would inevitably interrupt our
connections and correspondence. They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of
consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces our
Separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, Enemies in War, in Peace Friends.

We, therefore, the Representatives of the united States of America, in General Congress,
Assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world for the rectitude of our intentions, do,
in the Name, and by Authority of the good People of these Colonies, solemnly publish and
declare, That these United Colonies are, and of Right ought to be Free and Independent States;
that they are Absolved from all Allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection
between them and the State of Great Britain, is and ought to be totally dissolved; and that as
Free and Independent States, they have full Power to levy War, conclude Peace, contract
Alliances, establish Commerce, and to do all other Acts and Things which Independent States
may of right do. And for the support of this Declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection
of divine Providence, we mutually pledge to each other our Lives, our Fortunes and our sacred
Honor.
The 56 signatures on the Declaration appear in the positions indicated:

Column 1
Georgia:
 Button Gwinnett
 Lyman Hall
 George Walton

Column 2
North Carolina:
 William Hooper
 Joseph Hewes
 John Penn
South Carolina:
 Edward Rutledge
 Thomas Heyward, Jr.
 Thomas Lynch, Jr.
 Arthur Middleton

Column 3
Massachusetts:
 John Hancock
Maryland:
 Samuel Chase
 William Paca
 Thomas Stone
 Charles Carroll of Carrollton
Virginia:
 George Wythe
 Richard Henry Lee
 Thomas Jefferson
 Benjamin Harrison
 Thomas Nelson, Jr.
 Francis Lightfoot Lee
 Carter Braxton

Column 4
Pennsylvania:
 Robert Morris
 Benjamin Rush
 Benjamin Franklin
 John Morton
 George Clymer
 James Smith
 George Taylor
 James Wilson
 George Ross
Delaware:
 Caesar Rodney
 George Read
 Thomas McKean

Column 5
New York:
 William Floyd
 Philip Livingston
 Francis Lewis
 Lewis Morris
New Jersey:
 Richard Stockton
 John Witherspoon
 Francis Hopkinson
 John Hart
 Abraham Clark

Column 6
New Hampshire:
 Josiah Bartlett
 William Whipple
Massachusetts:
 Samuel Adams
 John Adams
 Robert Treat Paine
 Elbridge Gerry
Rhode Island:
 Stephen Hopkins
 William Ellery
Connecticut:
 Roger Sherman
 Samuel Huntington
 William Williams
 Oliver Wolcott
New Hampshire:
 Matthew Thornton



For more information on the Declaration of Independence and the Charters of Freedom, see
http://archives.gov/exhibits/charters/declaration.html
THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT MANUAL



Constitution of the United States
Article I Article II Article III Article IV Article V Article VI Article VII Amendments 1‐10 Amendments 11‐27

Note: The following text is a transcription of the Constitution in its original form. Items that are
hyperlinked/underlined have since been amended or superseded.


Preamble
We the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish
justice, insure domestic tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the
general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do
ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.

Article I
Section 1.

All legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of the United States,
which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives.

Section 2.

The House of Representatives shall be composed of members chosen every second year
by the people of the several states, and the electors in each state shall have the
qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the state
legislature.

No person shall be a Representative who shall not have attained to the age of twenty
five years, and been seven years a citizen of the United States, and who shall not, when
elected, be an inhabitant of that state in which he shall be chosen.

Representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among the several states which
may be included within this union, according to their respective numbers, which shall be
determined by adding to the whole number of free persons, including those bound to
service for a term of years, and excluding Indians not taxed, three fifths of all other
Persons. The actual Enumeration shall be made within three years after the first
meeting of the Congress of the United States, and within every subsequent term of ten
years, in such manner as they shall by law direct. The number of Representatives shall
not exceed one for every thirty thousand, but each state shall have at least one
Representative; and until such enumeration shall be made, the state of New Hampshire
shall be entitled to chuse three, Massachusetts eight, Rhode Island and Providence
Plantations one, Connecticut five, New York six, New Jersey four, Pennsylvania eight,
Delaware one, Maryland six, Virginia ten, North Carolina five, South Carolina five, and
Georgia three.

When vacancies happen in the Representation from any state, the executive authority
thereof shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.

The House of Representatives shall choose their speaker and other officers; and shall
have the sole power of impeachment.

Section 3.

The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two Senators from each
state, chosen by the legislature thereof, for six years; and each Senator shall have one
vote.

Immediately after they shall be assembled in consequence of the first election, they
shall be divided as equally as may be into three classes. The seats of the Senators of the
first class shall be vacated at the expiration of the second year, of the second class at
the expiration of the fourth year, and the third class at the expiration of the sixth year,
so that one third may be chosen every second year; and if vacancies happen by
resignation, or otherwise, during the recess of the legislature of any state, the executive
thereof may make temporary appointments until the next meeting of the legislature,
which shall then fill such vacancies.

No person shall be a Senator who shall not have attained to the age of thirty years, and
been nine years a citizen of the United States and who shall not, when elected, be an
inhabitant of that state for which he shall be chosen.

The Vice President of the United States shall be President of the Senate, but shall have
no vote, unless they be equally divided.
The Senate shall choose their other officers, and also a President pro tempore, in the
absence of the Vice President, or when he shall exercise the office of President of the
United States.

The Senate shall have the sole power to try all impeachments. When sitting for that
purpose, they shall be on oath or affirmation. When the President of the United States
is tried, the Chief Justice shall preside: And no person shall be convicted without the
concurrence of two thirds of the members present.

Judgment in cases of impeachment shall not extend further than to removal from office,
and disqualification to hold and enjoy any office of honor, trust or profit under the
United States: but the party convicted shall nevertheless be liable and subject to
indictment, trial, judgment and punishment, according to law.

Section 4.

The times, places and manner of holding elections for Senators and Representatives,
shall be prescribed in each state by the legislature thereof; but the Congress may at any
time by law make or alter such regulations, except as to the places of choosing Senators.

The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting shall be on
the first Monday in December, unless they shall by law appoint a different day.

Section 5.

Each House shall be the judge of the elections, returns and qualifications of its own
members, and a majority of each shall constitute a quorum to do business; but a smaller
number may adjourn from day to day, and may be authorized to compel the attendance
of absent members, in such manner, and under such penalties as each House may
provide.

Each House may determine the rules of its proceedings, punish its members for
disorderly behavior, and, with the concurrence of two thirds, expel a member.

Each House shall keep a journal of its proceedings, and from time to time publish the
same, excepting such parts as may in their judgment require secrecy; and the yeas and
nays of the members of either House on any question shall, at the desire of one fifth of
those present, be entered on the journal.
Neither House, during the session of Congress, shall, without the consent of the other,
adjourn for more than three days, nor to any other place than that in which the two
Houses shall be sitting.

Section 6.

The Senators and Representatives shall receive a compensation for their services, to be
ascertained by law, and paid out of the treasury of the United States. They shall in all
cases, except treason, felony and breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest during
their attendance at the session of their respective Houses, and in going to and returning
from the same; and for any speech or debate in either House, they shall not be
questioned in any other place.

No Senator or Representative shall, during the time for which he was elected, be
appointed to any civil office under the authority of the United States, which shall have
been created, or the emoluments whereof shall have been increased during such time:
and no person holding any office under the United States, shall be a member of either
House during his continuance in office.

Section 7.

All bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House of Representatives; but the
Senate may propose or concur with amendments as on other Bills.

Every bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the Senate, shall,
before it become a law, be presented to the President of the United States; if he
approve he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it, with his objections to that House in
which it shall have originated, who shall enter the objections at large on their journal,
and proceed to reconsider it. If after such reconsideration two thirds of that House shall
agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent, together with the objections, to the other House,
by which it shall likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two thirds of that House,
it shall become a law. But in all such cases the votes of both Houses shall be determined
by yeas and nays, and the names of the persons voting for and against the bill shall be
entered on the journal of each House respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by
the President within ten days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to
him, the same shall be a law, in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by
their adjournment prevent its return, in which case it shall not be a law.

Every order, resolution, or vote to which the concurrence of the Senate and House of
Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of adjournment) shall be
presented to the President of the United States; and before the same shall take effect,
shall be approved by him, or being disapproved by him, shall be repassed by two thirds
of the Senate and House of Representatives, according to the rules and limitations
prescribed in the case of a bill.

Section 8.

The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes, duties, imposts and excises, to
pay the debts and provide for the common defense and general welfare of the United
States; but all duties, imposts and excises shall be uniform throughout the United
States;

To borrow money on the credit of the United States;

To regulate commerce with foreign nations, and among the several states, and with the
Indian tribes;

To establish a uniform rule of naturalization, and uniform laws on the subject of
bankruptcies throughout the United States;

To coin money, regulate the value thereof, and of foreign coin, and fix the standard of
weights and measures;

To provide for the punishment of counterfeiting the securities and current coin of the
United States;

To establish post offices and post roads;

To promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times to
authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries;

To constitute tribunals inferior to the Supreme Court;

To define and punish piracies and felonies committed on the high seas, and offenses
against the law of nations;

To declare war, grant letters of marque and reprisal, and make rules concerning
captures on land and water;

To raise and support armies, but no appropriation of money to that use shall be for a
longer term than two years;
To provide and maintain a navy;

To make rules for the government and regulation of the land and naval forces;

To provide for calling forth the militia to execute the laws of the union, suppress
insurrections and repel invasions;

To provide for organizing, arming, and disciplining, the militia, and for governing such
part of them as may be employed in the service of the United States, reserving to the
states respectively, the appointment of the officers, and the authority of training the
militia according to the discipline prescribed by Congress;

To exercise exclusive legislation in all cases whatsoever, over such District (not
exceeding ten miles square) as may, by cession of particular states, and the acceptance
of Congress, become the seat of the government of the United States, and to exercise
like authority over all places purchased by the consent of the legislature of the state in
which the same shall be, for the erection of forts, magazines, arsenals, dockyards, and
other needful buildings;‐‐And

To make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the
foregoing powers, and all other powers vested by this Constitution in the government of
the United States, or in any department or officer thereof.

Section 9.

The migration or importation of such persons as any of the states now existing shall
think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the Congress prior to the year one
thousand eight hundred and eight, but a tax or duty may be imposed on such
importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person.

The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when in cases
of rebellion or invasion the public safety may require it.

No bill of attainder or ex post facto Law shall be passed.

No capitation, or other direct, tax shall be laid, unless in proportion to the census or
enumeration herein before directed to be taken.

No tax or duty shall be laid on articles exported from any state.
No preference shall be given by any regulation of commerce or revenue to the ports of
one state over those of another: nor shall vessels bound to, or from, one state, be
obliged to enter, clear or pay duties in another.

No money shall be drawn from the treasury, but in consequence of appropriations made
by law; and a regular statement and account of receipts and expenditures of all public
money shall be published from time to time.

No title of nobility shall be granted by the United States: and no person holding any
office of profit or trust under them, shall, without the consent of the Congress, accept of
any present, emolument, office, or title, of any kind whatever, from any king, prince, or
foreign state.

Section 10.

No state shall enter into any treaty, alliance, or confederation; grant letters of marque
and reprisal; coin money; emit bills of credit; make anything but gold and silver coin a
tender in payment of debts; pass any bill of attainder, ex post facto law, or law impairing
the obligation of contracts, or grant any title of nobility.

No state shall, without the consent of the Congress, lay any imposts or duties on
imports or exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing it's
inspection laws: and the net produce of all duties and imposts, laid by any state on
imports or exports, shall be for the use of the treasury of the United States; and all such
laws shall be subject to the revision and control of the Congress.

No state shall, without the consent of Congress, lay any duty of tonnage, keep troops, or
ships of war in time of peace, enter into any agreement or compact with another state,
or with a foreign power, or engage in war, unless actually invaded, or in such imminent
danger as will not admit of delay.

Article II
Section 1.

The executive power shall be vested in a President of the United States of America. He
shall hold his office during the term of four years, and, together with the Vice President,
chosen for the same term, be elected, as follows:

Each state shall appoint, in such manner as the Legislature thereof may direct, a number
of electors, equal to the whole number of Senators and Representatives to which the
State may be entitled in the Congress: but no Senator or Representative, or person
holding an office of trust or profit under the United States, shall be appointed an
elector.

The electors shall meet in their respective states, and vote by ballot for two persons, of
whom one at least shall not be an inhabitant of the same state with themselves. And
they shall make a list of all the persons voted for, and of the number of votes for each;
which list they shall sign and certify, and transmit sealed to the seat of the government
of the United States, directed to the President of the Senate. The President of the
Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and House of Representatives, open all the
certificates, and the votes shall then be counted. The person having the greatest
number of votes shall be the President, if such number be a majority of the whole
number of electors appointed; and if there be more than one who have such majority,
and have an equal number of votes, then the House of Representatives shall
immediately choose by ballot one of them for President; and if no person have a
majority, then from the five highest on the list the said House shall in like manner
choose the President. But in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by States,
the representation from each state having one vote; A quorum for this purpose shall
consist of a member or members from two thirds of the states, and a majority of all the
states shall be necessary to a choice. In every case, after the choice of the President, the
person having the greatest number of votes of the electors shall be the Vice President.
But if there should remain two or more who have equal votes, the Senate shall choose
from them by ballot the Vice President.

The Congress may determine the time of choosing the electors, and the day on which
they shall give their votes; which day shall be the same throughout the United States.

No person except a natural born citizen, or a citizen of the United States, at the time of
the adoption of this Constitution, shall be eligible to the office of President; neither shall
any person be eligible to that office who shall not have attained to the age of thirty five
years, and been fourteen Years a resident within the United States.

In case of the removal of the President from office, or of his death, resignation, or
inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve on
the Vice President, and the Congress may by law provide for the case of removal, death,
resignation or inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what officer
shall then act as President, and such officer shall act accordingly, until the disability be
removed, or a President shall be elected.
The President shall, at stated times, receive for his services, a compensation, which shall
neither be increased nor diminished during the period for which he shall have been
elected, and he shall not receive within that period any other emolument from the
United States, or any of them.

Before he enter on the execution of his office, he shall take the following oath or
affirmation:‐‐"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully execute the office of
President of the United States, and will to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and
defend the Constitution of the United States."

Section 2.

The President shall be commander in chief of the Army and Navy of the United States,
and of the militia of the several states, when called into the actual service of the United
States; he may require the opinion, in writing, of the principal officer in each of the
executive departments, upon any subject relating to the duties of their respective
offices, and he shall have power to grant reprieves and pardons for offenses against the
United States, except in cases of impeachment.

He shall have power, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, to make
treaties, provided two thirds of the Senators present concur; and he shall nominate, and
by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint ambassadors, other
public ministers and consuls, judges of the Supreme Court, and all other officers of the
United States, whose appointments are not herein otherwise provided for, and which
shall be established by law: but the Congress may by law vest the appointment of such
inferior officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, in the courts of law, or in
the heads of departments.

The President shall have power to fill up all vacancies that may happen during the recess
of the Senate, by granting commissions which shall expire at the end of their next
session.

Section 3.

He shall from time to time give to the Congress information of the state of the union,
and recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and
expedient; he may, on extraordinary occasions, convene both Houses, or either of them,
and in case of disagreement between them, with respect to the time of adjournment,
he may adjourn them to such time as he shall think proper; he shall receive
ambassadors and other public ministers; he shall take care that the laws be faithfully
executed, and shall commission all the officers of the United States.

Section 4.

The President, Vice President and all civil officers of the United States, shall be removed
from office on impeachment for, and conviction of, treason, bribery, or other high
crimes and misdemeanors.

Article III
Section 1.

The judicial power of the United States, shall be vested in one Supreme Court, and in
such inferior courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish. The
judges, both of the supreme and inferior courts, shall hold their offices during good
behaviour, and shall, at stated times, receive for their services, a compensation, which
shall not be diminished during their continuance in office.

Section 2.

The judicial power shall extend to all cases, in law and equity, arising under this
Constitution, the laws of the United States, and treaties made, or which shall be made,
under their authority;‐‐to all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and
consuls;‐‐to all cases of admiralty and maritime jurisdiction;‐‐to controversies to which
the United States shall be a party;‐‐to controversies between two or more states;‐‐
between a state and citizens of another state;‐‐between citizens of different states;‐‐
between citizens of the same state claiming lands under grants of different states, and
between a state, or the citizens thereof, and foreign states, citizens or subjects.

In all cases affecting ambassadors, other public ministers and consuls, and those in
which a state shall be party, the Supreme Court shall have original jurisdiction. In all the
other cases before mentioned, the Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction, both
as to law and fact, with such exceptions, and under such regulations as the Congress
shall make.

The trial of all crimes, except in cases of impeachment, shall be by jury; and such trial
shall be held in the state where the said crimes shall have been committed; but when
not committed within any state, the trial shall be at such place or places as the Congress
may by law have directed.
Section 3.

Treason against the United States, shall consist only in levying war against them, or in
adhering to their enemies, giving them aid and comfort. No person shall be convicted of
treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses to the same overt act, or on
confession in open court.

The Congress shall have power to declare the punishment of treason, but no attainder
of treason shall work corruption of blood, or forfeiture except during the life of the
person attainted.

Article IV
Section 1.

Full faith and credit shall be given in each state to the public acts, records, and judicial
proceedings of every other state. And the Congress may by general laws prescribe the
manner in which such acts, records, and proceedings shall be proved, and the effect
thereof.

Section 2.

The citizens of each state shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of citizens in
the several states.

A person charged in any state with treason, felony, or other crime, who shall flee from
justice, and be found in another state, shall on demand of the executive authority of the
state from which he fled, be delivered up, to be removed to the state having jurisdiction
of the crime.

No person held to service or labor in one state, under the laws thereof, escaping into
another, shall, in consequence of any law or regulation therein, be discharged from such
service or labor, but shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service or
labor may be due.

Section 3.

New states may be admitted by the Congress into this union; but no new states shall be
formed or erected within the jurisdiction of any other state; nor any state be formed by
the junction of two or more states, or parts of states, without the consent of the
legislatures of the states concerned as well as of the Congress.
The Congress shall have power to dispose of and make all needful rules and regulations
respecting the territory or other property belonging to the United States; and nothing in
this Constitution shall be so construed as to prejudice any claims of the United States, or
of any particular state.

Section 4.

The United States shall guarantee to every state in this union a republican form of
government, and shall protect each of them against invasion; and on application of the
legislature, or of the executive (when the legislature cannot be convened) against
domestic violence.

Article V
The Congress, whenever two thirds of both houses shall deem it necessary, shall
propose amendments to this Constitution, or, on the application of the legislatures of
two thirds of the several states, shall call a convention for proposing amendments,
which, in either case, shall be valid to all intents and purposes, as part of this
Constitution, when ratified by the legislatures of three fourths of the several states, or
by conventions in three fourths thereof, as the one or the other mode of ratification
may be proposed by the Congress; provided that no amendment which may be made
prior to the year one thousand eight hundred and eight shall in any manner affect the
first and fourth clauses in the ninth section of the first article; and that no state, without
its consent, shall be deprived of its equal suffrage in the Senate.

Article VI
All debts contracted and engagements entered into, before the adoption of this
Constitution, shall be as valid against the United States under this Constitution, as under
the Confederation.

This Constitution, and the laws of the United States which shall be made in pursuance
thereof; and all treaties made, or which shall be made, under the authority of the
United States, shall be the supreme law of the land; and the judges in every state shall
be bound thereby, anything in the Constitution or laws of any State to the contrary
notwithstanding.

The Senators and Representatives before mentioned, and the members of the several
state legislatures, and all executive and judicial officers, both of the United States and of
the several states, shall be bound by oath or affirmation, to support this Constitution;
but no religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust
under the United States.

Article VII
The ratification of the conventions of nine states, shall be sufficient for the
establishment of this Constitution between the states so ratifying the same.

Signers
Done in convention by the unanimous consent of the states present the seventeenth
day of September in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty seven
and of the independence of the United States of America the twelfth.

In witness whereof We have hereunto subscribed our Names,

G. Washington‐Presidt. and deputy from Virginia

New Hampshire: John Langdon, Nicholas Gilman

Massachusetts: Nathaniel Gorham, Rufus King

Connecticut: Wm: Saml. Johnson, Roger Sherman

New York: Alexander Hamilton

New Jersey: Wil: Livingston, David Brearly, Wm. Paterson, Jona: Dayton

Pennsylvania: B. Franklin, Thomas Mifflin, Robt. Morris, Geo. Clymer, Thos. FitzSimons, Jared Ingersoll,
James Wilson, Gouv Morris

Delaware: Geo: Read, Gunning Bedford jun, John Dickinson, Richard Bassett, Jaco: Broom

Maryland: James McHenry, Dan of St Thos. Jenifer, Danl Carroll

Virginia: John Blair‐‐, James Madison Jr.

North Carolina: Wm. Blount, Richd. Dobbs Spaight, Hu Williamson

South Carolina: J. Rutledge, Charles Cotesworth Pinckney, Charles Pinckney, Pierce Butler

Georgia: William Few, Abr Baldwin
Amendments
Note: The first ten Amendments were ratified December 15, 1791, and form what is known as the Bill of
Rights.


Amendment 1
Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the
free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of
the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of
grievances.

Amendment 2
A well regulated militia, being necessary to the security of a free state, the right of the
people to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed.

Amendment 3
No soldier shall, in time of peace be quartered in any house, without the consent of the
owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by law.

Amendment 4
The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects,
against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no warrants shall
issue, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly
describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.

Amendment 5
No person shall be held to answer for a capital, or otherwise infamous crime, unless on
a presentment or indictment of a grand jury, except in cases arising in the land or naval
forces, or in the militia, when in actual service in time of war or public danger; nor shall
any person be subject for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy of life or limb;
nor shall be compelled in any criminal case to be a witness against himself, nor be
deprived of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor shall private
property be taken for public use, without just compensation.
Amendment 6
In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial,
by an impartial jury of the state and district wherein the crime shall have been
committed, which district shall have been previously ascertained by law, and to be
informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the
witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor,
and to have the assistance of counsel for his defense.

Amendment 7
In suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the
right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no fact tried by a jury, shall be otherwise
reexamined in any court of the United States, than according to the rules of the
common law.

Amendment 8
Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual
punishments inflicted.

Amendment 9
The enumeration in the Constitution, of certain rights, shall not be construed to deny or
disparage others retained by the people.

Amendment 10
The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it
to the states, are reserved to the states respectively, or to the people.
Amendment 11
(Ratified February 7, 1795)

The judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend to any suit in
law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by citizens of
another state, or by citizens or subjects of any foreign state.

Amendment 12
(Ratified July 27, 1804)

The electors shall meet in their respective states and vote by ballot for President and
Vice‐President, one of whom, at least, shall not be an inhabitant of the same state with
themselves; they shall name in their ballots the person voted for as President, and in
distinct ballots the person voted for as Vice‐President, and they shall make distinct lists
of all persons voted for as President, and of all persons voted for as Vice‐President, and
of the number of votes for each, which lists they shall sign and certify, and transmit
sealed to the seat of the government of the United States, directed to the President of
the Senate;‐‐The President of the Senate shall, in the presence of the Senate and House
of Representatives, open all the certificates and the votes shall then be counted;‐‐the
person having the greatest number of votes for President, shall be the President, if such
number be a majority of the whole number of electors appointed; and if no person have
such majority, then from the persons having the highest numbers not exceeding three
on the list of those voted for as President, the House of Representatives shall choose
immediately, by ballot, the President. But in choosing the President, the votes shall be
taken by states, the representation from each state having one vote; a quorum for this
purpose shall consist of a member or members from two‐thirds of the states, and a
majority of all the states shall be necessary to a choice. And if the House of
Representatives shall not choose a President whenever the right of choice shall devolve
upon them, before the fourth day of March next following, then the Vice‐President shall
act as President, as in the case of the death or other constitutional disability of the
President. The person having the greatest number of votes as Vice‐President, shall be
the Vice‐President, if such number be a majority of the whole number of electors
appointed, and if no person have a majority, then from the two highest numbers on the
list, the Senate shall choose the Vice‐President; a quorum for the purpose shall consist
of two‐thirds of the whole number of Senators, and a majority of the whole number
shall be necessary to a choice. But no person constitutionally ineligible to the office of
President shall be eligible to that of Vice‐President of the United States.

Amendment 13
(Ratified December 6, 1865)

Section 1.

Neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, except as a punishment for crime whereof the
party shall have been duly convicted, shall exist within the United States, or any place
subject to their jurisdiction.

Section 2.

Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.

Amendment 14
(Ratified July 9, 1868)

Section 1.

All persons born or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction
thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the state wherein they reside. No state
shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of
citizens of the United States; nor shall any state deprive any person of life, liberty, or
property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the
equal protection of the laws.

Section 2.

Representatives shall be apportioned among the several states according to their
respective numbers, counting the whole number of persons in each state, excluding
Indians not taxed. But when the right to vote at any election for the choice of electors
for President and Vice President of the United States, Representatives in Congress, the
executive and judicial officers of a state, or the members of the legislature thereof, is
denied to any of the male inhabitants of such state, being twenty‐one years of age, and
citizens of the United States, or in any way abridged, except for participation in
rebellion, or other crime, the basis of representation therein shall be reduced in the
proportion which the number of such male citizens shall bear to the whole number of
male citizens twenty‐one years of age in such state.

Section 3.

No person shall be a Senator or Representative in Congress, or elector of President and
Vice President, or hold any office, civil or military, under the United States, or under any
state, who, having previously taken an oath, as a member of Congress, or as an officer of
the United States, or as a member of any state legislature, or as an executive or judicial
officer of any state, to support the Constitution of the United States, shall have engaged
in insurrection or rebellion against the same, or given aid or comfort to the enemies
thereof. But Congress may by a vote of two‐thirds of each House, remove such
disability.

Section 4.

The validity of the public debt of the United States, authorized by law, including debts
incurred for payment of pensions and bounties for services in suppressing insurrection
or rebellion, shall not be questioned. But neither the United States nor any state shall
assume or pay any debt or obligation incurred in aid of insurrection or rebellion against
the United States, or any claim for the loss or emancipation of any slave; but all such
debts, obligations and claims shall be held illegal and void.

Section 5.

The Congress shall have power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of
this article.

Amendment 15
(Ratified February 3, 1870)

Section 1.

The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the
United States or by any state on account of race, color, or previous condition of
servitude.

Section 2.

The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment 16
(Ratified February 3, 1913)

The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from whatever
source derived, without apportionment among the several states, and without regard to
any census or enumeration.

Amendment 17
(Ratified April 8, 1913)

The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two Senators from each state,
elected by the people thereof, for six years; and each Senator shall have one vote. The
electors in each state shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most
numerous branch of the state legislatures.

When vacancies happen in the representation of any state in the Senate, the executive
authority of such state shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies: Provided, that
the legislature of any state may empower the executive thereof to make temporary
appointments until the people fill the vacancies by election as the legislature may direct.

This amendment shall not be so construed as to affect the election or term of any
Senator chosen before it becomes valid as part of the Constitution.

Amendment 18
(Ratified January 16, 1919. Repealed December 5, 1933 by Amendment 21)

Section 1.

After one year from the ratification of this article the manufacture, sale, or
transportation of intoxicating liquors within, the importation thereof into, or the
exportation thereof from the United States and all territory subject to the jurisdiction
thereof for beverage purposes is hereby prohibited.

Section 2.

The Congress and the several states shall have concurrent power to enforce this article
by appropriate legislation.
Section 3.

This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to
the Constitution by the legislatures of the several states, as provided in the Constitution,
within seven years from the date of the submission hereof to the states by the
Congress.

Amendment 19
(Ratified August 18, 1920)

The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the
United States or by any state on account of sex.

Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.

Amendment 20
(Ratified January 23, 1933)

Section 1.

The terms of the President and Vice President shall end at noon on the 20th day of
January, and the terms of Senators and Representatives at noon on the 3d day of
January, of the years in which such terms would have ended if this article had not been
ratified; and the terms of their successors shall then begin.

Section 2.

The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting shall begin at
noon on the 3d day of January, unless they shall by law appoint a different day.

Section 3.

If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the term of the President, the President elect
shall have died, the Vice President elect shall become President. If a President shall not
have been chosen before the time fixed for the beginning of his term, or if the President
elect shall have failed to qualify, then the Vice President elect shall act as President until
a President shall have qualified; and the Congress may by law provide for the case
wherein neither a President elect nor a Vice President elect shall have qualified,
declaring who shall then act as President, or the manner in which one who is to act shall
be selected, and such person shall act accordingly until a President or Vice President
shall have qualified.

Section 4.

The Congress may by law provide for the case of the death of any of the persons from
whom the House of Representatives may choose a President whenever the right of
choice shall have devolved upon them, and for the case of the death of any of the
persons from whom the Senate may choose a Vice President whenever the right of
choice shall have devolved upon them.

Section 5.

Sections 1 and 2 shall take effect on the 15th day of October following the ratification of
this article.

Section 6.

This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to
the Constitution by the legislatures of three‐fourths of the several states within seven
years from the date of its submission.

Amendment 21
(Ratified December 5, 1933)

Section 1.

The eighteenth article of amendment to the Constitution of the United States is hereby
repealed.

Section 2.

The transportation or importation into any state, territory, or possession of the United
States for delivery or use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of the laws thereof,
is hereby prohibited.

Section 3.

This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to
the Constitution by conventions in the several states, as provided in the Constitution,
within seven years from the date of the submission hereof to the states by the
Congress.
Amendment 22
(Ratified February 27, 1951)

Section 1.

No person shall be elected to the office of the President more than twice, and no person
who has held the office of President, or acted as President, for more than two years of a
term to which some other person was elected President shall be elected to the office of
the President more than once. But this article shall not apply to any person holding the
office of President when this article was proposed by the Congress, and shall not
prevent any person who may be holding the office of President, or acting as President,
during the term within which this article becomes operative from holding the office of
President or acting as President during the remainder of such term.

Section 2.

This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to
the Constitution by the legislatures of three‐fourths of the several states within seven
years from the date of its submission to the states by the Congress.

Amendment 23
(Ratified March 29, 1961)

Section 1.

The District constituting the seat of government of the United States shall appoint in
such manner as the Congress may direct:

A number of electors of President and Vice President equal to the whole number of
Senators and Representatives in Congress to which the District would be entitled if it
were a state, but in no event more than the least populous state; they shall be in
addition to those appointed by the states, but they shall be considered, for the purposes
of the election of President and Vice President, to be electors appointed by a state; and
they shall meet in the District and perform such duties as provided by the twelfth article
of amendment.

Section 2.

The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Amendment 24
(Ratified January 23, 1964)

Section 1.

The right of citizens of the United States to vote in any primary or other election for
President or Vice President, for electors for President or Vice President, or for Senator
or Representative in Congress, shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or
any state by reason of failure to pay any poll tax or other tax.

Section 2.

The Congress shall have power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.

Amendment 25
(Ratified February 10, 1967)

Section 1.

In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or resignation, the
Vice President shall become President.

Section 2.

Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the President shall
nominate a Vice President who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of
both Houses of Congress.

Section 3.

Whenever the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the
Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that he is unable to
discharge the powers and duties of his office, and until he transmits to them a written
declaration to the contrary, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice
President as Acting President.

Section 4.

Whenever the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the
executive departments or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit
to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of
Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the
powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately assume the powers
and duties of the office as Acting President.

Thereafter, when the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate
and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that no inability
exists, he shall resume the powers and duties of his office unless the Vice President and
a majority of either the principal officers of the executive department or of such other
body as Congress may by law provide, transmit within four days to the President pro
tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written
declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office.
Thereupon Congress shall decide the issue, assembling within forty‐eight hours for that
purpose if not in session. If the Congress, within twenty‐one days after receipt of the
latter written declaration, or, if Congress is not in session, within twenty‐one days after
Congress is required to assemble, determines by two‐thirds vote of both Houses that
the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice
President shall continue to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise, the
President shall resume the powers and duties of his office.

Amendment 26
(Ratified July 1, 1971)

Section 1.

The right of citizens of the United States, who are 18 years of age or older, to vote, shall
not be denied or abridged by the United States or any state on account of age.

Section 2.

The Congress shall have the power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.

Amendment 27
(Ratified May 7, 1992)

No law, varying the compensation for the services of the Senators and Representatives,
shall take effect, until an election of Representatives shall have intervened.


For more information on the Constitution and the Charters of Freedom, see
http://archives.gov/exhibits/charters/constitution.html
  THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT MANUAL

               History of Agency Organizational Changes
           Federal Agencies Terminated, Transferred, or Changed in Name Subsequent to March 4, 1933

NOTE: Italicized terms indicate obsolete agencies, organizations, and programs. Refer to the name of the obsolete
entity in this index for more explanation. Some dates prior to March 4, 1933 are included to provide additional
information. Entries are indexed using the most significant term in their titles, or when there is more than one
significant term, the entry uses the first significant term. Thus, Bureau of the Budget is found at Budget, Bureau of
the, and Annual Assay Commission is found at Assay Commission, Annual.


A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P R S T U V W Y

A

Accounting Office, General
        Established by act of June 10, 1921 (42 Stat. 20). Renamed Government Accountability Office by act of
        July 7, 2004 (118 Stat. 814).

ACTION
         Established by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1971 (5 U.S.C. app.), effective July 1, 1971. Reorganized by act of Oct.
         1, 1973 (87 Stat. 405). Functions relating to SCORE and ACT programs transferred to Small Business
         Administration by EO 11871 of July 18, 1975 (40 FR 30915). Functions exercised by the Director of ACTION
         prior to Mar. 31, 1995, transferred to the Corporation for National and Community Service (107 Stat. 888
         and Proclamation 6662 of Apr. 4, 1994 (57 FR 16507)).

Acts of Congress See State, Department of

Administrative Conference of the United States
        Established by act of Aug. 30, 1964 (78 Stat. 615). Terminated by act of Nov. 19, 1995 (109 Stat. 480).
        Reauthorized in 2004, 2008, and 2009 by acts of Oct. 30, 2004 (118 Stat. 2255), July 30, 2008 (122 Stat.
        2914), and March 11, 2009 (123 Stat. 656). Reestablished by Congress on Mar. 3, 2010 upon confirmation
        of chairman.

Advanced Research Projects Agency See Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency

Advisory Board. See other part of title

Advisory Committee. See other part of title

Advisory Council. See other part of title

Aeronautical Board
       Organized in 1916 by agreement of War and Navy Secretaries. Placed under supervision of President by
       military order of July 5, 1939. Dissolved by Secretary of Defense letter of July 27, 1948, and functions
       transferred to Munitions Board and Research and Development Board. Military order of July 5, 1939,
       revoked by military order of Oct. 18, 1948.
Aeronautics, Bureau of
       Established in the Department of the Navy by act of July 12, 1921 (42 Stat. 140). Abolished by act of Aug.
       18, 1959 (73 Stat. 395) and functions transferred to Bureau of Naval Weapons.

Aeronautics, National Advisory Committee for
       Established by act of Mar. 3, 1915 (38 Stat. 930). Terminated by act of July 29, 1958 (72 Stat. 432), and
       functions transferred to National Aeronautics and Space Administration, established by same act.

Aeronautics Administration, Civil See Aeronautics Authority, Civil

Aeronautics Authority, Civil
       Established under act of June 23, 1938 (52 Stat. 973). Renamed Civil Aeronautics Board and Administrator
       transferred to the Department of Commerce by Reorg. Plan Nos. III and IV of 1940, effective June 30,
       1940. Office of Administrator designated Civil Aeronautics Administration by Department Order 52 of Aug.
       29, 1940. Administration transferred to Federal Aviation Agency by act of Aug. 23, 1958 (72 Stat. 810).
       Functions of Board under act of Aug. 23, 1958 (72 Stat. 775), transferred to National Transportation Safety
       Board by act of Oct. 15, 1966 (80 Stat. 931). Functions of Board terminated or transferred— effective in
       part Dec. 31, 1981; in part Jan. 1, 1983; and in part Jan. 1, 1985—by act of Aug. 23, 1958 (92 Stat. 1744).
       Most remaining functions transferred to Secretary of Transportation, remainder to U.S. Postal Service.
       Termination of Board finalized by act of Oct. 4, 1984 (98 Stat. 1703).

Aeronautics Board, Civil See Aeronautics Authority, Civil

Aeronautics Branch
       Established in the Department of Commerce to carry out provisions of act of May 20, 1926 (44 Stat. 568).
       Renamed Bureau of Air Commerce by Secretary’s administrative order of July 1, 1934. Personnel and
       property transferred to Civil Aeronautics Authority by EO 7959 of Aug. 22, 1938.

Aeronautics and Space Council, National
       Established by act of July 29, 1958 (72 Stat. 427). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1973, effective June
       30, 1973.

Aging, Administration on
        Established by Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare on Oct. 1, 1965, to carry out provisions of act
        of July 14, 1965 (79 Stat. 218). Reassigned to Social and Rehabilitation Service by Department
        reorganization of Aug. 15, 1967. Transferred to Office of Assistant Secretary for Human Development by
        Secretary’s order of June 15, 1973. Transferred to the Office of the Secretary of Health and Human
        Services by Secretary’s reorganization notice dated Apr. 15, 1991. Transferred to the Administration for
        Community Living by Department’s notice of April 18, 2012 (77 FR 23250).

Aging, Federal Council on
         Established by Presidential memorandum of Apr. 2, 1956. Reconstituted at Federal level by Presidential
         letter of Mar. 7, 1959, to Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare. Abolished by EO 11022 of May 15,
         1962, which established President’s Council on Aging.

Aging, Office of
        Established by Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare June 2, 1955, as Special Staff on Aging.
        Terminated Sept. 30, 1965, and functions assumed by Administration on Aging.

Aging, President’s Council on
         Established by EO 11022 of May 14, 1962. Terminated by EO 11022, which was revoked by EO 12379 of
         Aug. 17, 1982.

Agricultural Adjustment Administration
         Established by act of May 12, 1933 (48 Stat. 31). Consolidated into Agricultural Conservation and
         Adjustment Administration as Agricultural Adjustment Agency, Department of Agriculture, by EO 9069 of
        Feb. 23, 1942. Grouped with other agencies to form Food Production Administration by EO 9280 of Dec. 5,
        1942. Transferred to War Food Administration by EO 9322 of Mar. 26, 1943. Administration terminated by
        EO 9577 of June 29, 1945, and functions transferred to Secretary of Agriculture. Transfer made
        permanent by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1946, effective July 16, 1946. Functions of Agricultural Adjustment
        Agency consolidated with Production and Marketing Administration by Secretary’s Memorandum 1118 of
        Aug. 18, 1945.

Agricultural Adjustment Agency See Agricultural Adjustment Administration

Agricultural Advisory Commission, National
         Established by EO 10472 of July 20, 1953. Terminated Feb. 4, 1965, on resignation of members.

Agricultural Chemistry and Engineering, Bureau of See Agricultural Engineering, Bureau of

Agricultural Conservation and Adjustment Administration
         Established by EO 9069 of Feb. 23, 1942, consolidating Agricultural Adjustment Agency, Sugar Agency,
         Federal Crop Insurance Corporation, and Soil Conservation Service. Consolidated into Food Production
         Administration by EO 9280 of Dec. 5, 1942.

Agricultural Conservation Program Service
         Established by Secretary of Agriculture Jan. 21, 1953, from part of Production and Marketing
         Administration. Merged with Commodity Stabilization Service by Secretary’s Memorandum 1446, supp. 2,
         of Apr. 19, 1961.

Agricultural Developmental Service, International
         Established by Secretary of Agriculture memorandum of July 12, 1963. Functions and delegations of
         authority transferred to Foreign Agricultural Service by Secretary’s memorandum of Mar. 28, 1969.
         Functions transferred by Secretary to Foreign Economic Development Service Nov. 8, 1969.

Agricultural Economics, Bureau of
         Established by act of May 11, 1931 (42 Stat. 532). Functions transferred to other units of the Department
         of Agriculture, including Consumer and Marketing Service and Agricultural Research Service, under
         Secretary’s Memorandum 1320, supp. 4, of Nov. 2, 1953.

Agricultural Engineering, Bureau of
         Established by act of Feb. 23, 1931 (46 Stat. 1266). Merged with Bureau of Chemistry and Soils by
         Secretarial order of Oct. 16, 1938, to form Bureau of Agricultural Chemistry and Engineering.

Agricultural and Industrial Chemistry, Bureau of
         Bureau of Chemistry and Bureau of Soils, created in 1901, combined into Bureau of Chemistry and Soils by
         act of Jan. 18, 1927 (44 Stat. 976). Soils units transferred to other agencies of the Department of
         Agriculture and remaining units of Bureau of Chemistry and Soils and Bureau of Agricultural Engineering
         consolidated with Bureau of Agricultural Chemistry and Engineering by Secretary’s order of Oct. 16, 1938.
         In February 1943 agricultural engineering research made part of Bureau of Plant Industry, Soils, and
         Agricultural Engineering, and organization for continuing agricultural chemistry research relating to crop
         utilization named Bureau of Agricultural and Industrial Chemistry, in accordance with Research
         Administration Memorandum 5 issued pursuant to EO 9069 of Feb. 23, 1942, and in conformity with
         Secretary’s Memorandums 960 and 986. Functions transferred to Agricultural Research Service under
         Secretary’s Memorandum 1320, supp. 4, of Nov. 2, 1953.

Agricultural Library, National
         Established by Secretary of Agriculture Memorandum 1496 of Mar. 23, 1962. Consolidated into Science
         and Education Administration by Secretary’s order of Jan. 24, 1978. Reestablished as National Agricultural
         Library by Secretary’s order of June 16, 1981. Became part of Agricultural Research Service in 1994 under
         Department of Agriculture reorganization.
Agricultural Marketing Administration
         Established by EO 9069 of Feb. 23, 1942, consolidating Surplus Marketing Administration, Agricultural
         Marketing Service, and Commodity Exchange Administration. Division of Consumers’ Counsel transferred
         to Administration by Secretary’s memorandum of Feb. 28, 1942. Consolidated into Food Distribution
         Administration in the Department of Agriculture by EO 9280 of Dec. 5, 1942.

Agricultural Marketing Service
         Established by the Secretary of Agriculture pursuant to act of June 30, 1939 (53 Stat. 939). Merged into
         Agricultural Marketing Administration by EO 9069 of Feb. 23, 1942. Renamed Consumer and Marketing
         Service by Secretary’s Memorandum 1567, supp. 1, of Feb. 8, 1965. Reestablished as Agricultural
         Marketing Service by the Secretary of Agriculture on Apr. 2, 1972, under authority of Reorg. Plan No. 2 of
         1953 (67 Stat. 633).

Agricultural Relations, Office of Foreign See Agricultural Service, Foreign

Agricultural Research Administration
         Established by EO 9069 of Feb. 23, 1942. Superseded by Agricultural Research Service.

Agricultural Research Service
         Established by Secretary of Agriculture Memorandum 1320, supp. 4, of Nov. 2, 1953. Consolidated into
         Science and Education Administration by Secretary’s order of Jan. 24, 1978. Reestablished as Agricultural
         Research Service by Secretarial order of June 16, 1981.

Agricultural Service, Foreign
         Established by act of June 5, 1930 (46 Stat. 497). Economic research and agricultural attache´ activities
         administered by Foreign Agricultural Service Division, Bureau of Agricultural Economics, until June 29,
         1939. Transferred by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939, from the Department of Agriculture
         to the Department of State. Economic research functions of Division transferred to Office of Foreign
         Agricultural Relations June 30, 1939. Functions of Office transferred to Foreign Agricultural Service Mar.
         10, 1953. Agricultural attache´s placed in the Department of Agriculture by act of Aug. 28, 1954 (68 Stat.
         908).

Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service
         Established June 5, 1961, by the Secretary of Agriculture under authority of revised statutes (5
         U.S.C. 301) and Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1953 (5 U.S.C. app.). Abolished and functions assumed by the Farm
         Service Agency by Secretary’s Memorandum 1010–1 dated Oct. 20, 1994 (59 FR 60297, 60299).

Agricultural Statistics Division
         Transferred to Bureau of Agricultural Economics by EO 9069 of Feb. 23, 1942.

Agriculture, Division of See Farm Products, Division of

Air Commerce, Bureau of See Aeronautics Branch

Air Coordinating Committee
        Established Mar. 27, 1945, by interdepartmental memorandum; formally established by EO 9781 of Sept.
        19, 1946. Terminated by EO 10883 of Aug. 11, 1960, and functions transferred for liquidation to Federal
        Aviation Agency.

Air Force, National Commission on the Structure of the
         Established by act of January 2, 2013 (126 Stat. 1703). Terminated 90 days after submission of final report
         to President on May 1, 2014.

Air Force Management Engineering Agency
         Established in 1975 in Air Force as separate operating unit. Made subordinate unit of Air Force Military
         Personnel Center (formerly Air Force Manpower and Personnel Center) in 1978. Reestablished as separate
         operating unit of Air Force, effective Mar. 1, 1985, by Secretarial order.

Air Force Manpower and Personnel Center
         Certain functions transferred on activation of Air Force Management Engineering Agency, which was
         made separate operating unit from Air Force Manpower and Personnel Center (later Air Force Military
         Personnel Center) in April 1985 by general order of Chief of Staff.

Air Force Medical Service Center
         Renamed Air Force Office of Medical Support by Program Action Directive 85–1 of Mar. 6, 1985, approved
         by Air Force Vice Chief of Staff.

Air Mail, Bureau of
         Established in Interstate Commerce Commission to carry out provisions of act of June 12, 1934 (48 Stat.
         933). Personnel and property transferred to Civil Aeronautics Authority by EO 7959 of Aug. 22, 1938.

Air Patrol, Civil
         Established in Civilian Defense Office by Administrative Order 9 of Dec. 8, 1941. Transferred to
         Department of War as auxiliary of Army Air Forces by EO 9339 of Apr. 29, 1943. Transferred to the
         Department of the Air Force by Secretary of Defense order of May 21, 1948. Established as civilian
         auxiliary of U.S. Air Force by act of May 26, 1948 (62 Stat. 274).

Air Safety Board
         Established by act of June 23, 1938 (52 Stat. 973). Functions transferred to Civil Aeronautics Board by
         Reorg. Plan No. IV of 1940, effective June 30, 1940.

Airways Modernization Board
        Established by act of Aug. 14, 1957 (71 Stat. 349). Transferred to Federal Aviation Agency by EO 10786 of
        Nov. 1, 1958.

Alaska, Board of Road Commissioners for
         Established in Department of War by act of Jan. 27, 1905 (33 Stat. 616). Functions transferred to the
         Department of Interior by act of June 30, 1932 (47 Stat. 446), and delegated to Alaska Road Commission.
         Functions transferred to the Department of Commerce by act of June 29, 1956 (70 Stat. 377), and
         terminated by act of June 25, 1959 (73 Stat. 145).

Alaska, Federal Field Committee for Development Planning in
         Established by EO 11182 of Oct. 2, 1964. Abolished by EO 11608 of July 19, 1971.

Alaska, Federal Reconstruction and Development Planning Commission for
         Established by EO 11150 of Apr. 2, 1964. Abolished by EO 11182 of Oct. 2, 1964, which established
         President’s Review Committee for Development Planning in Alaska and Federal Field Committee for
         Development Planning in Alaska.

Alaska, President’s Review Committee for Development Planning in
         Established by EO 11182 of Oct. 2, 1964. Superseded by Federal Advisory Council on Regional Economic
         Development established by EO 11386 of Dec. 28, 1967. EO 11386 revoked by EO 12553 f Feb. 25, 1986.

Alaska Communication System
        Operational responsibility vested in Secretary of the Army by act of May 26, 1900 (31 Stat. 206).
        Transferred to Secretary of the Air Force by Secretary of Defense reorganization order of May 24, 1962.

Alaska Engineering Commission See Alaska Railroad
Alaska Game Commission
        Established by act of Jan. 13, 1925 (43 Stat. 740). Expired Dec. 31, 1959, pursuant to act of July 7, 1958 (72
        Stat. 339).

Alaska International Rail and Highway Commission
         Established by act of Aug. 1, 1956 (70 Stat. 888). Terminated June 30, 1961, under terms of act.

Alaska Natural Gas Transportation System, Office of Federal Inspector of Construction for the
        Established by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1979 (5 U.S.C. app.), effective July 1, 1979. Abolished by act of Oct. 24,
        1992 (106 Stat. 3128) and functions and authority vested in the Inspector transferred to the Secretary of
        Energy. Functions vested in the Secretary of Energy transferred to the Federal Coordinator, Office of the
        Federal Coordinator for Alaska Natural Gas Transportation Projects by act of Oct. 13, 2004 (118 Stat.
        1261).

Alaska Power Administration
        Established by the Secretary of the Interior in 1967. Transferred to the Department of Energy by act of
        Aug. 4, 1977 (91 Stat. 578).

Alaska Railroad
        Built pursuant to act of Mar. 12, 1914 (38 Stat. 305), which created Alaska Engineering Commission.
        Placed under the Secretary of the Interior by EO 2129 of Jan. 26, 1915, and renamed Alaska Railroad by
        EO 3861 of June 8, 1923. Authority to regulate tariffs granted to Interstate Commerce Commission by EO
        11107 of Apr. 25, 1963. Authority to operate Railroad transferred to the Secretary of Transportation by
        act of Oct. 15, 1966 (80 Stat. 941), effective Apr. 1, 1967. Railroad purchased by State of Alaska, effective
        Jan. 5, 1985.

Alaska Road Commission See Alaska, Board of Road Commissioners for

Alcohol, Bureau of Industrial
         Established by act of May 27, 1930 (46 Stat. 427). Consolidated into Bureau of Internal Revenue by EO
         6166 of June 10, 1933. Consolidation deferred until May 11, 1934, by EO 6639 of Mar. 10, 1934. Order
         also transferred to Internal Revenue Commissioner certain functions imposed on Attorney General by act
         of May 27, 1930, with relation to enforcement of criminal laws concerning intoxicating liquors remaining
         in effect after repeal of 18th amendment; personnel of, and appropriations for, Bureau of Industrial
         Alcohol; and necessary personnel and appropriations of Bureau of Prohibition, Department of Justice.

Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration
         Established by the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare by act of May 21, 1972 (88 Stat. 134).
         Redesignated as an agency of the Public Health Service from the National Institute of Mental Health Sept.
         25, 1973, by the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare. Functions transferred to the Department of
         Health and Human Services by act of Oct. 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 695). Established as an agency of the Public
         Health Service by act of Oct. 27, 1986 (100 Stat. 3207– 106). Renamed Substance Abuse and Mental
         Health Services Administration by act of July 10, 1992 (106 Stat. 325).

Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institute on
        Established within the National Institute of Mental Health, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
        by act of Dec. 31, 1970 (84 Stat. 1848). Removed from within the National Institute of Mental Health and
        made an entity within the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration by act of May 14, 1974
        (88 Stat. 1356). Functions transferred to the Department of Health and Human Services by act of Oct. 17,
        1979 (93 Stat. 695). (See also act of Oct. 27, 1986; 100 Stat. 3207–106.) Abolished by act of July 10, 1992
        (106 Stat. 331). Reestablished by act of July 10, 1992 (106 Stat. 359).

Alcohol Administration, Federal See Alcohol Control Administration, Federal
Alcohol Control Administration, Federal
        Established by EO 6474 of Dec. 4, 1933. Abolished Sept. 24, 1935, on induction into office of
        Administrator, Federal Alcohol Administration, as provided in act of Aug. 29, 1935 (49 Stat. 977).
        Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. III of 1940, effective June 30, 1940, and functions consolidated with activities
        of Internal Revenue Service.

Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms, Bureau of
         Established within Treasury Department by Treasury Order No. 221, eff. July 1, 1972. Transferred to
         Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives in Justice Department by act of Nov. 25, 2002,
         except some authorities, functions, personnel, and assets relating to administration and enforcement of
         certain provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and title 27 of the U.S. Code (116 Stat. 2275).

Alexander Hamilton Bicentennial Commission
       Established by act of Aug. 20, 1954 (68 Stat. 746). Terminated Apr. 30, 1958.

Alien Property Custodian
         Appointed by President Oct. 22, 1917, under authority of act of Oct. 6, 1917 (40 Stat. 415). Office
         transferred to Alien Property Division, Department of Justice, by EO 6694 of May 1, 1934. Powers vested
         in President by act delegated to Attorney General by EO 8136 of May 15, 1939. Authority vested in
         Attorney General by EO’s 6694 and 8136 transferred by EO 9142 of Apr. 21, 1942, to Office of Alien
         Property Custodian, Office for Emergency Management, as provided for by EO 9095 of Mar. 11, 1942.

American Forces Information Service
       Established by Secretary of Defense Directive 5122.10 of March 13, 1989. Dissolved by Secretary’s
       Directive 5105.74 of Dec. 18, 2007 and functions transferred to Defense Media Activity effective Oct. 1,
       2008.

American Republics, Office for Coordination of Commercial and Cultural Relations between the
       Established by Council of National Defense order approved by President Aug. 16, 1940. Succeeded by
       Office of the Coordinator of Inter-American Affairs, Office for Emergency Management, established by EO
       8840 of July 30, 1941. Renamed Office of Inter-American Affairs by EO 9532 of Mar. 23, 1945. Information
       functions transferred to the Department of State by EO 9608 of Aug. 31, 1945. Terminated by EO 9710 of
       Apr. 10, 1946, and functions transferred to the Department of State, functioning as Institute of Inter-
       American Affairs. Transferred to Foreign Operations Administration by Reorg. Plan No. 7, effective Aug. 1,
       1953.

American Revolution Bicentennial Administration See American Revolution Bicentennial Commission

American Revolution Bicentennial Commission
       Established by act of July 4, 1966 (80 Stat. 259). American Revolution Bicentennial Administration
       established by act of Dec. 11, 1973 (87 Stat. 697), to replace Commission. Administration terminated June
       30, 1977, pursuant to terms of act. Certain continuing functions transferred to the Secretary of the
       Interior by EO 12001 of June 29, 1977.

Anacostia Neighborhood Museum
        Renamed Anacostia Museum by Smithsonian Institution announcement of Apr. 3, 1987.

Animal Industry, Bureau of
        Established in the Department of Agriculture by act of May 29, 1884 (23 Stat. 31). Functions transferred to
        Agricultural Research Service by Secretary’s Memorandum 1320, supp. 4, of Nov. 2, 1953.

Apprenticeship, Federal Committee on
        Previously known as Federal Committee on Apprentice Training, established by EO 6750–C of June 27,
        1934. Functioned as part of Division of Labor Standards, Department of Labor, pursuant to act of Aug. 16,
        1937 (50 Stat. 664). Transferred to Office of Administrator, Federal Security Agency, by EO 9139 of Apr.
        18, 1942. Transferred to Bureau of Training, War Manpower Commission, by EO 9247 of Sept. 17, 1942.
         Returned to the Department of Labor by EO 9617 of Sept. 19, 1945.

Archive of Folksong
        Renamed Archive of Folk Culture by administrative order of Deputy Librarian of Congress, effective Sept.
        21, 1981.

Archives Council, National
        Established by act of June 19, 1934 (48 Stat. 1122). Transferred to General Services Administration by act
        of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 378). Terminated on establishment of Federal Records Council by act of Sept. 5,
        1950 (64 Stat. 583).

Archives Establishment, National
        Office of Archivist of the U.S. and National Archives created by act of June 19, 1934 (48 Stat. 1122).
        Transferred to General Services Administration by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 381), and incorporated as
        National Archives and Records Service by order of General Services Administrator, together with functions
        of Division of the Federal Register, National Archives Council, National Historical Publications Commission,
        National Archives Trust Fund Board, Trustees of the Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, and Administrative
        Committee of the Federal Register. Transferred from General Services Administration to National Archives
        and Records Administration by act of Oct. 19, 1984 (98 Stat. 2283), along with certain functions of
        Administrator of General Services transferred to Archivist of the United States, effective Apr. 1, 1985.

Archives and Records Service, National See Archives Establishment, National

Archives Trust Fund Board, National See Archives Establishment, National

Area Redevelopment Administration
        Established May 8, 1961, by the Secretary of Commerce pursuant to act of May 1, 1961 (75 Stat. 47) and
        Reorg. Plan No. 5 of 1950, effective May 24, 1950. Terminated Aug. 31, 1965, by act of June 30, 1965 (79
        Stat. 195). Functions transferred to Economic Development Administration in the Department of
        Commerce by Department Order 4–A, effective Sept. 1, 1965.

Arlington Memorial Amphitheater Commission
        Established by act of Mar. 4, 1921 (41 Stat. 1440). Abolished by act of Sept. 2, 1960 (74 Stat. 739), and
        functions transferred to the Secretary of Defense.

Arlington Memorial Bridge Commission
        Established by act of Mar. 4, 1913 (37 Stat. 885; D.C. Code (1951 ed.) 8–158). Abolished by EO 6166 of
        June 10, 1933, and functions transferred to Office of National Parks, Buildings, and Reservations.

Armed Forces, U.S. Court of Appeals for the See Military Appeals, United States Court of

Armed Forces, Industrial College of the
       Established by Department of War memorandum of April 11, 1946. Renamed Dwight D. Eisenhower
       School for National Security and Resource Strategy by act of Dec. 31, 2011 (125 Stat. 1701).

Armed Forces Medical Library
       Founded in 1836 as Library of the Surgeon General’s Office, U.S. Army. Later known as Army Medical
       Library, then Armed Forces Medical Library in 1952. Personnel and property transferred to National
       Library of Medicine established in Public Health Service by act of Aug. 3, 1956 (70 Stat. 960).

Armed Forces Museum Advisory Board, National
       Established by act of Aug. 30, 1961 (75 Stat. 414). Functions discontinued due to lack of funding.

Armed Forces Staff College
       Renamed Joint Forces Staff College by act of Oct. 30, 2000 (144 Stat. 165A–230).
Armed Services Renegotiation Board
       Established by Secretary of Defense directive of July 19, 1948. Abolished by Secretary’s letter of Jan. 18,
       1952, and functions transferred to Renegotiation Board.

Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, U.S.
       Established by act of Sept. 26, 1961 (75 Stat. 631). Abolished by act of Oct. 21, 1998 (112 Stat. 2681– 767)
       and functions transferred to the Secretary of State.

Army Communications Command, U.S.
       Renamed U.S. Army Information Systems Command by Department General Order No. 26 of July 25,
       1984.

Army Industrial College
        Established in Department of War by General Order No. 7 of February 25, 1924. Renamed The Industrial
        College of the Armed Forces by Department of War memorandum of April 11, 1946.

Army Materiel Development and Readiness Command, U.S.
      Renamed U.S. Army Materiel Command by Department General Order No. 28 of Aug. 15, 1984.

Army and Navy, Joint Board
       Placed under direction of President by military order of July 5, 1939. Abolished Sept. 1, 1947, by joint
       letter of Aug. 20, 1947, to President from Secretaries of War and Navy.

Army and Navy Staff College
       Established Apr. 23, 1943, and operated under Joint Chiefs of Staff. Redesignated the National War
       College, effective July 1, 1946.

Army Specialist Corps
       Established in Department of War by EO 9078 of Feb. 26, 1942. Abolished by the Secretary of War Oct. 31,
       1942, and functions merged into central Officer Procurement Service.

Arts, National Collection of Fine
         Established within Smithsonian Institution by act of Mar. 24, 1937 (50 Stat. 51). Renamed National
         Museum of American Art in Smithsonian Institution by act of Oct. 13, 1980 (94 Stat. 1884).

Arthritis, Diabetes, and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institute of See Arthritis, Metabolism, and
Digestive Diseases, National Institute of

Arthritis, Metabolism, and Digestive Diseases, National Institute of
          Renamed National Institute of Arthritis, Diabetes, and Digestive and Kidney Diseases by Secretary’s order
          of June 15, 1981, pursuant to act of Dec. 19, 1980 (94 Stat. 3184). Renamed National Institute of Diabetes
          and Digestive and Kidney Diseases and National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin
          Diseases by act of Nov. 20, 1985 (99 Stat. 820).

Arts, Advisory Committee on the
         Established under authority of act of Sept. 20, 1961 (75 Stat. 527). Terminated July 1973 by act of Oct. 6,
         1972. Formally abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1977, effective Apr. 1, 1978.

Arts, National Council on the
         Established in Executive Office of the President by act of Sept. 3, 1964 (78 Stat. 905). Transferred to
         National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities by act of Sept. 29, 1965 (79 Stat. 845).

Assay Commission, Annual
        Established initially by act of Apr. 2, 1792 (1 Stat. 250) and by act of Feb. 12, 1873 (Revised Statute sec.
        3647; 17 Stat. 432). Terminated and functions transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury by act of Mar.
        14, 1980 (94 Stat. 98).
Assistance, Bureau of Public
        Renamed Bureau of Family Services by order of the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare, effective
        Jan. 1, 1962. Functions redelegated to Social and Rehabilitation Service by Secretary’s reorganization of
        Aug. 15, 1967.

Assistance Coordinating Committee, Adjustment
        Established by act of Jan. 3, 1975 (88 Stat. 2040). Inactive since 1981.

Assistance Payments Administration Established by
        Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare reorganization of Aug. 15, 1967. Transferred by Secretary’s
        reorganization of Mar. 8, 1977 (42 FR 13262), from Social and Rehabilitation Service to Social Security
        Administration.

Athletics, Interagency Committee on International
         Established by EO 11117 of Aug. 13, 1963. Terminated by EO 11515 of Mar. 13, 1970.

Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission
         Established by act of Sept. 22, 1964 (78 Stat. 990). Terminated Dec. 1, 1970, pursuant to terms of act.

Atomic Energy Commission
        Established by act of Aug. 1, 1946 (60 Stat. 755). Abolished by act of Oct. 11, 1974 (88 Stat. 1237) and
        functions transferred to Energy Research and Development Administration and Nuclear Regulatory
        Commission.

Aviation, Interdepartmental Committee on Civil International
        Established by Presidential letter of June 20, 1935. Terminated on organization of Civil Aeronautics
        Authority.

Aviation Agency, Federal
        Established by act of Aug. 23, 1958 (72 Stat. 731). Transferred to Secretary of Transportation by act of Oct.
        15, 1966 (80 Stat. 931). Agency reestablished as Federal Aviation Administration by act of Jan 12, 1983 (96
        Stat. 2416).

Aviation Commission, Federal
        Established by act of June 12, 1934 (48 Stat. 938). Terminated Feb. 1, 1935 under provisions of act.

Aviation Consumer Protection, Advisory Committee for
        Established by act of Feb. 14, 2012 (126 Stat. 88). Terminated Sept. 30, 2015 under provisions of act.



B                                            TOP OF PAGE

Beltsville Research Center
          Established to operate with other agencies of the Department of Agriculture under Agricultural Research
          Administration. Consolidated into Agricultural Research Administration, the Department of Agriculture, by
          EO 9069 of Feb. 23, 1942.

Bilingual Education and Minority Languages Affairs, Office of
         Renamed Office of English Language Acquisition, Language Enhancement, and Academic Achievement for
         Limited English Proficient Students by act of Jan. 8, 2002 (115 Stat. 2089).

Biobased Products and Bioenergy, Advisory Committee on
        Established by EO 13134 of June 3, 1999. Abolished by EO 13423 of Jan. 24, 2007.
Biobased Products and Bioenergy, Interagency Council on
        Established by EO 13134 of June 3, 1999. Abolished by EO 13423 of Jan. 24, 2007.

Biobased Products and Bioenergy Coordination Office, National
        Established by EO 13134 of June 3, 1999. Abolished by EO 13423 of Jan. 24, 2007.

Biological Service, National
         Established in the Department of the Interior in 1995 by Secretarial order. Transferred to U.S. Geological
         Survey as new Biological Resources Division by Secretarial Order No. 3202, Sept. 30, 1996.

Biological Survey, Bureau of
         Established by Secretary’s order July 1, 1885, as part of Division of Entomology, Department of
         Agriculture. Made separate bureau by act of Apr. 23, 1904 (33 Stat. 276). Transferred to the Department
         of the Interior by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Consolidated with Bureau of Fisheries
         into Fish and Wildlife Service by Reorg. Plan No. III of 1940, effective June 30, 1940.

Biological Survey, National
         Established in the Department of the Interior by Secretarial Order 3173 of Sept. 29, 1993. Renamed
         National Biological Service by Secretarial order in 1995.

Blind, Inc., American Printing House for the
         Established in 1858 as privately owned institution in Louisville, KY. Functions of the Secretary of the
         Treasury, except that relating to perpetual trust funds, transferred to Federal Security Agency by Reorg.
         Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Functions performed by Department of Health, Education, and
         Welfare transferred to the Department of Education.

Blind-made Products, Committee on Purchases of
        Established by act of June 25, 1938 (52 Stat. 1196). Renamed Committee for Purchase of Products and
        Services of the Blind and Other Severely Handicapped by act of June 23, 1971 (85 Stat. 77). Renamed
        Committee for Purchase from the Blind and Other Severely Handicapped by act of July 25, 1974 (88 Stat.
        392). Renamed Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or Severely Disabled by act of Oct.
        29, 1992 (106 Stat. 4486).

Blind and Other Severely Handicapped, Committee for Purchase of Products and Services of the See Blind-made
Products, Committee on Purchases of

Board. See other part of title

Bond and Spirits Division
       Established as Taxes and Penalties Unit, as announced by Assistant to Attorney General in departmental
       circular of May 25, 1934, pursuant to EO 6639 of May 10, 1934. Abolished by administrative order of
       October 1942, and functions transferred to Tax, Claims, and Criminal Divisions, Department of Justice.

Bonneville Power Administration
        Established by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to act of Aug. 20, 1937 (50 Stat. 731). Transferred to
        the Department of Energy by act of Aug. 4, 1977 (91 Stat. 578).

Boston National Historic Sites Commission
        Established by joint resolution of June 16, 1955 (69 Stat. 137). Terminated June 16, 1960, by act of Feb.
        19, 1957 (71 Stat. 4).

Brazil-U.S. Defense Commission, Joint
         Established in May 1942 by agreement between the U.S. and Brazil. Terminated in September 1977 at
         direction of Brazilian Government.
Broadcast Bureau
        Merged with Cable Television Bureau to form Mass Media Bureau by Federal Communications
        Commission order, effective Nov. 30, 1982.

Broadcast Intelligence Service, Foreign See Broadcast Monitoring Service, Foreign

Broadcast Monitoring Service, Foreign
        Established in Federal Communications Commission by Presidential directive of Feb. 26, 1941. Renamed
        Foreign Broadcast Intelligence Service by FCC order of July 28, 1942. Transferred to Department of War by
        Secretarial order of Dec. 30, 1945. Act of May 3, 1945 (59 Stat. 110), provided for liquidation 60 days after
        Japanese armistice. Transferred to Central Intelligence Group Aug. 5, 1946, and renamed Foreign
        Broadcast Information Service.

Budget, Bureau of the
        Established by act of June 10, 1921 (42 Stat. 20), in the Department of the Treasury under immediate
        direction of President. Transferred to Executive Office of the President by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939,
        effective July 1, 1939. Reorganized by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1970, effective July 1, 1970, and renamed
        Office of Management and Budget.

Buildings Administration, Public
         Established as part of Federal Works Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Abolished
         by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 380), and functions transferred to General Services Administration.

Buildings Branch, Public
         Organized in Procurement Division, established in the Department of the Treasury by EO 6166 of June 10,
         1933. Consolidated with Branch of Buildings Management, National Park Service, to form Public Buildings
         Administration, Federal Works Agency, under Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939.

Buildings Commission, Public
         Established by act of July 1, 1916 (39 Stat. 328). Abolished by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933, and functions
         transferred to Office of National Parks, Buildings, and Reservations, Department of the Interior. Functions
         transferred to Public Buildings Administration, Federal Works Agency, under Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939,
         effective July 1, 1939.

Buildings Management, Branch of
         Functions of National Park Service (except those relating to monuments and memorials) consolidated
         with Public Buildings Branch, Procurement Division, Department of the Treasury, to form Public Buildings
         Administration, Federal Works Agency, in accordance with Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939.

Buildings and Public Parks of the National Capital, Office of Public
         Established by act of Feb. 26, 1925 (43 Stat. 983), by consolidation of Office of Public Buildings and
         Grounds under Chief of Engineers, U.S. Army, and Office of Superintendent of State, War, and Navy
         Department Buildings. Abolished by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933, and functions transferred to Office of
         National Parks, Buildings, and Reservations, Department of the Interior.

Bureau. See other part of title

Business, Cabinet Committee on Small
        Established by Presidential letter of May 31, 1956. Dissolved January 1961.

Business Administration, Domestic and International See Business and Defense Services Administration

Business and Defense Services Administration
        Established by the Secretary of Commerce Oct. 1, 1953, and operated under Department Organization
         Order 40–1. Abolished by Department Organization Order 40–1A of Sept. 15, 1970, and functions
         transferred to Bureau of Domestic Commerce. Functions transferred to Domestic and International
         Business Administration, effective Nov. 17, 1972. Administration terminated by Secretary’s order of Dec.
         4, 1977, and functions assumed by Industry and Trade Administration.

Business Economics, Office of
        Established by the Secretary of Commerce Jan. 17, 1946. Renamed Office of Economic Analysis Dec. 1,
        1953. Transferred to the Administration of Social and Economic Statistics along with Bureau of the Census
        and renamed Bureau of Economic Analysis on Jan. 1, 1972.

Business Operations, Bureau of International
        Established by the Secretary of Commerce Aug. 8, 1961, by Departmental Orders 173 and 174. Abolished
        by Departmental Order 182 of Feb. 1, 1963, which established Bureau of International Commerce.
        Functions transferred to Domestic and International Business Administration, effective Nov. 17, 1972.


C                                             TOP OF PAGE

Cable Television Bureau
        Merged with Broadcast Bureau by Federal Communications Commission order to form Mass Media
        Bureau, effective Nov. 30, 1982.

California Debris Commission
         Established by act of Mar. 1, 1893 (27 Stat. 507). Abolished by act of Nov. 17, 1986 (100 Stat. 4229), and
         functions transferred to the Secretary of the Interior.

Canal Zone Government
        Established by act of Aug. 24, 1912 (37 Stat. 561). Abolished by act of Sept. 27, 1979 (93 Stat. 454).

Capital Housing Authority, National
         Established by act of June 12, 1934 (48 Stat. 930). Made agency of District of Columbia government by act
         of Dec. 24, 1973 (87 Stat. 779), effective July 1, 1974.

Capital Park Commission, National
         Established by act of June 6, 1924 (43 Stat. 463). National Capital Park and Planning Commission named
         successor by act of Apr. 30, 1926 (44 Stat. 374). Functions transferred to National Capital Planning
         Commission by act of July 19, 1952 (66 Stat. 781).

Capital Park and Planning Commission, National See Capital Park Commission, National

Capital Regional Planning Council, National
         Established by act of July 19, 1952 (66 Stat. 785). Terminated by Reorg. Plan No. 5 of 1966, effective Sept.
         8, 1966.

Capital Transportation Agency, National
         Established by act of July 14, 1960 (74 Stat 537). Authorized to establish rapid rail transit system by act of
         Sept. 8, 1965 (79 Stat. 663). Functions transferred to Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority by
         EO 11373 of Sept. 20, 1967.

Career Executive Board
        Established by EO 10758 of Mar. 4, 1958. Terminated July 1, 1959, and EO 10758 revoked by EO 10859 of
        Feb. 5, 1960.

Caribbean Organization
        Act of June 30, 1961 (75 Stat. 194), provided for acceptance by President of Agreement for the
         Establishment of the Caribbean Organization, signed at Washington, June 21, 1960. Article III of
         Agreement provided for termination of Caribbean Commission, authorized by Agreement signed Oct. 30,
         1946, on first meeting of Caribbean Council, governing body of Organization. Terminated, effective Dec.
         31, 1965, by resolution adopted by Council.

Cemeteries and Memorials in Europe, National
       Supervision transferred from Department of War to American Battle Monuments Commission by EO 6614
       of Feb. 26, 1934, which transfer was deferred to May 21, 1934, by EO 6690 of Apr. 25, 1934.

Cemeteries and Parks, National
       Department of War functions regarding National Cemeteries and Parks located in continental U.S.
       transferred to Office of National Parks, Buildings, and Reservations, Department of the Interior, by EO
       6166 of June 10, 1933.

Cemetery System, National
       Established in the Veterans’ Administration by act of June 18, 1973 (87 Stat. 75). Redesignated as the
       National Cemetery Administration by act of Nov. 11, 1998 (112 Stat. 3337).

Censorship, Office of
        Established by EO 8985 of Dec. 19, 1941. Terminated by EO 9631 of Sept. 28, 1945.

Censorship Policy Board
        Established by EO 8985 of Dec. 19, 1941. Terminated by EO 9631 of Sept. 28, 1945.

Census, Bureau of the See Census Office

Census Office
        Established temporarily within the Department of the Interior in accordance with act of Mar. 3, 1899.
        Established as a permanent office by act of Mar. 6, 1902. Transferred from the Department of the Interior
        to Department of Commerce and Labor by act of Feb. 14, 1903. Remained in the Department of
        Commerce under provisions of Reorganization Plan No. 5 of May 24, 1950, effective May 24, 1950.

Center. See other part of title

Central. See other part of title

Chemistry and Soils, Bureau of See Agricultural and Industrial Chemistry, Bureau of

Chesapeake Bay Center for Environmental Studies
       Established in 1965 in Annapolis, MD, as part of Smithsonian Institution by Secretarial order. Merged with
       Radiation Biology Laboratory by Secretarial Order July 1, 1983, to form Smithsonian Environmental
       Research Center.

Chief Information Officers Council
         Established by EO 13011 of July 16, 1996. Abolished by EO 13403 of May 12, 2006.

Chief People Officer, Office of the
        Renamed Office of the Chief Human Capital Officer by administrative order 5440.597 of June 16, 2006.

Chief Strategic Officer, Office of the
         Established by the Commissioner of Social Security Dec. 20, 2002. Abolished by Commissioner’s
         memorandum of Jan. 14, 2008, and functions transferred to the Office of the Deputy Commissioner for
         Budget, Finance, and Management.

Child Development, Office of See Children’s Bureau
Children’s Bureau
        Established by act of Apr. 9, 1912 (37 Stat. 79). Placed in the Department of Labor by act of Mar. 4, 1913
        (37 Stat. 737). Transferred, with exception of child labor functions, to Social Security Administration,
        Federal Security Agency, by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1946, effective July 16, 1946. Continued under
        Administration when Agency functions assumed by the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.
        Reassigned to Welfare Administration by Department reorganization of Jan. 28, 1963. Reassigned to Social
        and Rehabilitation Service by Department reorganization of Aug. 15, 1967. Reassigned to Office of Child
        Development by Department reorganization order of Sept. 17, 1969.

Child Health and Human Development, National Institute of
        Established by act of Oct. 17, 1962 (76 Stat. 1072). Renamed Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of
        Child Health and Human Development by act of Dec. 21, 2007 (121 Stat. 1826).

China, U.S. Court for
        Established by act of June 30, 1906 (34 Stat. 814). Transferred to the Department of Justice by EO 6166 of
        June 10, 1933, effective Mar. 2, 1934. Act of June 30, 1906, repealed effective Sept. 1, 1948 (62 Stat. 992).

Christopher Columbus Quincentenary Jubilee Commission
        Established by act of Aug. 7, 1984 (98 Stat. 1257). Terminated pursuant to terms of act.

Civil defense. See Defense

Civil Rights, Commission on
          Established by act of Sept. 9, 1957 (71 Stat. 634). Terminated in 1983 and reestablished by act of Nov. 30,
          1983 (97 Stat. 1301). Renamed United States Commission on Civil Rights by act of Nov. 2, 1994 (108 Stat.
          4683).

Civil Service Commission, U.S.
          Established by act of Jan. 16, 1883 (22 Stat. 403). Redesignated as Merit Systems Protection Board and
          functions transferred to Board and Office of Personnel Management by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1978,
          effective Jan. 1, 1979.

Civil War Centennial Commission
         Established by act of Sept. 7, 1957 (71 Stat. 626). Terminated May 1, 1966, pursuant to terms of act.

Civilian Conservation Corps
          Established by act of June 28, 1937 (50 Stat. 319). Made part of Federal Security Agency by Reorg. Plan
          No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Liquidation provided for by act of July 2, 1942 (56 Stat. 569), not later
          than June 30, 1943.

Civilian Health and Medical Program of the United States, Office of
          Established as field activity in the Department of Defense in 1974. Functions consolidated into the
          TRICARE Management Activity in November 1997 by Defense Reform Initiative.

Civilian Production Administration
          Established by EO 9638 of Oct. 4, 1945. Consolidated with other agencies to form Office of Temporary
          Controls, Office for Emergency Management, by EO 9809 of Dec. 12, 1946.

Civilian Service Awards Board, Distinguished
          Established by EO 10717 of June 27, 1957. Terminated by EO 12014 of Oct. 19, 1977, and functions
          transferred to U.S. Civil Service Commission.

Claims, U.S. Court of
         Established Feb. 25, 1855 (10 Stat. 612). Abolished by act of Apr. 2, 1982 (96 Stat. 26) and trial jurisdiction
         transferred to U.S. Claims Court and appellate functions merged with those of U.S. Court of Customs and
         Patent Appeals to form U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit. U.S. Claims Court renamed U.S.
         Court of Federal Claims by act of Oct. 29, 1992 (106 Stat. 4516).

Claims Commission of the United States, International
        Established in the Department of State by act of Mar. 10, 1950 (64 Stat. 12). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No.
        1 of 1954, effective July 1, 1954, and functions transferred to Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of
        the United States.

Claims Settlement Commission of the United States, Foreign
        Established by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1954, effective July 1, 1954. Transferred to the Department of Justice
        by act of Mar. 14, 1980 (94 Stat. 96).

Clark Sesquicentennial Commission, George Rogers
         Established by Public Resolution 51 (45 Stat. 723). Expenditures ordered administered by the Department
         of the Interior by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933.

Classification Review Committee, Interagency
          Established by EO 11652 of Mar. 8, 1972. Abolished by EO 12065 of June 28, 1978.

Clemency Board, Presidential
       Established in Executive Office of the President by EO 11803 of Sept. 16, 1974. Final recommendations
       submitted to President Sept. 15, 1975, and Board terminated by EO 11878 of Sept. 10, 1975.

Coal Commission, National Bituminous
        Established under authority of act of Aug. 30, 1935 (49 Stat. 992). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939,
        effective July 1, 1939, and functions transferred to Bituminous Coal Division, Department of the Interior.

Coal Consumers’ Counsel, Office of the Bituminous
        Established by act of Apr. 11, 1941 (55 Stat. 134), renewing provisions of act of Apr. 23, 1937 (50 Stat. 72)
        for 2 years to continue functions of Consumers’ Counsel Division, Department of the Interior. Functions
        continued by acts of Apr. 24, 1943 (57 Stat. 68), and May 21, 1943 (57 Stat. 82). Terminated Aug. 24,
        1943.

Coal Division, Bituminous
         Established July 1, 1939, by Secretary of the Interior Order 1394 of June 16, 1939, as amended by Order
         1399, of July 5, 1939, pursuant to act of Apr. 3, 1939 (53 Stat. 562) and Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939,
         effective July 1, 1939. Administered functions vested in National Bituminous Coal Commission by act of
         Apr. 23, 1937 (50 Stat. 72). Act extended to Aug. 24, 1943, on which date it expired.

Coal Labor Board, Bituminous
        Established by act of July 12, 1921 (42 Stat. 140). Abolished as result of U.S. Supreme Court decision, May
        18, 1936, in case of Carter v. Carter Coal Company et al.

Coal Mine Safety Board of Review, Federal
        Established by act of July 16, 1952 (66 Stat. 697). Inactive after Mar. 30, 1970, pursuant to act of Dec. 30,
        1969 (83 Stat. 803).

Coal Mines Administration
        Established by the Secretary of the Interior July 1, 1943. Abolished by Secretary’s Order 1977 of Aug. 16,
        1944, as amended by Order 1982 of Aug. 31, 1944, and functions assumed by Solid Fuels Administration
        for War. Administration reestablished in the Department of the Interior by EO 9728 of May 21, 1946.
        Terminated June 30, 1947, by act of Mar. 27, 1942 (56 Stat. 176).

Coal Research, Office of
        Established in the Department of the Interior by act of July 7, 1960 (74 Stat. 336). Functions transferred to
        Energy Research and Development Administration by act of Oct. 11, 1974 (88 Stat. 1237).
Coalition Provisional Authority, Inspector General of the
         Established by act of Nov. 6, 2003 (117 Stat. 1234). Renamed Special Inspector General for Iraq
         Reconstruction by act of Oct. 28, 2004 (118 Stat. 2078.)

Coalition Provisional Authority, Office of the Inspector General of the
         Established by act of Nov. 6, 2003 (117 Stat. 1234). Renamed Office of the Special Inspector General for
         Iraq Reconstruction by act of Oct. 28, 2004 (118 Stat. 2078).

Coast and Geodetic Survey See Coast Survey

Coast Guard, U.S.
        Established by act of Jan. 28, 1915 (38 Stat. 800) as a military service and branch of the U.S. Armed Forces
        at all times and as a service in Treasury Department, except when operating as a service in the Navy.
        Transferred from the Department of the Treasury to the Department of the Navy by EO 8929 of Nov. 1,
        1941. Returned to the Department of the Treasury by EO 9666 of Dec. 28, 1945. Transferred to the
        Department of Transportation by act of Oct. 15, 1966 (80 Stat. 931). Transferred to Homeland Security
        Department by act of Nov. 25, 2002 (116 Stat. 2249) with related authorities and functions of the
        Secretary of Transportation.

Coast Survey
        Established by act of Feb. 10, 1807 (2 Stat. 413). Redesignated as Coast and Geodetic Survey by act of June
        20, 1878 (20 Stat. 206). Transferred to Environmental Science Services Administration by Reorg. Plan No. 2
        of 1965, effective July 13, 1965.

Codification Board
         Established by act of June 19, 1937 (50 Stat. 304). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1,
         1939, and functions transferred to Division of the Federal Register.

Coinage, Joint Commission on the
        Established by act of July 23, 1965 (79 Stat. 258). Expired Jan. 4, 1975, pursuant to act of Oct. 6, 1972 (88
        Stat. 776).

Columbia Institution for the Instruction of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind
       Established by act of Feb. 16, 1857 (11 Stat. 161). Renamed Columbia Institution for the Instruction of the
       Deaf and Dumb by act of Feb. 23, 1865 (13 Stat. 436). Renamed Columbia Institution for the Deaf by act of
       Mar. 4, 1911 (36 Stat. 1422). Renamed Gallaudet College by act of June 18, 1954 (68 Stat. 265). Functions
       of the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare transferred to the Department of Education by act
       of Oct. 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 695). Renamed Gallaudet University by act of Aug. 4, 1986 (100 Stat. 781).

Commander in Chief, U.S. Fleet, and Chief of Naval Operations
      Duties of two positions prescribed by EO 8984 of Dec. 18, 1941. Combined under one officer by EO 9096
      of Mar. 12, 1942.

Commerce, Bureau of Domestic See Business and Defense Services Administration

Commerce, Bureau of Foreign
      Established by the Secretary of Commerce Oct. 12, 1953, by Reorg. Plan No. 5 of 1950, effective May 24,
      1950. Abolished by department order of Aug. 7, 1961, and functions vested in Bureau of International
      Programs and Bureau of International Business Operations.

Commerce, Bureau of Foreign and Domestic
      Established by act of Aug. 23, 1912 (37 Stat. 407). Functions reassigned to other offices of the Department
      of Commerce due to internal reorganizations.

Commerce, Bureau of International See Business Operations, Bureau of International
Commerce Service, Foreign
      Established in Bureau of Foreign and Domestic Commerce, Department of Commerce, by act of Mar. 3,
      1927 (44 Stat. 1394). Transferred to the Department of State as part of Foreign Service by Reorg. Plan No.
      II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939.

Commercial Company, U.S.
      Established Mar. 27, 1942, as subsidiary of Reconstruction Finance Corporation. Transferred to Office of
      Economic Warfare by EO 9361 of July 15, 1943. Office consolidated into Foreign Economic Administration
      by EO 9380 of Sept. 25, 1943. Functions returned to Corporation by EO 9630 of Sept. 27, 1945, until June
      30, 1948.

Commercial Policy, Executive Committee on
      Established by Presidential letter of Nov. 11, 1933, to Secretary of State. Abolished by EO 9461 of Aug. 7,
      1944.

Commercial Standards Division
      Transferred with Division of Simplified Trade Practice from National Bureau of Standards to the Secretary
      of Commerce by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1946, effective July 16, 1946, to permit reassignment to Office of
      Domestic Commerce. Functions transferred to National Bureau of Standards by the Department of
      Commerce Order 90, June 7, 1963, pursuant to Reorg. Plan No. 5 of 1950, effective May 24, 1950.

Commission. See other part of title

Committee. See also other part of title

Committee Management Secretariat
       Established in the Office of Management and Budget Jan. 5, 1973, by act of Oct. 6, 1972 (86 Stat. 772).
       Functions transferred to General Services Administrator by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1977, effective Apr. 1,
       1978. Reassigned to the National Archives and Records Service by GSA order of Feb. 22, 1979. Transferred
       in Archives to Office of the Federal Register by GSA order of Oct. 14, 1980. Transferred to Office of the
       Archivist of the United States by GSA order of Sept. 24, 1982. Reassigned to Office of Program Initiatives,
       GSA, by GSA order of May 18, 1984. Transferred to Office of Management Services, GSA, by GSA order of
       Apr. 7, 1986.

Commodities Corporation, Federal Surplus See Relief Corporation, Federal Surplus

Commodity Credit Corporation
      Organized by EO 6340 of Oct. 16, 1933, and managed in close affiliation with Reconstruction Finance
      Corporation. Transferred to the Department of Agriculture by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1,
      1939.

Commodity Exchange Administration See Grain Futures Administration

Commodity Exchange Authority See Grain Futures Administration

Commodity Exchange Commission
      Established by act of Sept. 21, 1922 (42 Stat. 998). Functions transferred to Commodity Futures Trading
      Commission by act of Oct. 23, 1974 (88 Stat. 1414).

Commodity Stabilization Service
      Established in the Department of Agriculture Nov. 2, 1953, by Secretary’s Memorandum 1320, supp. 4.
      Renamed Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation Service by Secretary’s Memorandum 1458 of June
      14, 1961, effective June 5, 1961.

Communication Agency, International See Information Agency, U.S.
Communications Program, Joint Tactical
      Combined with Joint Interoperability of the Tactical Command and Control Systems Programs to form
      Joint Tactical Command, Control, and Communications Agency in July 1984, pursuant to DOD Directive
      5154.28.

Community Development Corporation
      Established in the Department of Housing and Urban Development by act of Dec. 31, 1970 (84 Stat. 1791).
      Renamed New Community Development Corporation by act of Aug. 22, 1974 (88 Stat. 725). Abolished
      Nov. 30, 1983, by act of Nov. 30, 1983 (97 Stat. 1238), and functions transferred to Assistant Secretary for
      Community Planning and Development, Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Community Development Corporation, New See Community Development Corporation

Community Facilities, Bureau of
      Established in 1945 by Federal Works Administrator. Transferred by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 380), to
      General Services Administration, functioning as Community Facilities Service. Certain functions transferred
      to various agencies, including the Department of the Interior, Housing and Home Finance Agency, and
      Federal Security Agency by Reorg. Plans Nos. 15, 16, and 17 of 1950, effective May 24, 1950.

Community Facilities Administration
      Established in Housing and Home Finance Agency by Administrator’s Organizational Order 1 of Dec. 23,
      1954. Terminated by act of Sept. 9, 1965 (79 Stat. 667), and functions transferred to the Department of
      Housing and Urban Development.

Community Organization, Committee on
      Established in Office of Defense Health and Welfare Services Sept. 10, 1941. Functions transferred to
      Federal Security Agency by EO 9338 of Apr. 29, 1943.

Community Relations Service
      Established in the Department of Commerce by act of July 2, 1964 (78 Stat. 241). Transferred to the
      Department of Justice by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1966, effective Apr. 22, 1966.

Community Service, Commission on National and
      Established by act of Nov. 16, 1990 (104 Stat. 3168). Abolished by act of Sept. 21, 1993, and functions
      vested in the Board of Directors or the Executive Director prior to Oct. 1, 1993, transferred to the
      Corporation for National and Community Service (107 Stat. 873, 888).

Community Services Administration
      Established by act of Jan. 4, 1975 (88 Stat. 2291) as successor to Office of Economic Opportunity.
      Abolished as independent agency through repeal of act of Aug. 20, 1964 (except titles VIII and X of such
      act) by act of Aug. 13, 1981 (95 Stat. 519).

Community Services Administration
      Functions concerning Legal Services Program transferred to Legal Services Corporation by act of July 25,
      1974 (88 Stat. 389). Renamed Public Services Administration by Health, Education, and Welfare
      departmental notice of Nov. 3, 1976. Transferred to Office of Human Development by Secretary’s
      reorganization of Mar. 8, 1977 (42 FR 13262).

Community War Services
      Established in Office of the Administrator under EO 9338 of Apr. 29, 1943, and Federal Security Agency
      order. Terminated Dec. 31, 1946, by act of July 26, 1946 (60 Stat. 695).

Conciliation Service, U.S.
         Established by act of Mar. 4, 1913 (37 Stat. 738). Functions transferred to Federal Mediation and
         Conciliation Service, established by act of June 23, 1947 (61 Stat. 153).
Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe
        Renamed Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe by EO 13029, Dec. 3, 1996 (61 FR 64591).

Consolidated Farm Service Agency
        Established by act of Oct. 13, 1994 (108 Stat. 3214). Renamed Farm Service Agency (61 FR 1109), effective
        Jan. 16, 1996.

Constitution, Commission on the Bicentennial of the United States
        Established by act of Sept. 29, 1983, as amended (97 Stat. 722). Terminated by act of Dec. 3, 1991 (105
        Stat. 1232).

Constitution, transfer of functions See Statutes at Large and other matters

Construction, Collective Bargaining Committee in
        Established by EO 11849 of Apr. 1, 1975. Inactive since Jan. 7, 1976. Formally abolished by EO 12110 of
        Dec. 28, 1978.

Construction, Equipment and Repairs, Bureau of
        Established in the Department of the Navy by act of Aug. 31, 1842 (5 Stat. 579). Abolished by act of July 5,
        1862 (12 Stat. 510), and functions distributed among Bureau of Equipment and Recruiting, Bureau of
        Construction and Repair, and Bureau of Steam Engineering.

Construction Branch
        Established in the Department of the Treasury in 1853 and designated Bureau of Construction under
        control of Office of Supervising Architect by Sept. 30, 1855. Office incorporated into Public Buildings
        Branch, Procurement Division, by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933. Transferred to Federal Works Agency by
        Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939, when Public Buildings Branch of Procurement Division,
        Bureau of Buildings Management, National Park Service, Department of the Interior—so far as latter
        concerned with operation of public buildings for other departments or agencies—and U.S. Housing
        Corporation consolidated with Public Buildings Administration, Federal Works Agency.

Construction Industry Stabilization Committee
        Established by EO 11588 of Mar. 29, 1971. Abolished by EO 11788 of June 18, 1974.

Construction and Repair, Bureau of
        Established by act of July 5, 1862 (12 Stat. 510), replacing Bureau of Construction, Equipment and Repairs.
        Abolished by act of June 20, 1940 (54 Stat. 492), and functions transferred to Bureau of Ships.

Consumer Advisory Council
      Established by EO 11136 of Jan. 3, 1964. Office of Consumer Affairs established in Executive Office of the
      President by EO 11583 of Feb. 24, 1971, and Council reestablished in Office.

Consumer Affairs, Office of
      Established by EO 11583 of Feb. 24, 1971. Transferred to the Department of Health, Education, and
      Welfare by EO 11702 of Jan. 25, 1973.

Consumer Affairs Staff, National Business Council for
      Established in the Department of Commerce by departmental organization order of Dec. 16, 1971.
      Terminated by departmental order of Dec. 6, 1973, due to lack of funding.

Consumer agencies
      Consumer agencies of National Emergency Council and National Recovery Administration reorganized and
      functions transferred, together with those of Consumers’ Advisory Board, NRA, and Cabinet Committee on
      Price Policy, to Consumers’ Division, NRA, by EO 7120 of July 30, 1935. Division transferred to the
      Department of Labor by EO 7252 of Dec. 21, 1935. Transferred to Division of Consumers’ Counsel,
        Agricultural Adjustment Administration, Department of Agriculture, by Secretary of Labor letter of Aug.
        30, 1938, to the Secretary of Agriculture. Continued as Consumer Standards Project until June 30, 1941.
        Research on consumer standards continued by Consumer Standards Section, Consumers’ Counsel Division,
        transferred to Agricultural Marketing Administration by administrative order of Feb. 28, 1942. Other
        project activities discontinued.

Consumer Cooperative Bank, National
      Established by act of Aug. 20, 1978 (92 Stat. 499). Removed from mixed-ownership, Government
      corporation status by acts of Sept. 13, 1982 (96 Stat. 1062) and Jan. 12, 1983 (96 Stat. 2478).

Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight, Office of
      Established by Health and Human Services Secretary’s notice of April 19, 2010 (75 FR 20364). Abolished by
      Centers for Medicare & Medicaid's notice of Jan. 26, 2011 (76 FR 4703).

Consumer Interests, President’s Committee on
      Established by EO 11136 of Jan. 3, 1964. Abolished by EO 11583 of Feb. 24, 1971.

Consumer and Marketing Service
      Established by the Secretary of Agriculture Feb. 2, 1965. Renamed Agricultural Marketing Service Apr. 2,
      1972, by Secretary’s order and certain functions transferred to Animal and Plant Health Inspection
      Service.

Consumers’ Counsel
      Established in National Bituminous Coal Commission by act of Aug. 30, 1935 (49 Stat. 993). Office
      abolished by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939, and functions transferred to Office of
      Solicitor, Department of the Interior, to function as Consumers’ Counsel Division under direction of the
      Secretary of the Interior. Functions transferred to Office of the Bituminous Coal Consumers’ Counsel June
      1941 by act of Apr. 11, 1941 (55 Stat. 134).

Consumers’ Counsel Division See Consumers’ Counsel

Consumers’ Counsel, Division of
      Established by act of May 12, 1933 (48 Stat. 31). Transferred by order of the Secretary of Agriculture from
      Agricultural Adjustment Administration to supervision of Director of Marketing, effective Feb. 1, 1940.
      Transferred to Agricultural Marketing Administration by administrative order of Feb. 28, 1942.

Consumers’ Problems, Adviser on See Consumer agencies

Contract Committee Government See Contract Compliance, Committee on Government

Contract Compliance, Committee on Government
        Established by EO 10308 of Dec. 3, 1951. Abolished by EO 10479 of Aug. 13, 1953, which established
        successor Government Contract Committee. Abolished by EO 10925 of Mar. 6, 1961, and records and
        property transferred to President’s Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity.

Contract Settlement, Office of
        Established by act of July 1, 1944 (58 Stat. 651). Transferred to Office of War Mobilization and
        Reconversion by act of Oct. 3, 1944 (58 Stat. 785). Terminated by EO 9809 of Dec. 12, 1946, and Reorg.
        Plan No. 1 of 1947, effective July 1, 1947, and functions transferred to the Department of the Treasury.
        Functions transferred to General Services Administration by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 380).

Contract Settlement Advisory Board
        Established by act of July 1, 1944 (58 Stat. 651). Transferred to the Department of the Treasury by EO
        9809 of Dec. 12, 1946, and by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1947, effective July 1, 1947. Transferred to General
        Services Administration by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 380) and established as Contract Review Board.
        Renamed Board of Contract Appeals in 1961 by Administrator’s order. Board established as independent
        entity within General Services Administration Feb. 27, 1979, pursuant to act of Nov. 1, 1978 (92 Stat.
        2383).

Contract Settlement Appeal Board, Office of
        Established by act of July 1, 1944 (58 Stat. 651). Transferred to the Department of the Treasury by EO
        9809 of Dec. 12, 1946, and by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1947, effective July 1, 1947. Functions transferred to
        General Services Administration by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 380). Abolished by act of July 14, 1952
        (66 Stat. 627).

Contract Termination Board, Joint
        Established Nov. 12, 1943, by Director of War Mobilization. Functions assumed by Office of Contract
        Settlement.

Contracts Division, Public
        Established in the Department of Labor to administer act of June 30, 1936 (49 Stat. 2036). Consolidated
        with Wage and Hour Division by Secretarial order of Aug. 21, 1942. Absorbed by Wage and Hour Division
        by Secretarial order of May 1971.

Cooperation Administration, International
       Established by Department of State Delegation of Authority 85 of June 30, 1955, pursuant to EO 10610 of
       May 9, 1955. Abolished by act of Sept. 4, 1961 (75 Stat. 446), and functions redelegated to Agency for
       International Development pursuant to Presidential letter of Sept. 30, 1961, and EO 10973 of Nov. 3,
       1961.

Cooperative State Research, Education, and Extension Service
       Established by act of Oct. 13, 1994 (108 Stat. 3178). Reorganized into the National Institute of Food and
       Agriculture by Secretary's Memorandum 1062-001 of Sept. 17, 2009.

Cooperative State Research Service
       Established in the Department of Agriculture. Incorporated into Cooperative State, Research, Education,
       and Extension Service under Department of Agriculture reorganization in 1995.

Coordinating Council for Comparative Effectiveness Research, Federal
        Established by act of Feb. 17, 2009 (123 Stat 187). Terminated by act of Mar. 23, 2010 (124 Stat. 747).

Coordinating Service, Federal
        Office of Chief Coordinator created by Executive order promulgated in Bureau of the Budget Circular 15,
        July 27, 1921, and duties enlarged by other Bureau circulars. Abolished by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933.
        Contract form, Federal traffic, and surplus property functions transferred to Procurement Division by
        order of the Secretary of the Treasury, approved by President Oct. 9, 1933, issued pursuant to EO’s 6166
        of June 10, 1933, and 6224 of July 27, 1933.

Copyright Arbitration Royalty Panels
        Established by act of Dec. 17, 1993 (107 Stat. 2304). Replaced by Copyright Royalty Judges under act of
        Nov. 30, 2004 (118 Stat. 2351).

Copyright Royalty Tribunal
        Established as an independent entity within the legislative branch by act of Oct. 19, 1976 (90 Stat. 2594).
        Abolished by act of Dec. 17, 1993 (107 Stat. 2304), and functions transferred to copyright arbitration
        royalty panels.

Copyrighted Works, National Commission on New Technological Uses of
        Established by act of Dec. 31, 1974 (88 Stat. 1873). Terminated Sept. 29, 1978, pursuant to terms of act.
Corporate Payments Abroad, Task Force on Questionable
        Established by Presidential memorandum of Mar. 31, 1976. Terminated Dec. 31, 1976, pursuant to terms
        of memorandum.

Corporation, Federal Facilities
        Established in the Department of the Treasury by EO 10539 of June 22, 1954. Placed under supervision of
        Director appointed by General Services Administrator by EO 10720 of July 11, 1957. Dissolved by act of
        Aug. 30, 1961 (75 Stat. 418), and functions transferred to Administrator of General Services.

Corregidor-Bataan Memorial Commission
        Established by act of Aug. 5, 1953 (67 Stat. 366). Terminated May 6, 1967, by act of Dec. 23, 1963 (77 Stat.
        477).

Cost Accounting Standards Board
        Established by act of Aug. 15, 1970 (84 Stat. 796). Terminated Sept. 30, 1980, due to lack of funding.
        Reestablished by act of Nov. 17, 1988 (102 Stat. 4059).

Cost of Living Council
         Established by EO 11615 of Aug. 15, 1971. Abolished by EO 11788 of June 18, 1974.

Cotton Stabilization Corporation
        Organized June 1930 under laws of Delaware by Federal Farm Board pursuant to act of June 15, 1929 (46
        Stat. 11). Certificate of dissolution filed with Corporation Commission of Delaware Dec. 27, 1934.

Cotton Textile Industry, Board of Inquiry for the
        Established by EO 6840 of Sept. 5, 1934. Abolished by EO 6858 of Sept. 26, 1934.

Council. See other part of title

Counterespionage Section
       Transferred from the Criminal Division to the National Security Division by act of Mar. 9, 2006 (120 Stat.
       249).

Counterintelligence, Office of
        Established within the Department of Energy by Public Law 106–65 of Oct. 5, 1999 (113 Stat. 955).
        Merged with Office of Intelligence to form Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence by memorandum
        of March 9, 2006 of the Secretary of Energy.

Counterterrorism Section
        Transferred from the Criminal Division to the National Security Division by act of Mar. 9, 2006 (120 Stat.
        249).

Courts
         Under act of Aug. 7, 1939 (53 Stat. 1223), and revised June 25, 1948 (62 Stat. 913), to provide for
         administration of U.S. courts, administrative jurisdiction over all continental and territorial courts
         transferred to Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, including U.S. courts of appeals and district courts,
         District Court for the Territory of Alaska, U.S. District Court for the District of the Canal Zone, District Court
         of Guam, District Court of the Virgin Islands, Court of Claims, Court of Customs and Patent Appeals, and
         Customs Courts.

Credit Unions, Bureau of Federal See Credit Union System, Federal

Credit Union System, Federal
        Established by act of June 26, 1934 (48 Stat. 1216), to be administered by Farm Credit Administration.
        Transferred to Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation by EO 9148 of Apr. 27, 1942, and Reorg. Plan No. 1
        of 1947, effective July 1, 1947. Functions transferred to Bureau of Federal Credit Unions, Federal Security
        Agency, established by act of June 29, 1948 (62 Stat. 1091). Functions transferred to the Department of
        Health, Education, and Welfare by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1953, effective Apr. 11, 1953. Functions
        transferred to National Credit Union Administration by act of Mar. 10, 1970 (84 Stat. 49).

Crime, National Council on Organized
        Established by EO 11534 of June 4, 1970. Terminated by EO 12110 of Dec. 28, 1978.

Critical Materials Council, National
          Established within Executive Office of the President by act of July 31, 1984 (98 Stat. 1250). Office
          abolished in September 1993 due to lack of funding and functions transferred to the Office of Science and
          Technology Policy.

Crop Insurance Corporation, Federal
        Established by act of Feb. 16, 1938. Consolidated with the Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation
        Service and Farmers’ Home Administration in 1995 to form the Farm Service Agency pursuant to act of
        Oct. 13, 1994 (108 Stat. 3178).

Crop Production Loan Office
        Authorized by Presidential letters of July 26, 1918, and July 26, 1919, to the Secretary of Agriculture.
        Further authorized by act of Mar. 3, 1921 (41 Stat. 1347). Transferred to Farm Credit Administration by EO
        6084 of Mar. 27, 1933.

Cultural Center, National
         Established in Smithsonian Institution by act of Sept. 2, 1958 (72 Stat. 1698). Renamed John F. Kennedy
         Center for the Performing Arts by act of Jan. 23, 1964 (78 Stat. 4).

Customs, Bureau of
       Established under sec. 1 of act of Mar. 3, 1927 (19 U.S.C. 2071) in Treasury Department. Functions relating
       to award of numbers to undocumented vessels, vested in Collectors of Customs, transferred to
       Commandant of Coast Guard by EO 9083 of Feb. 27, 1942. Transfer made permanent by Reorg. Plan No. 3
       of 1946, effective July 16, 1946. Redesignated U.S. Customs Service by the Department of the Treasury
       Order 165–23 of Apr. 4, 1973. Functions transferred to and agency established within Homeland Security
       Department by act of Nov. 25, 2002 (116 Stat. 2178).

Customs Court, U.S.
       Formerly established as Board of General Appraisers by act of June 10, 1890 (26 Stat. 136). Renamed U.S.
       Customs Court by act of May 26, 1926 (44 Stat. 669). Renamed U.S. Court of International Trade by act of
       Oct. 10, 1980 (94 Stat. 1727).

Customs and Patent Appeals, U.S. Court of
       Established by act of Mar. 2, 1929 (45 Stat. 1475). Abolished by act of Apr. 2, 1982 (96 Stat. 28) and
       functions merged with appellate functions of U.S. Court of Claims to form U.S. Court of Appeals for the
       Federal Circuit.


D                                           TOP OF PAGE

Dairy Industry, Bureau of
         Bureau of Dairying established in the Department of Agriculture by act of May 29, 1924 (43 Stat. 243).
         Bureau of Dairy Industry designation first appeared in act of May 11, 1926 (44 Stat. 499). Functions
         transferred to Agricultural Research Service by Secretary’s Memorandum 1320, supp. 4, of Nov. 2, 1953.

Deepwater Horizon Oil Spill and Offshore Drilling, The National Commission on the
       Established by EO 13543 of May 21, 2010. Terminated March 11, 2011 pursuant to terms of order.
Defense, Advisory Commission to the Council of National See Defense, Council of National

Defense, Council of National
        Established by act of Aug. 29, 1916 (39 Stat. 649). Advisory Commission—composed of Advisers on
        Industrial Production, Industrial Materials, Employment, Farm Products, Price Stabilization,
        Transportation, and Consumer Protection—established by Council pursuant to act and approved by
        President May 29, 1940. Commission decentralized by merging divisions with newly created national
        defense units. Agencies evolved from Commission, except Office of Agricultural War Relations and Office
        of Price Administration, made units of Office for Emergency Management. Council inactive.

Defense, Office of Civilian
        Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 8757 of May 20, 1941. Terminated by EO 9562 of
        June 4, 1945.

Defense Administration, Federal Civil
        Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 10186 of Dec. 1, 1950; subsequently established
        as independent agency by act of Jan. 12, 1951 (64 Stat. 1245). Functions transferred to Office of Defense
        and Civilian Mobilization by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1958, effective July 1, 1958.

Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
        Established as a separate agency of the Department of Defense by DOD Directive 5105.41 dated July 25,
        1978. Renamed Advanced Research Projects Agency by order of the Secretary of Defense dated July 13,
        1993. Reestablished by act of Feb. 10, 1996 (110 Stat. 406).

Defense Advisory Council, Civil
        Established by act of Jan. 12, 1951 (64 Stat. 1245). Transferred to Office of Defense and Civilian
        Mobilization by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1958, effective July 1, 1958.

Defense Aid Reports, Division of
        Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 8751 of May 2, 1941. Abolished by EO 8926 of
        Oct. 28, 1941, which created Office of Lend-Lease Administration.

Defense Air Transportation Administration
        Established Nov. 12, 1951, by Department of Commerce Order 137. Abolished by Amendment 3 of Sept.
        13, 1962, to Department Order 128 (revised) and functions transferred to Office of the Under Secretary of
        Commerce for Transportation.

Defense Atomic Support Agency
        Renamed Defense Nuclear Agency by General Order No. 1 of July 1, 1971.

Defense Audiovisual Agency
        Established by DOD Directive 5040.1 of June 12, 1979. Abolished by Secretary’s memorandum of Apr. 19,
        1985, and functions assigned to the military departments.

Defense Audit Service
        Established by DOD Directive of Oct. 14, 1976. Abolished by Deputy Secretary’s memorandum of Nov. 2,
        1982, and functions transferred to Office of the Inspector General.

Defense Civil Preparedness Agency
        Functions transferred from the Department of Defense to the Federal Emergency Management Agency by
        EO 12148 of July 20, 1979.

Defense and Civilian Mobilization Board
        Established by EO 10773 of July 1, 1938. Redesignated Civil and Defense Mobilization Board by act of Aug.
        26, 1958 (72 Stat. 861). Abolished by Office of Emergency Preparedness Circular 1200.1 of Oct. 31, 1962.

Defense Communications Agency
        Established by direction of the Secretary of Defense on May 12, 1960. Renamed Defense Information
        Systems Agency by DOD Directive 5105.19 dated June 25, 1991.

Defense Communications Board
        Established by EO 8546 of Sept. 24, 1940. Renamed Board of War Communications by EO 9183 of June 15,
        1942. Abolished by EO 9831 of Feb. 24, 1947, and property transferred to Federal Communications
        Commission.

Defense Coordinating Board, Civil
        Established by EO 10611 of May 11, 1955. EO 10611 revoked by EO 10773 of July 1, 1958.

Defense Electric Power Administration
        Established by Order 2605 of Dec. 4, 1950 of the Secretary of the Interior. Abolished June 30, 1953, by
        Secretary’s Order 2721 of May 7, 1953. Reestablished by Departmental Manual Release No. 253 of Aug. 6,
        1959. Terminated by Departmental Manual Release No. 1050 of Jan. 10, 1977.

Defense Fisheries Administration
        Established by Order 2605 of Dec. 4, 1950 of the Secretary of the Interior. Abolished June 30, 1953, by
        Secretary’s Order 2722 of May 13, 1953.

Defense Health and Welfare Services, Office of
        Established by EO 8890 of Sept. 3, 1941. Terminated by EO 9338 of Apr. 29, 1943, and functions
        transferred to Federal Security Agency.

Defense Homes Corporation
        Incorporated pursuant to President’s letter to the Secretary of the Treasury of Oct. 18, 1940. Transferred
        to Federal Public Housing Authority by EO 9070 of Feb. 24, 1942.

Defense Housing Coordinator
        Office established July 21, 1940, by Advisory Commission to Council of National Defense. Functions
        transferred to Division of Defense Housing Coordination, Office for Emergency Management, by EO 8632
        of Jan. 11, 1941.

Defense Housing Division, Mutual Ownership
        Established by Administrator of Federal Works Agency under provisions of act of June 28, 1941 (55 Stat.
        361). Functions transferred to Federal Public Housing Authority, National Housing Agency, by EO 9070 of
        Feb. 24, 1942.

Defense Intelligence College
        Established by DOD Directive 3305.1 of January 28, 1983. Renamed Joint Military Intelligence College by
        DOD Directive 3305.1 of January 14, 1998. See also Defense Intelligence School.

Defense Intelligence School
        Established by DOD Directive 5105.25 of November 2, 1962. Renamed Defense Intelligence College by
        DOD Directive 3305.1 of January 28, 1983.

Defense Investigative Service
        Established by the Secretary of Defense Jan. 1, 1972. Renamed Defense Security Service in November
        1997 by Defense Reform Initiative.
Defense Manpower Administration
        Established by the Secretary of Labor by General Order 48, pursuant to EO 10161 of Sept. 9, 1950, and
        Reorg. Plan No. 6 of 1950, effective May 24, 1950. General Order 48 revoked by General Order 63 of Aug.
        25, 1953, which established Office of Manpower Administration in Department.

Defense Mapping Agency
        Established as a the Department of Defense agency in 1972. Functions transferred to the National
        Imagery and Mapping Agency by act of Sept. 23, 1996 (110 Stat. 2677).

Defense Materials Procurement Agency
        Established by EO 10281 of Aug. 28, 1951. Abolished by EO 10480 of Aug. 14, 1953, and functions
        transferred to General Services Administration.

Defense Materials Service See Emergency Procurement Service

Defense Materiel Readiness Board
        Established by act of Jan. 28, 2008 (122 Stat. 260). Abolished by act of Jan. 2, 2013 (126 Stat. 2362).

Defense Mediation Board, National
        Established by EO 8716 of Mar. 19, 1941. Terminated on creation of National War Labor Board, Office for
        Emergency Management by EO 9017 of Jan. 12, 1942. Transferred to the Department of Labor by EO 9617
        of Sept. 19, 1945. Board terminated by EO 9672 of Dec. 31, 1945, which established National Wage
        Stabilization Board in the Department of Labor. Terminated by EO 9809 of Dec. 12, 1946, and functions
        transferred to the Secretary of Labor and the Department of the Treasury, effective Feb. 24, 1947.

Defense Medical Programs Activity
        Functions consolidated into the TRICARE Management Activity in November 1997 by Defense Reform
        Initiative.

Defense Minerals Administration
        Established by Order 2605 of Dec. 4, 1950 of the Secretary of the Interior. Functions assigned to Defense
        Materials Procurement Agency. Functions of exploration for critical and strategic minerals redelegated to
        the Secretary of the Interior and administered by Defense Minerals Exploration Administration by
        Secretary’s Order 2726 of June 30, 1953. Termination of program announced by Secretary June 6, 1958.
        Certain activities continued in Office of Minerals Exploration, Department of the Interior.

Defense Minerals Exploration Administration See Defense Minerals Administration

Defense Mobilization, Office of
        Established in Executive Office of the President by EO 10193 of Dec. 16, 1950. Superseded by Office of
        Defense Mobilization established by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1953, effective June 12, 1953, which assumed
        functions of former Office, National Security Resources Board, and critical materials stockpiling functions
        of Army, Navy, Air Force, and Interior Secretaries and of Army and Navy Munitions Board. Consolidated
        with Federal Civil Defense Administration into Office of Defense and Civilian Mobilization by Reorg. Plan
        No. 1 of 1958, effective July 1, 1958, and offices of Director and Deputy Director terminated.

Defense Mobilization Board
        Established by EO 10200 of Jan. 3, 1951, and restated in EO 10480 of Aug. 14, 1953. Terminated by EO
        10773 of July 1, 1958.

Defense Nuclear Agency
        Established in 1971. Renamed Defense Special Weapons Agency by DOD Directive 5105.31 of June 14,
        1995.
Defense Nuclear Counterintelligence, Office of
        Established by act of Oct. 5, 1999 (113 Stat. 960). Abolished by act of Oct. 17, 2006 (120 Stat. 2507) and
        functions transferred to the Secretary of Energy.

Defense Plant Corporation
        Established by act of June 25, 1940 (54 Stat. 572). Transferred from Federal Loan Agency to the
        Department of Commerce by EO 9071 of Feb. 24, 1942. Returned to Federal Loan Agency pursuant to act
        of Feb. 24, 1945 (59 Stat. 5). Dissolved by act of June 30, 1945 (59 Stat. 310), and functions transferred to
        Reconstruction Finance Corporation.

Defense Plants Administration, Small
        Established by act of July 31, 1951 (65 Stat. 131). Terminated July 31, 1953, by act of June 30, 1953 (67
        Stat. 131). Functions relating to liquidation transferred to Small Business Administration by EO 10504 of
        Dec. 1, 1953.

Defense Production Administration
        Established by EO 10200 of Jan. 3, 1951. Terminated by EO 10433 of Feb. 4, 1953, and functions
        transferred to Office of Defense Mobilization.

Defense Property Disposal Service
        Renamed Defense Reutilization and Marketing Service by Defense Logistics Agency General Order 10–85,
        effective July 1, 1985.

Defense Prisoner of War/Missing in Action Office
        Established by DOD Directive 5110.10, July 16, 1993. Renamed Defense Prisoner of War/Missing
        Personnel Office by Secretary of Defense memorandum of May 30, 1996.

Defense Public Works Division
        Established in Public Works Administration. Transferred to Office of Federal Works Administrator by
        administrative order of July 16, 1941. Abolished by administrative order of Mar. 6, 1942, and functions
        transferred to Office of Chief Engineer, Federal Works Agency.

Defense Purchases, Office for the Coordination of National
        Established by order of Council of National Defense, approved June 27, 1940. Order revoked Jan. 7, 1941,
        and records transferred to Executive Office of the President.

Defense Research Committee, National
        Established June 27, 1940, by order of Council of National Defense. Abolished by order of Council June 28,
        1941, and reestablished in Office of Scientific Research and Development by EO 8807 of June 28, 1941.
        Office terminated by EO 9913 of Dec. 26, 1947, and property and records transferred to National Military
        Establishment.

Defense Resources Committee
        Established by Administrative Order 1496 of June 15, 1940. Replaced by War Resources Council by
        Administrative Order 1636 of Jan. 14, 1942. Inactive.

Defense Security Assistance Agency
        Established on Sept. 1, 1971. Renamed the Defense Security Cooperation Agency by DOD Directive
        5105.38.

Defense Solid Fuels Administration
        Established by Order 2605 of Dec. 4, 1950 of the Secretary of the Interior. Abolished June 29, 1954, by
        Secretary’s Order 2764.

Defense Special Weapons Agency
        Established by General Order No. 1 of July 1, 1971. Functions transferred to the Defense Threat Reduction
         Agency by DOD Directive 5105.62 of Sept. 30, 1998.

Defense Stockpile Manager, National
        Established by act of Nov. 14, 1986 (100 Stat. 4067). Functions transferred from the Administrator of
        General Services to the Secretary of Defense by EO 12626 of Feb. 25, 1988.

Defense Supplies Corporation
        Established under act of June 25, 1940 (54 Stat. 572). Transferred from Federal Loan Agency to the
        Department of Commerce by EO 9071 of Feb. 24, 1942. Returned to Federal Loan Agency by act of Feb.
        24, 1945 (59 Stat. 5). Dissolved by act of June 30, 1945 (59 Stat. 310), and functions transferred to
        Reconstruction Finance Corporation.

Defense Supply Agency
        Renamed Defense Logistics Agency by DOD Directive 5105.22 of Jan. 22, 1977.

Defense Supply Management Agency
        Established in the Department of Defense by act of July 1, 1952 (66 Stat. 318). Abolished by Reorg. Plan
        No. 6 of 1953, effective June 30, 1953, and functions transferred to the Secretary of Defense.

Defense Technology Security Administration
        Established on May 10, 1985. Functions transferred to the Defense Threat Reduction Agency by DOD
        Directive 5105.62 of Sept. 30, 1998.

Defense Transport Administration
        Established Oct. 4, 1950, by order of Commissioner of Interstate Commerce Commission in charge of
        Bureau of Service, pursuant to EO 10161 of Sept. 9, 1950. Terminated by DTA Commissioner’s order,
        effective July 1, 1955, and functions transferred to Bureau of Safety and Service, Interstate Commerce
        Commission.

Defense Transportation, Office of
        Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 8989 of Dec. 18, 1941. Terminated by EO 10065
        of July 6, 1949.

Deficit Reduction, Joint Select Committee on
         Established by act of Aug. 2, 2011 (125 Stat. 259). Terminated January 31, 2012, pursuant to the act (125
         Stat. 263).

Director. See other part of title

Disarmament Administration, U.S.
       Established in the Department of State. Functions transferred to U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament
       Agency by act of Sept. 26, 1961 (75 Stat. 638).

Disarmament Problems, President’s Special Committee on
       Established by President Aug. 5, 1955. Dissolved in February 1958.

Disaster Assistance Administration, Federal
         Functions transferred from the Department of Housing and Urban Development to the Federal
         Emergency Management Agency by EO 12148 of July 20, 1979.

Disaster Loan Corporation
         Grouped with other agencies to form Federal Loan Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1,
         1939. Transferred to the Department of Commerce by EO 9071 of Feb. 24, 1942. Returned to Federal
         Loan Agency by act of Feb. 24, 1945 (59 Stat. 5). Dissolved by act of June 30, 1945 (59 Stat. 310), and
         functions transferred to Reconstruction Finance Corporation.
Disease Control, Center for
        Established within the Public Health Service by the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare on July 1,
        1973. Renamed Centers for Disease Control by Health and Human Services Secretary’s notice of Oct. 1,
        1980 (45 FR 67772). Renamed Centers for Disease Control and Prevention by act of Oct. 27, 1992 (106
        Stat. 3504).

Displaced Persons Commission
        Established by act of June 25, 1948 (62 Stat. 1009). Terminated Aug. 31, 1952, pursuant to terms of act.

Dispute Resolution, Office of
        Transferred to the Office of Legal Policy by the Attorney General on August 24, 2011.

District of Columbia
          Established by acts of July 16, 1790 (1 Stat. 130), and Mar. 3, 1791. Corporations of Washington and
          Georgetown and levy court of Washington County abolished in favor of territorial form of government in
          1871. Permanent commission government established July 1, 1878. District Government created as
          municipal corporation by act of June 11, 1878 (20 Stat. 102). Treated as branch of U.S. Government by
          various statutory enactments of Congress. District Government altered by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1967,
          effective Nov. 3, 1967. Charter for local government in District of Columbia provided by act of Dec. 24,
          1973 (87 Stat. 774).

District of Columbia, Highway Commission of the
          Established by act of Mar. 2, 1893 (27 Stat 532). National Capital Park and Planning Commission named
          successor by act of Apr. 30, 1926 (44 Stat. 374). Functions transferred to National Capital Planning
          Commission by act of July 19, 1952 (66 Stat. 781).

District of Columbia, Reform-School of the
          Established by act of May 3, 1876 (19 Stat. 49). Renamed National Training School for Boys by act of May
          27, 1908 (35 Stat. 380). Transferred to the Department of Justice by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective
          July 1, 1939, to be administered by Director of Bureau of Prisons.

District of Columbia Auditorium Commission
          Established by act of July 1, 1955 (69 Stat. 243). Final report submitted to Congress Jan. 31, 1957,
          pursuant to act of Apr. 27, 1956 (70 Stat. 115).

District of Columbia Redevelopment Land Agency
          Established by act of Aug. 2, 1946 (60 Stat. 790). Agency established as instrumentality of District
          Government by act of Dec. 24, 1973 (87 Stat. 774), effective July 1, 1974.

District of Columbia-Virginia Boundary Commission
          Established by act of Mar. 21, 1934 (48 Stat. 453). Terminated Dec. 1, 1935, to which date it had been
          extended by Public Resolution 9 (49 Stat. 67).

Division. See other part of title

Domestic Council
       Established in Executive Office of the President by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1970, effective July 1, 1970.
       Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1977, effective Mar. 26, 1978, and functions transferred to President
       and staff designated as Domestic Policy Staff. Pursuant to EO 12045 of Mar. 27, 1978, Staff assisted
       President in performance of transferred functions. Renamed Office of Policy Development in 1981.
       Abolished in February 1992 by President’s reorganizational statement, effective May 1992.

Domestic Policy Staff See Domestic Council

Dominican Customs Receivership
        Transferred from Division of Territories and Island Possessions, Department of the Interior, to the
        Department of State by Reorg. Plan No. IV of 1940, effective June 30, 1940.

Drug Abuse, National Institute on
       Established within the National Institute of Mental Health, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
       by act of Mar. 21, 1972 (86 Stat. 85). Removed from within the National Institute of Mental Health and
       made an entity within the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration by act of May 14, 1974
       (88 Stat. 136). Functions transferred to the Department of Health and Human Services by act of Oct. 17,
       1979 (93 Stat. 695). (See also act of Oct. 27, 1986; 100 Stat. 3207–106.) Abolished by act of July 10, 1992
       (106 Stat. 331). Reestablished by act of July 10, 1992 (106 Stat. 361).

Drug Abuse, President’s Advisory Commission on Narcotic and
       Established by EO 11076 of Jan. 15, 1963. Terminated November 1963 under terms of order.

Drug Abuse Control, Bureau of
       Established in Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health and Human Services, to carry out
       functions of act of July 15, 1965 (79 Stat. 226). Functions transferred to Bureau of Narcotics and
       Dangerous Drugs, Department of Justice, by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1968, effective Apr. 8, 1968. Abolished
       by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1973, effective July 1, 1973, and functions transferred to Drug Enforcement
       Administration.

Drug Abuse Law Enforcement, Office of
       Established by EO 11641 of Jan. 28, 1972. Terminated by EO 11727 of July 6, 1973, and functions
       transferred to Drug Enforcement Administration.

Drug Abuse Policy, Office of
       Established in Executive Office of the President by act of Mar. 19, 1976 (90 Stat. 242). Abolished by Reorg.
       Plan No. 1 of 1977, effective Mar. 26, 1978, and functions transferred to President.

Drug-Free Schools, Office of Safe
        Abolished by the Secretary of Education on Sept. 25, 2011. Programs transferred to Office of Safe and
        Healthy Students within the Office of Elementary and Secondary Education.

Drug Abuse Prevention, Treatment, and Rehabilitation, Cabinet Committee on
       Established Apr. 27, 1976, by Presidential announcement. Terminated by Presidential memorandum of
       Mar. 14, 1977.

Drug Intelligence Center, National
        Abolished on May 2, 2012. Functions performed by National Drug Intelligence Center ordered transferred
        to such division in the Department of Justice as deemed desirable by Attorney General.

Drug Law Enforcement, Cabinet Committee for
        Established Apr. 27, 1976, pursuant to Presidential message to Congress of Apr. 27, 1976. Abolished by
        Presidential memorandum of Mar. 14, 1977.

Drug Law Enforcement, Cabinet Committee for
        Established Apr. 27, 1976, pursuant to Presidential message to Congress of Apr. 27, 1976. Abolished by
        Presidential memorandum of Mar. 14, 1977.

Drugs, Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous See Drug Abuse Control, Bureau of

Drugs and Biologics, National Center for
        Renamed Center for Drugs and Biologics by Food and Drug Administration notice of Mar. 9, 1984 (49 FR
        10166). Reestablished as Center for Drug Evaluation and Research and Center for Biologics Evaluation and
        Research by Secretary’s notice of Oct. 6, 1987 (52 FR 38275).
Drunk Driving, Presidential Commission on
        Established by EO 12358 of Apr. 14, 1982. Terminated Dec. 31, 1983, by EO 12415 of Apr. 5, 1983.

Dryden Research Center, Hugh L.
        Formerly separate field installation of National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Made component
        of Ames Research Center by NASA Management Instruction 1107.5A of Sept. 3, 1981.



E                                            TOP OF PAGE

Economic Administration, Foreign
       Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 9380 of Sept. 25, 1943. Functions of Office of
       Lend-Lease Administration, Office of Foreign Relief and Rehabilitation Operations, Office of Economic
       Warfare (together with U.S. Commercial Company, Rubber Development Corporation, Petroleum Reserves
       Corporation, and Export-Import Bank of Washington and functions transferred thereto by EO 9361 of July
       15, 1943), and foreign economic operations of Office of Foreign Economic Coordination transferred to
       Administration. Foreign procurement activities of War Food Administration and Commodity Credit
       Corporation transferred by EO 9385 of Oct. 6, 1943. Terminated by EO 9630 of Sept. 27, 1945, and
       functions redistributed to the Departments of State, Commerce, and Agriculture and the Reconstruction
       Finance Corporation.

Economic Analysis, Office of See Business Economics, Office of

Economic Cooperation Administration
       Established by act of Apr. 3, 1948 (62 Stat. 138). Abolished by act of Oct. 10, 1951 (65 Stat. 373), and
       functions transferred to Mutual Security Agency pursuant to EO 10300 of Nov. 1, 1951.

Economic Coordination, Office of Foreign See Board of Economic Operations

Economic Defense Board
       Established by EO 8839 of July 30, 1941. Renamed Board of Economic Warfare by EO 8982 of Dec. 17,
       1941. Board terminated by EO 9361 of July 15, 1943, and Office of Economic Warfare established in Office
       for Emergency Management. Office of Economic Warfare consolidated with Foreign Economic
       Administration by EO 9380 of Sept. 25, 1943.

Economic Development, Office of Regional
       Established by the Secretary of Commerce Jan. 6, 1966, pursuant to act of Aug. 26, 1965 (79 Stat. 552).
       Abolished by Department Order 5A, Dec. 22, 1966, and functions vested in Economic Development
       Administration.

Economic Development Service, Foreign
       Established by order of the Secretary of Agriculture Nov. 8, 1969. Abolished by order of Secretary Feb. 6,
       1972, and functions transferred to Economic Research Service.

Economic Growth and Stability, Advisory Board on
       Established by Presidential letter to Congress of June 1, 1953. Superseded by National Advisory Board on
       Economic Policy by Presidential direction Mar. 12, 1961. Cabinet Committee on Economic Growth
       established by President Aug. 21, 1962, to succeed Board.

Economic Management Support Center
       Established by Secretary of Agriculture Memorandum 1836 of Jan. 9, 1974. Consolidated with other
       Department units into Economics, Statistics, and Cooperatives Service by Secretary’s Memorandum 1927,
       effective Dec. 23, 1977.
Economic Operations, Board of
        Established by Department of State order of Oct. 7, 1941. Abolished by departmental order of June 24,
        1943, and functions transferred to Office of Foreign Economic Coordination established by same order.
        Office abolished by departmental order of Nov. 6, 1943, pursuant to EO 9380 of Sept. 25, 1943.

Economic Opportunity, Office of
       Established in Executive Office of the President by act of Aug. 20, 1964 (78 Stat. 508). All OEO programs
       except three transferred by administrative action to the Departments of Health, Education, and Welfare,
       Labor, and Housing and Urban Development July 6, 1973. Community Action, Economic Development,
       and Legal Services Programs transferred to Community Services Administration by act of Jan. 4, 1975 (88
       Stat. 2310).

Economic Policy, Council on
       Established by Presidential memorandum of Feb. 2, 1973. Functions absorbed by Economic Policy Board
       Sept. 30, 1974.

Economic Policy, Council on Foreign
       Established Dec. 22, 1954, by Presidential letter of Dec. 11, 1954. Abolished by President Mar. 12, 1961,
       and functions transferred to Secretary of State.

Economic Policy, Council on International
       Established in Executive Office of the President by Presidential memorandum of January 1971.
       Reestablished by act of Aug. 29, 1972 (86 Stat. 646). Terminated Sept. 30, 1977, on expiration of statutory
       authority.

Economic Policy, National Advisory Board on See Economic Growth and Stability, Advisory Board on

Economic Policy Board, President’s
       Established by EO 11808 of Sept. 30, 1974. Terminated by EO 11975 of Mar. 7, 1977.

Economic Recovery Advisory Board, President’s
       Established by EO 13501 of February 6, 2009. Terminated February 12, 2011 pursuant to terms of order.

Economic Research Service
       Established by Secretary of Agriculture Memorandum 1446, supp. 1, of Apr. 3, 1961. Consolidated with
       other Department of Agriculture units into Economics, Statistics, and Cooperatives Service by Secretary’s
       Memorandum 1927, effective Dec. 23, 1977. Redesignated as Economic Research Service by Secretarial
       order of Oct. 1, 1981.

Economic Security, Advisory Council on
       Established by EO 6757 of June 29, 1934. Terminated on approval of act of Aug. 14, 1935 (49 Stat. 620)
       Aug. 14, 1935.

Economic Security, Committee on
       Established by EO 6757 of June 29, 1934. Terminated as formal agency in April 1936, as provided in act,
       but continued informally for some time thereafter.

Economic Stabilization, Office of
       Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 9250 of Oct. 3, 1942. Terminated by EO 9620 of
       Sept. 20, 1945, and functions transferred to Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion. Reestablished in
       Office for Emergency Management by EO 9699 of Feb. 21, 1946. Transferred by EO 9762 of July 25, 1946,
       to Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion. Consolidated with other agencies to form Office of
       Temporary Controls by EO 9809 of Dec. 12, 1946.

Economic Stabilization Agency
       Established by EO 10161 of Sept. 9, 1950, and EO 10276 of July 31, 1951. Terminated, except for
       liquidation purposes, by EO 10434 of Feb. 6, 1953. Liquidation completed Oct. 31, 1953, pursuant to EO
         10480 of Aug. 14, 1953.

Economic Stabilization Board
       Established by EO 9250 of Oct. 3, 1942. Transferred to Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion by EO
       9620 of Sept. 20, 1945. Returned to Office of Economic Stabilization on reestablishment by EO 9699 of
       Feb. 21, 1946. Board returned to Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion by EO 9762 of July 25,
       1946. Functions terminated by EO 9809 of Dec. 12, 1946.

Economic Warfare, Board of See Economic Defense Board

Economic Warfare, Office of See Economic Defense Board

Economics, Bureau of Industrial
       Established by the Secretary of Commerce Jan. 2, 1980, in conjunction with Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1979,
       effective Oct. 1, 1980, and operated under Department Organization Order 35–5B. Abolished at bureau
       level by Secretarial order, effective Jan. 22, 1984 (49 FR 4538). Industry-related functions realigned and
       transferred from Under Secretary for Economic Affairs to Under Secretary for International Trade. Under
       Secretary for Economic Affairs retained units to support domestic macroeconomic policy functions.

Economics, Statistics, and Cooperatives Service
       Renamed Economics and Statistics Service by Secretary of Agriculture Memorandum 2025 of Sept. 17,
       1980. Redesignated as Economic Research Service and Statistical Reporting Service by Secretarial order of
       Oct. 1, 1981.

Economy Board, Joint
       Placed under direction of President by military order of July 5, 1939. Abolished Sept. 1, 1947, by joint
       letter of Aug. 20, 1947, from Secretaries of War and Navy to President.

Education, Federal Board for Vocational
        Established by act of Feb. 23, 1917 (39 Stat. 929). Functions transferred to the Department of the Interior
        by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933. Functions assigned to Commissioner of Education Oct. 10, 1933. Office of
        Education transferred from the Department of the Interior to the Federal Security Agency by Reorg. Plan
        No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Board abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1946, effective July 16, 1946.

Education, National Institute of
        Established by act of June 23, 1972 (86 Stat. 327). Transferred to Office of Educational Research and
        Improvement, Department of Education, by act of Oct. 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 678), effective May 4, 1980.

Education, Office of
        Established as independent agency by act of Mar. 2, 1867 (14 Stat. 434). Transferred to the Department of
        the Interior by act of July 20, 1868 (15 Stat. 106). Transferred to Federal Security Agency by Reorg. Plan
        No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Functions of Federal Security Administrator administered by Office of
        Education relating to student loans and defense-related education transferred to War Manpower
        Commission by EO 9247 of Sept. 17, 1942.

Education, Office of Bilingual
        Abolished by act of Oct. 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 675), and functions transferred to Office of Bilingual Education
        and Minority Languages Affairs, Department of Education.

Education Beyond the High School, President’s Committee on
        Established by act of July 26, 1956 (70 Stat. 676). Terminated Dec. 31, 1957. Certain activities continued
        by Bureau of Higher Education, Office of Education.


Education Division
         Established in the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare by act of June 23, 1972 (86 Stat. 327).
         Functions transferred to the Department of Education by act of Oct. 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 677).

Education Goals Panel, National
        Terminated by Congressional mandate, March 15, 2002.

Education Statistics, National Center for
        Established in the Office of the Assistant Secretary, Department of Health and Human Services, by act of
        Aug. 21, 1974 (88 Stat. 556). Transferred to the Office of Educational Research and Improvement,
        Department of Education, by act of Oct. 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 678), effective May 4, 1980. Renamed Center
        for Education Statistics by act of Oct. 17, 1986 (100 Stat. 1579). Renamed National Center for Education
        Statistics by act of Apr. 28, 1988 (102 Stat. 331).

Educational and Cultural Affairs, Bureau of
        Established by Secretary of State in 1960. Terminated by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1977, effective July 1, 1978,
        and functions transferred to International Communication Agency, effective Apr. 1, 1978.

Educational and Cultural Affairs, Interagency Council on International
        Established Jan. 20, 1964, by Foreign Affairs Manual Circular, under authority of act of Sept. 21, 1961 (75
        Stat. 527). Terminated Oct. 1973 following creation of Subcommittee on International Exchanges by
        National Security Council directive.

Educational Exchange, U.S. Advisory Commission on
        Established by act of Jan. 27, 1948 (62 Stat. 10). Abolished by act of Sept. 21, 1961 (75 Stat. 538), and
        superseded by U.S. Advisory Commission on International Educational and Cultural Affairs.

Efficiency, Bureau of
         Organized under act of Feb. 28, 1916 (39 Stat. 15). Abolished by act of Mar. 3, 1933 (47 Stat. 1519), and
         records transferred to Bureau of the Budget.

Elderly, Committee on Mental Health and Illness of the
         Established by act of July 29, 1975 (89 Stat. 347). Terminated Sept. 30, 1977.

Electoral votes for President and Vice President, transfer of functions See State, Department of

Electric Home and Farm Authority
          Incorporated Aug. 1, 1935, under laws of District of Columbia. Designated as U.S. agency by EO 7139 of
          Aug. 12, 1935. Continued by act of June 10, 1941 (55 Stat. 248). Grouped with other agencies in Federal
          Loan Agency by Reorg. Plan. No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Functions transferred to the Department
          of Commerce by EO 9071 of Feb. 24, 1942. Terminated by EO 9256 of Oct. 13, 1942.

Electric Home and Farm Authority, Inc.
          Organized Jan. 17, 1934, under laws of State of Delaware by EO 6514 of Dec. 19, 1933. Dissolved Aug. 1,
          1935, and succeeded by Electric Home and Farm Authority.

Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability, Office of
          Established by Secretary of Energy announcement of June 9, 2005. Position of director elevated to
          Assistant Secretary of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability by Secretary’s memorandum EXEC-2007-
          010607 of Oct. 24, 2007.

Electricity Transmission and Distribution, Office of
          Renamed Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability by the Secretary of Energy’s memo of Feb. 15,
          2005.


Emergency Administration of Public Works, Federal
         Established by act of June 16, 1933 (48 Stat. 200). Operation continued by subsequent legislation,
         including act of June 21, 1938 (52 Stat. 816). Consolidated with Federal Works Agency as Public Works
         Administration by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Functions transferred to Office of
         Federal Works Administrator by EO 9357 of June 30, 1943.

Emergency Conservation Work
       Established by EO 6101 of Apr. 5, 1933. Succeeded by Civilian Conservation Corps.

Emergency Council, National
       Established by EO 6433–A of Nov. 17, 1933. Consolidated with Executive Council by EO 6889–A of Oct. 29,
       1934. Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939, and functions (except those relating
       to Radio Division and Film Service) transferred to Executive Office of the President.

Emergency Council, Office of Economic Adviser to National
       Established by EO 6240 of Aug. 3, 1933, in connection with Executive Council, which later consolidated
       with National Emergency Council. Records and property used in preparation of statistical and economic
       summaries transferred to Central Statistical Board by EO 7003 of Apr. 8, 1935.

Emergency Management, Office for
       Established in Executive Office of the President by administrative order of May 25, 1940, in accordance
       with EO 8248 of Sept. 8, 1939. Inactive.

Emergency Management Agency, Federal
       Established in EO 12127 of Mar. 31, 1979. Functions transferred to Department of Homeland Security by
       act of Nov. 25, 2002 (116 Stat. 2213). Established as a distinct entity with the Department of Homeland
       Security by act of Oct. 4, 2006 (120 Stat. 1400).

Emergency Mobilization Preparedness Board
       Established Dec. 17, 1981, by the President. Abolished by Presidential directive of Sept. 16, 1985.

Emergency Planning, Office of
       Established as successor to Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization by act of Sept. 22, 1961 (75 Stat. 630).
       Renamed Office of Emergency Preparedness by act of Oct. 21, 1968 (82 Stat. 1194). Terminated by Reorg.
       Plan No. 2 of 1973, effective July 1, 1973, and functions transferred to the Departments of the Treasury
       and Housing and Urban Development and the General Services Administration.

Emergency Preparedness, Office of See Emergency Planning, Office of

Emergency Procurement Service
       Established Sept. 1, 1950, by Administrator of General Services. Renamed Defense Materials Service Sept.
       7, 1956. Functions transferred to Property Management and Disposal Service July 29, 1966. Service
       abolished July 1, 1973, and functions transferred to Federal Supply Service, Public Buildings Service, and
       Federal Property Resources Service.

Emergency Relief Administration, Federal
       Established by act of May 12, 1933 (48 Stat. 55). Expired June 30, 1938, having been liquidated by Works
       Progress Administrator pursuant to act of May 28, 1937 (50 Stat. 352).

Employee-Management Relations Program, President’s Committee on the Implementation of the Federal
       Established by EO 10988 of Jan. 17, 1962. Terminated upon submission of report to President June 21,
       1963.

Employees’ Compensation, Bureau of
       Transferred from Federal Security Agency to the Department of Labor by Reorg. Plan No. 19 of 1950,
       effective May 24, 1950. Functions absorbed by Employment Standards Administration Mar. 13, 1972.
Employees’ Compensation Appeals Board
       Transferred from Federal Security Agency to the Department of Labor by Reorg. Plan No. 19 of 1950,
       effective May 24, 1950.

Employees’ Compensation Commission, U.S.
       Established by act of Sept. 7, 1916 (39 Stat. 742). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1946, effective July 16,
       1946, and functions transferred to Federal Security Administrator.

Employment Board, Fair
       Established by U.S. Civil Service Commission pursuant to EO 9980 of July 26, 1948. Abolished by EO 10590
       of Jan. 18, 1955.

Employment of People With Disabilities, President’s Committee on
       Created by EO 12640 of May 10, 1988. Duties subsumed by the Office of Disability Employment within the
       Department of Labor as directed by Public Law 106–554 of Dec. 21, 2000.

Employment of the Physically Handicapped, President’s Committee on
       Established by EO 10640 of Oct. 10, 1955, continuing Committee established by act of July 11, 1949 (63
       Stat. 409). Superseded by President’s Committee on Employment of the Handicapped established by EO
       10994 of Feb. 14, 1962.

Employment Policy, President’s Committee on Government
       Established by EO 10590 of Jan. 18, 1955. Abolished by EO 10925 of Mar. 6, 1961, and functions
       transferred to President’s Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity.

Employment Practice, Committee on Fair
       Established in Office of Production Management by EO 8802 of June 25, 1941. Transferred to War
       Manpower Commission by Presidential letter effective July 30, 1942. Committee terminated on
       establishment of Committee on Fair Employment Practice, Office for Emergency Management, by EO 9346
       of May 27, 1943. Terminated June 30, 1946, by act of July 17, 1945 (59 Stat. 743).

Employment Security, Bureau of
       Transferred from Federal Security Agency to the Department of Labor by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1949,
       effective Aug. 20, 1949. Abolished by order of Mar. 14, 1969 of the Secretary of Labor, and functions
       transferred to Manpower Administration.

Employment Service, U.S.
       Established in the Department of Labor in 1918 by departmental order. Abolished by act of June 6, 1933
       (48 Stat. 113), and created as bureau with same name. Functions consolidated with unemployment
       compensation functions of Social Security Board, Bureau of Employment Security, and transferred to
       Federal Security Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Service transferred to Bureau
       of Placement, War Manpower Commission, by EO 9247 of Sept. 17, 1942. Returned to the Department of
       Labor by EO 9617 of Sept. 19, 1945. Transferred to Federal Security Agency by act of June 16, 1948 (62
       Stat. 443), to function as part of Bureau of Employment Security, Social Security Administration. Bureau,
       including U.S. Employment Service, transferred to the Department of Labor by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1949,
       effective Aug. 20, 1949. Abolished by reorganization of Manpower Administration, effective Mar. 17,
       1969, and functions assigned to U.S. Training and Employment Service.

Employment Stabilization Board, Federal
       Established by act of Feb. 10, 1931 (46 Stat. 1085). Abolished by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933. Abolition
       deferred by EO 6623 of Mar. 1, 1934, until functions of Board transferred to Federal Employment
       Stabilization Office, established in the Department of Commerce by same order. Office abolished by
       Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939, and functions transferred from the Department of
       Commerce to National Resources Planning Board, Executive Office of the President.
Employment Stabilization Office, Federal. See Employment Stabilization Board, Federal
Employment and Training, Office of Comprehensive
       Established in the Department of Labor. Terminated due to expiration of authority for appropriations
       after fiscal year 1982. Replaced by Office of Employment and Training Programs.

Employment and Training Programs, Office of
       Renamed Office of Job Training Programs by Employment and Training Administration reorganization in
       the Department of Labor, effective June 1984.

Endangered Species Scientific Authority
       Established by EO 11911 of Apr. 13, 1976. Terminated by act of Dec. 28, 1979 (93 Stat. 1228), and
       functions transferred to the Secretary of the Interior.

Energy Administration, Federal
        Established by act of May 7, 1974 (88 Stat. 96). Assigned additional responsibilities by acts of June 22,
        1974 (88 Stat. 246), Dec. 22, 1975 (89 Stat. 871), and Aug. 14, 1976 (90 Stat. 1125). Terminated by act of
        Aug. 4, 1977 (91 Stat. 577), and functions transferred to the Department of Energy.

Energy Advisory Support Office, Secretary of
        Abolished by secretarial decision of Feb. 6, 2006.

Energy Assurance, Office of
        Abolished pursuant to Conference Report No. 108-729 on H.R. 4818, Consolidated Appropriations Act.
        Functions merged with Office of Electricity Delivery and Energy Reliability.

Energy Conservation, Office of
        Established by Interior Secretarial Order 2953 May 7, 1973. Functions transferred to Federal Energy
        Administration by act of May 7, 1974 (88 Stat. 100).

Energy Data and Analysis, Office of
        Established by Interior Secretarial Order 2953 of May 7, 1973. Functions transferred to Federal Energy
        Administration by act of May 7, 1974 (88 Stat. 100).

Energy Policy Office
        Established in Executive Office of the President by EO 11726 of June 29, 1973. Abolished by EO 11775 of
        Mar. 26, 1974.

Energy Programs, Office of
        Established by Department of Commerce Organization Order 25– 7A, effective Sept. 24, 1975. Terminated
        by act of Aug. 4, 1977 (91 Stat. 581), and functions transferred to the Department of Energy.

Energy Research and Development Administration
        Established by act of Oct. 11, 1974 (88 Stat. 1234). Assigned responsibilities by acts of Sept. 3, 1974 (88
        Stat. 1069, 1079), Oct. 26, 1974 (88 Stat. 1431), and Dec. 31, 1974 (88 Stat. 1887). Terminated by act of
        Aug. 4, 1977 (91 Stat. 577), and functions transferred to the Department of Energy.

Energy Resources Council
        Established in Executive Office of the President by act of Oct. 11, 1974 (88 Stat. 1233). Establishing
        authority repealed by act of Aug. 4, 1977 (91 Stat. 608), and Council terminated.

Energy Supplies and Resources Policy, Presidential Advisory Committee on
        Established July 30, 1954, by President. Abolished Mar. 12, 1961, by President and functions transferred
        to the Secretary of the Interior.

Enforcement Commission, National
        Established by General Order 18 of Economic Stabilization Administrator, effective July 30, 1952.
        Functions transferred to Director, Office of Defense Mobilization, and Attorney General by EO 10494 of
        Oct. 14, 1953.

Engineering, Bureau of See Steam Engineering, Bureau of

Entomology, Bureau of See Entomology and Plant Quarantine, Bureau of

Entomology and Plant Quarantine, Bureau of
       Bureau of Entomology and Bureau of Plant Quarantine created by acts of Apr. 23, 1904 (33 Stat. 276), and
       July 7, 1932 (47 Stat. 640), respectively. Consolidated with disease control and eradication functions of
       Bureau of Plant Industry into Bureau of Entomology and Plant Quarantine by act of Mar. 23, 1934 (48 Stat.
       467). Functions transferred to Agricultural Research Service by Secretary’s Memorandum 1320, supp. 4, of
       Nov. 2, 1953.

Environment, Cabinet Committee on the See Environmental Quality Council

Environmental Financing Authority
        Established by act of Oct. 18, 1972 (86 Stat. 899). Expired June 30, 1975, pursuant to terms of act.

Environmental Quality Council
        Established by EO 11472 of May 29, 1969. Renamed Cabinet Committee on the Environment by EO 11514
        of Mar. 5, 1970. EO 11514 terminated by EO 11541 of July 1, 1970.

Environment, Safety, and Health, Office of
        Established by act of Aug. 4, 1977 (91 Stat. 570). Abolished by Secretary of Energy memorandum 2006-
        007929 of Aug. 30, 2006, and functions transferred to Office of Health, Safety, and Security.

Environmental Science Services Administration
        Established in the Department of Commerce by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1965, effective July 13, 1965, by
        consolidating Weather Bureau and Coast and Geodetic Survey. Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 4 of 1970,
        effective Oct. 3, 1970, and functions transferred to National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

Equal Employment Opportunity, President’s Committee on
        Established by EO 10925 of Mar. 6, 1961. Abolished by EO 11246 of Sept. 24, 1965, and functions
        transferred to the Department of Labor and U.S. Civil Service Commission.

Equal Opportunity, President’s Council on
        Established by EO 11197 of Feb. 5, 1965. Abolished by EO 11247 of Sept. 24, 1965, and functions
        transferred to the Department of Justice.

Equipment, Bureau of
       Established as Bureau of Equipment and Recruiting by act of July 5, 1862 (12 Stat. 510), replacing Bureau
       of Construction, Equipment and Repairs. Designated as Bureau of Equipment in annual appropriation acts
       commencing with fiscal year 1892 (26 Stat. 192) after cognizance over enlisted personnel matters
       transferred, effective July 1, 1889, to Bureau of Navigation. Functions distributed among bureaus and
       offices in the Department of the Navy by act of June 24, 1910 (61 Stat. 613). Abolished by act of June 30,
       1914 (38 Stat. 408).

Ethics, Office of Government
         Established in the Office of Personnel Management by act of Oct. 26, 1978 (92 Stat. 1862). Became a
         separate executive agency status by act of Nov. 3, 1988 (102 Stat. 3031).

European Migration, Intergovernmental Committee for
       Renamed Intergovernmental Committee for Migration by Resolution 624, passed by Intergovernmental
       Committee for European Migration Council, effective Nov. 11, 1980.
Evacuation, Joint Committee on See Health and Welfare Aspects of Evacuation of Civilians, Joint Committee on

Exchange Service, International
       Established in 1849 in Smithsonian Institution. Renamed Office of Publications Exchange by Secretary’s
       internal directive of Jan. 11, 1985.

Executive Branch of the Government, Commission on Organization of the
        Established by act of July 7, 1947 (61 Stat. 246). Terminated June 12, 1949, pursuant to terms of act.
        Second Commission on Organization of the Executive Branch of the Government established by act of July
        10, 1953 (67 Stat. 142). Terminated June 30, 1955, pursuant to terms of act.

Executive Council
        Established by EO 6202–A of July 11, 1933. Consolidated with National Emergency Council by EO 6889–A
        of Oct. 29, 1934.

Executive Exchange, President’s Commission on See Personnel Interchange, President’s Commission on

Executive orders See State, Department of

Executive Organization, President’s Advisory Council on
        Established by President on Apr. 5, 1969. Terminated May 7, 1971.

Executive Protective Service See Secret Service Division

Executives, Active Corps of
        Established in ACTION by act of Oct. 1, 1973 (87 Stat. 404). Transferred to Small Business Administration
        by EO 11871 of July 18, 1975.

Export Administration, Bureau of
        Established as a separate agency within the Department of Commerce on Oct. 1, 1987 (50 USC app. 2401
        et seq.). Renamed Bureau of Industry and Security by Department of Commerce internal organization
        order of Apr. 18, 2002 (67 FR 20630).

Export Control, Administrator of
        Functions delegated to Administrator by Proc. 2413 of July 2, 1940, transferred to Office of Export Control,
        Economic Defense Board, by EO 8900 of Sept. 15, 1941. Renamed Board of Economic Warfare by EO 8982
        of Dec. 17, 1941. Board terminated by EO 9361 of July 15, 1943.

Export Control, Office of See Export Control, Administrator of

Export-Import Bank of the United States
        Bank’s charter expired on June 30, 2015. Reauthorized by act of Dec. 4, 2015 (129 Stat. 1768).

Export-Import Bank of Washington
        Organization of District of Columbia banking corporation directed by EO 6581 of Feb. 2, 1934. Certificate
        of incorporation filed Feb. 12, 1934. Grouped with other agencies to form Federal Loan Agency by Reorg.
        Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Transferred to the Department of Commerce by EO 9071 of Feb.
        24, 1942. Functions transferred to Office of Economic Warfare by EO 9361 of July 15, 1943. Established as
        permanent independent agency by act of July 31, 1945 (59 Stat. 526). Renamed Export-Import Bank of the
        U.S. by act of Mar. 13, 1968 (82 Stat. 47).

Export-Import Bank of Washington, DC, Second
        Authorized by EO 6638 of Mar. 9, 1934. Abolished by EO 7365 of May 7, 1936, and records transferred to
        Export-Import Bank of Washington, effective June 30, 1936.
Export Marketing Service
        Established by the Secretary of Agriculture Mar. 28, 1969. Merged with Foreign Agricultural Service by
        Secretary’s memorandum of Dec. 7, 1973, effective Feb. 3, 1974.

Exports and Requirements, Division of
        Established in Office of Foreign Economic Coordination by the Department of State order of Feb. 1, 1943.
        Abolished by departmental order of Nov. 6, 1943, pursuant to EO 9380 of Sept. 25, 1943.

Extension Service
        Established by act of May 14, 1914 (38 Stat. 372). Consolidated into Science and Education Administration
        by Secretary’s order of Jan. 24, 1978. Reestablished as Extension Service by Secretarial order of June 16,
        1981. Became part of Cooperative State, Research, Education, and Extension Service under Department of
        Agriculture’s reorganization in 1995.


F                                           TOP OF PAGE

Facts and Figures, Office of
        Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 8922 of Oct. 24, 1941. Consolidated with Office of
        War Information in Office for Emergency Management by EO 9182 of June 13, 1942.

Family Security Committee
        Established in Office of Defense Health and Welfare Services Feb. 12, 1941, by administrative order.
        Terminated Dec. 17, 1942.

Family Services, Bureau of See Assistance, Bureau of Public

Family Support Administration
        Established on Apr. 4, 1986, in the Department of Health and Human Services under authority of section 6
        of Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1953, effective Apr. 11, 1953 (see also 51 FR 11641). Merged into
        Administration for Children and Families by Secretary’s reorganization notice dated Apr. 15, 1991.

Farm Board, Federal
       Established by act of June 15, 1929 (46 Stat. 11). Renamed Farm Credit Administration and certain
       functions abolished by EO 6084 of Mar. 27, 1933. Administration placed under the Department of
       Agriculture by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Made independent agency in the executive
       branch of the Government, to be housed in the Department of Agriculture, by act of Aug. 6, 1953 (67 Stat.
       390). Removed from the Department of Agriculture by act of Dec. 10, 1971 (85 Stat. 617).

Farm Credit Administration See Farm Board, Federal

Farm Loan Board, Federal
        Established in the Department of the Treasury to administer act of July 17, 1916 (39 Stat. 360). Offices of
        appointed members of Board, except member designated as Farm Loan Commissioner, abolished by EO
        6084 of Mar. 27, 1933, and Board functions transferred to Farm Loan Commissioner, subject to
        jurisdiction and control of Farm Credit Administration. Title changed to Land Bank Commissioner by act of
        June 16, 1933. Abolished by act of Aug. 6, 1953 (67 Stat. 393).

Farm Loan Bureau, Federal
        Established in the Department of the Treasury under supervision of Federal Farm Loan Board and charged
        with execution of act of July 17, 1916 (39 Stat. 360). Transferred to Farm Credit Administration by EO 6084
        of Mar. 27, 1933.

Farm Loan Commissioner See Farm Loan Board, Federal
Farm Mortgage Corporation, Federal
       Established by act of Jan. 31, 1934 (48 Stat. 344). Transferred to the Department of Agriculture by Reorg.
       Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939, to operate under supervision of Farm Credit Administration.
       Abolished by act of Oct. 4, 1961 (75 Stat. 773).

Farm Products, Division of (Also known as Division of Agriculture)
        Established by Advisory Commission to Council of National Defense pursuant to act of Aug. 29, 1916 (39
        Stat. 649). Office of Agricultural Defense Relations (later known as Office for Agricultural War Relations)
        established in the Department of Agriculture by Presidential letter of May 5, 1941, which transferred to
        the Secretary of Agriculture functions previously assigned to Division of Agriculture. Functions concerned
        with food production transferred to Food Production Administration and functions concerned with food
        distribution transferred to Food Distribution Administration by EO 9280 of Dec. 5, 1942.

Farm Security Administration See Resettlement Administration

Farm Service Agency
        Established by Secretary’s Memorandum 1010–1 dated Oct. 20, 1994, under authority of the act of Oct.
        13, 1994 (7 U.S.C. 6901), and assumed certain functions of the Agricultural Stabilization and Conservation
        Service, the Farmers’ Home Administration, and the Federal Crop Insurance Corporation. Renamed
        Consolidated Farm Service Agency by Acting Administrator on Dec. 19, 1994.

Farmer Cooperative Service
        Established by Secretary of Agriculture Memorandum 1320, supp. 4, of Dec. 4, 1953. Consolidated with
        other Department of Agriculture units into Economics, Statistics, and Cooperatives Service by Secretary’s
        Memorandum 1927, effective Dec. 23, 1977.

Farmers’ Home Administration. See Resettlement Administration

Federal. See also other part of title

Federal Advisory Council
        Established in Federal Security Agency by act of June 6, 1933 (48 Stat. 116). Transferred to the
        Department of Labor by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1949, effective Aug. 20, 1949.

Federal Detention Trustee, Office of the
        Transferred to the United States Marshals Service by the Attorney General on November 26, 2012.

Federal Register, Administrative Committee of the See Archives Establishment, National

Federal Register, Division of the
        Established by act of July 26, 1935 (49 Stat. 500). Transferred to General Services Administration as part of
        National Archives and Records Service by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 381). Renamed Office of the
        Federal Register by order of General Services Administrator, Feb. 6, 1959. Transferred to National
        Archives and Records Administration by act of Oct. 19, 1984 (98 Stat. 2283).

Federal Register, Office of the See Federal Register, Division of the

Federal Reserve Board
        Renamed Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and Governor and Vice Governor designated
        as Chairman and Vice Chairman, respectively, of Board by act of Aug. 23, 1935 (49 Stat. 704).

Federal Tax Reform, President’s Advisory Panel on
         Established by EO 13369 of Jan. 7, 2005. Abolished by EO 13446 of Sept. 28, 2007.

Field Services, Office of
         Established by the Secretary of Commerce Feb. 1, 1963, by Department Organization Order 40–3.
         Terminated by Department Organization Order 40–1A of Sept. 15, 1970, and functions transferred to
         Bureau of Domestic Commerce.

Filipino Rehabilitation Commission
          Established by act of June 29, 1944 (58 Stat. 626). Inactive pursuant to terms of act.

Film Service, U.S.
         Established by National Emergency Council in September 1938. Transferred to Office of Education, Federal
         Security Agency, by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Terminated June 30, 1940.

Films, Coordinator of Government
         Director of Office of Government Reports designated Coordinator of Government Films by Presidential
         letter of Dec. 18, 1941. Functions transferred to Office of War Information by EO 9182 of June 13, 1942.

Financial Capability, President's Advisory Council on
         Established by EO 13530 of January 29, 2010. Terminated on January 29, 2013 by sec. 3 of EO 13591 of
         November 11, 2011.

Financial Operations, Bureau of Government
         Renamed Financial Management Service by Order 145–21 of the Secretary of the Treasury, effective Oct.
         10, 1984.

Fire Administration, U.S. See Fire Prevention and Control Administration, National

Fire Council, Federal
        Established by EO 7397 of June 20, 1936. Transferred July 1, 1939, to Federal Works Agency by EO 8194 of
        July 6, 1939, with functions under direction of Federal Works Administrator. Transferred with Federal
        Works Agency to General Services Administration by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 380). Transferred to
        the Department of Commerce by EO 11654 of Mar. 13, 1972.

Fire Prevention and Control, National Academy for
         Established in the Department of Commerce by act of Oct. 29, 1974 (88 Stat. 1537). Transferred to
         Federal Emergency Management Agency by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1978, effective Apr. 1, 1979.

Fire Prevention and Control Administration, National
         Renamed U.S. Fire Administration by act of Oct. 5, 1978 (92 Stat. 932). Transferred to Federal
         Emergency Management Agency by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1978, effective Apr. 1, 1979.

Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, National Commission on
         Established by EO 13531 of Feb. 18, 2010. Terminated 30 days after submission of final report to
         President on January 31, 2011.

Fish Commission, U.S.
        Commissioner of Fish and Fisheries established as head of U.S. Fish Commission by joint resolution of Feb.
        9, 1871 (16 Stat. 594). Commission established as Bureau of Fisheries in Department of Commerce and
        Labor by act of Feb. 14, 1903 (32 Stat. 827). Department of Labor created by act of Mar. 4, 1913 (37 Stat.
        736), and Bureau remained in the Department of Commerce. Transferred to the Department of the
        Interior by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Consolidated with Bureau of Biological Survey
        into Fish and Wildlife Service by Reorg. Plan No. III of 1940, effective June 30, 1940.

Fish and Wildlife Service
         Established by Reorg. Plan No. III of 1940, effective June 30, 1940, consolidating Bureau of Fisheries and
         Bureau of Biological Survey. Succeeded by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.

Fisheries, Bureau of See Fish Commission, U.S.
Fisheries, Bureau of Commercial
         Organized in 1959 under U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the Department of the Interior. Abolished by
         Reorg. Plan No. 4 of 1970, effective Oct. 3, 1970, and functions transferred to National Oceanic and
         Atmospheric Administration.

Fishery Coordination, Office of
         Established in the Department of the Interior by EO 9204 of July 21, 1942. Terminated by EO 9649 of Oct.
         29, 1945.

Flood Indemnity Administration, Federal
        Established in Housing and Home Finance Agency by Administrator’s Organizational Order 1, effective
        Sept. 28, 1956, redesignated as Administrator’s Organizational Order 2 on Dec. 7, 1956, pursuant to act of
        Aug. 7, 1956 (70 Stat. 1078). Abolished by Administrator’s Organizational Order 3, effective July 1, 1957,
        due to lack of funding.

Flood Protection Structure Accreditation Task Force
        Established by act of July 6, 2012 (126 Stat. 942). Terminated upon submission of final report no later than
        July 6, 2013.

Food, Cost of Living Council Committee on
        Established by EO 11695 of Jan. 11, 1973. Abolished by EO 11788 of June 18, 1974.

Food, Drug, and Insecticide Administration
        Established by act of Jan. 18, 1927 (44 Stat. 1002). Renamed Food and Drug Administration by act of May
        27, 1930 (46 Stat. 422). Transferred from the Department of Agriculture to Federal Security Agency by
        Reorg. Plan No. IV of 1940, effective June 30, 1940. Transferred to Department of Health, Education, and
        Welfare by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1953, effective Apr. 11, 1953.

Food Distribution Administration
        Established in the Department of Agriculture by EO 9280 of Dec. 5, 1942, consolidating Agricultural
        Marketing Administration, Sugar Agency, distribution functions of Office for Agricultural War Relations,
        regulatory work of Bureau of Animal Industry, and food units of War Production Board. Consolidated with
        other agencies by EO 9322 of Mar. 26, 1943, to form Administration of Food Production and Distribution.

Food and Drug Administration See Food, Drug, and Insecticide Administration

Food Industry Advisory Committee
        Established by EO 11627 of Oct. 15, 1971. Abolished by EO 11781 of May 1, 1974.

Food and Nutrition Service
        Established Aug. 8, 1969, by Secretary of Agriculture under authority of 5 U.S.C. 301 and Reorg. Plan No. 2
        of 1953 (5 U.S.C. app.). Abolished by Secretary’s Memorandum 1010–1 dated Oct. 20, 1994. Functions
        assumed by Food and Consumer Service.

Food Production Administration
        Established in the Department of Agriculture by EO 9280 of Dec. 5, 1942, which consolidated Agricultural
        Adjustment Agency, Farm Credit Administration, Farm Security Administration, Federal Crop Insurance
        Corporation, Soil Conservation Service, and food production activities of War Production Board, Office of
        Agricultural War Relations, and Division of Farm Management and Costs, Bureau of Agricultural
        Economics. Consolidated with other agencies by EO 9322 of Mar. 26, 1943, to form Administration of Food
        Production and Distribution.

Food Production and Distribution, Administration of
        Established by consolidation of Food Production Administration, Food Distribution Administration,
        Commodity Credit Corporation, and Extension Service, Department of Agriculture, by EO 9322 of Mar. 26,
        1943, under direction of Administrator, directly responsible to President. Renamed War Food
         Administration by EO 9334 of Apr. 19, 1943. Terminated by EO 9577 of June 29, 1945, and functions
         transferred to the Secretary of Agriculture. Transfer made permanent by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1946,
         effective July 16, 1946.

Food Safety and Quality Service
        Renamed Food Safety and Inspection Service by Agriculture Secretary’s memorandum of June 19, 1981.

Foods, Bureau of
        Renamed Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition by Food and Drug Administration notice of Mar. 9,
        1984 (49 FR 10166).

Foreign. See also other part of title

Foreign Aid, Advisory Committee on Voluntary
        Established by President May 14, 1946. Transferred from the Department of State to the Director of the
        Mutual Security Agency, and later to Director of the Foreign Operations Administration, by Presidential
        letter of June 1, 1953.

Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, President’s
         Established by EO 12863 of Sept. 13, 1993. Abolished by EO 13462 of Feb. 29, 2008.

Foreign Operations Administration
        Established by Reorg. Plan No. 7 of 1953, effective Aug. 1, 1953, and functions transferred from Office of
        Director of Mutual Security, Mutual Security Agency, Technical Cooperation Administration, Institute of
        Inter-American Affairs. Abolished by EO 10610 of May 9, 1955, and functions and offices transferred to
        the Departments of State and Defense.

Foreign Scholarships, Board of
         Renamed J. William Fulbright Foreign Scholarship Board by act of Feb. 16, 1990 (104 Stat. 49).

Forest Reservation Commission, National
        Established by act of Mar. 1, 1911 (36 Stat. 962). Terminated by act of Oct. 22, 1976 (90 Stat. 2961), and
        functions transferred to the Secretary of Agriculture.

Forests, Director of
         Established by Administrative Order 1283 of May 18, 1938. Made part of Office of Land Utilization,
         Department of the Interior, by Administrative Order 1466 of Apr. 15, 1940.

Freedmen’s Hospital
       Established by act of Mar. 3, 1871 (16 Stat. 506; T. 32 of D.C. Code). Transferred from the Department of
       the Interior to Federal Security Agency by Reorg. Plan No. IV of 1940, effective June 30, 1940.

Fuel Yards
        Established by act of July 1, 1918 (40 Stat. 672). Transferred from Bureau of Mines, Department of
        Commerce, to Procurement Division, Department of the Treasury, by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933, effective
        Mar. 2, 1934.

Fuels Coordinator for War, Office of Solid See Fuels Administration for War, Solid

Fuels Corporation, U.S. Synthetic
        Established by act of June 30, 1980 (94 Stat. 636). Terminated Apr. 18, 1986, by act of Dec. 19, 1985 (99
        Stat. 1249), and functions transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury.


Fund-Raising Within the Federal Service, President’s Committee on
        Established by EO 10728 of Sept. 6, 1957. Abolished by EO 10927 of Mar. 18, 1961, and functions
        transferred to U.S. Civil Service Commission.


G                                           TOP OF PAGE

Gallaudet College See Columbia Institution for the Instruction of the Deaf and Dumb, and the Blind

General Programs, Office of
        Renamed Office of Public Programs by the Chairman, National Endowment for the Humanities, in January
        1991.

Geographic Board, U.S.
       Established by EO 27–A of Sept. 4, 1890. Abolished by EO 6680 of Apr. 17, 1935, and duties transferred to
       U.S. Board on Geographical Names, Department of the Interior, effective June 17, 1934. Board abolished
       by act of July 25, 1947 (61 Stat. 457), and duties assumed by Board on Geographic Names.

Geographical Names, U.S. Board on See Geographic Board, U.S.

Geography, Office of
       Function of standardizing foreign place names placed in the Department of the Interior conjointly with the
       Board on Geographic Names by act of July 25, 1947 (61 Stat. 456). Functions transferred to the
       Department of Defense by memorandum of understanding by the Departments of the Interior and
       Defense and the Bureau of the Budget Mar. 9, 1968.

Geological Survey
        Established in the Department of the Interior by act of Mar. 3, 1879 (20 Stat. 394). Renamed United States
        Geological Survey by acts of Nov. 13, 1991 (105 Stat. 1000) and May 18, 1992 (106 Stat. 172).

Germany, Mixed Claims Commission, U.S. and
       Established by agreement of Aug. 10, 1922, between U.S. and Germany. Duties extended by agreement of
       Dec. 31, 1928. Time limit for filing claims expired June 30, 1928. All claims disposed of by Oct. 30, 1939.
       Terminated June 30, 1941.

Global Communications, Office of
        Established within the White House Office by EO 13283 of Jan. 21, 2003. Abolished by EO 13385 of Sept.
        29, 2005

Global Health Affairs, Office of
        Renamed Office o f Global Affairs by Secretary of Health and Human Services notice of June 22, 2011 (76
        FR 36539).

Goethals Memorial Commission
        Established by act of Aug. 4, 1935 (49 Stat. 743). Placed under jurisdiction of Department of War by EO
        8191 of July 5, 1939.

Government. See other part of title

Grain Futures Administration
        Established in the Department of Agriculture under provisions of act of Sept. 21, 1922 (42 Stat. 998).
        Superseded by Commodity Exchange Administration by order of Secretary, effective July 1, 1936.
        Consolidated with other agencies into Commodity Exchange Branch, Agricultural Marketing
        Administration, by EO 9069 of Feb. 23, 1942. Functions transferred to the Secretary of Agriculture by EO
        9577 of June 29, 1945. Transfer made permanent by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1946, effective July 16, 1946.
        Functions transferred to Commodity Exchange Authority by Secretary’s Memorandum 1185 of Jan. 21,
        1947. Functions transferred to Commodity Futures Trading Commission by act of Oct. 23, 1974 (88 Stat.
         1414).
Grain Inspection Service, Federal
         Established in the Department of Agriculture by act of Oct. 21, 1976 (90 Stat. 2868). Abolished by
         Secretary’s Memorandum 1010–1 dated Oct. 20, 1994, and program authority and functions transferred
         to the Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration.

Grain Stabilization Corporation
         Organized as Delaware corporation to operate in connection with Federal Farm Board pursuant to act of
         June 15, 1929 (46 Stat. 11). Terminated by filing of certificate of dissolution with Corporation Commission
         of State of Delaware Dec. 14, 1935.

Grant Administration, Office of
        Transferred from the Office of the General Council to the Deputy Director, U.S. Trade and Development
        Agency by administrative order of Apr. 25, 2007.

Grants and Program Systems, Office of
        Abolished and functions transferred to Cooperative State Research Service, Department of Agriculture, by
        Secretarial Memorandum 1020–26 of July 1, 1986.

Grazing Service
        Consolidated with General Land Office into Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior, by
        Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1946, effective July 16, 1946.

Great Lakes Basin Commission
        Established by EO 11345 of Apr. 20, 1967. Terminated by EO 12319 of Sept. 9, 1981.

Great Lakes Pilotage Administration
        Established in the Department of Commerce to administer act of June 30, 1960 (74 Stat. 259).
        Administration of act transferred to the Secretary of Transportation by act of Oct. 15, 1966 (80 Stat. 931).

Greening the Government through Waste Prevention and Recycling, Steering Committee
        Established by EO 13101 of Sept. 14, 1998. Abolished by EO 13423 of Jan. 24, 2007.

Gulf Coast Ecosystem Restoration Council Task Force
        Established by EO 13554 of Oct. 5, 2010. Terminated by EO 13626 of Sept. 10, 2012.


H                                            TOP OF PAGE

Handicapped, National Center on Education Media and Materials for the
       Established by agreement between the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare and Ohio State
       University, pursuant to acts of Aug. 20, 1969 (83 Stat. 102) and Apr. 13, 1970 (84 Stat. 187). Authorization
       deleted by act of Nov. 29, 1975 (89 Stat. 795), and the Secretary was authorized to enter into agreements
       with non-Federal organizations to establish and operate centers for handicapped.

Handicapped, National Council on the
       Established in the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare by act of Nov. 6, 1978 (92 Stat. 2977).
       Transferred to the Department of Education by act of Oct. 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 677). Reorganized as
       independent agency by act of Feb. 22, 1984 (98 Stat. 26).

Handicapped Employees, Interagency Committee on
       Alternately renamed Interagency Committee on Employment of People with Disabilities by EO 12704 of
       Feb. 26, 1990.
Handicapped Individuals, White House Conference on
       Established by act of Dec. 7, 1974 (88 Stat. 1617). Terminated Dec. 30, 1977, pursuant to terms of act.

Handicapped Research, National Institute of
       Renamed National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research by act of Oct. 21, 1986 (100 Stat.
       1820).

Health, Cost of Living Council Committee on
         Established by EO 11695 of Jan. 11, 1973. Abolished by EO 11788 of June 18, 1974.

Health, Education, and Welfare, Department of
         Established by Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1953 (5 U.S.C. app.), effective Apr. 11, 1953. Renamed
         Department of Health and Human Services by act of Oct. 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 695).

Health, Welfare, and Related Defense Activities, Office of the Coordinator of
        Federal Security Administrator designated as Coordinator of health, welfare, and related fields of activity
        affecting national defense, including aspects of education under Federal Security Agency, by Council of
        National Defense, with approval of President, Nov. 28, 1940. Office of Coordinator superseded by Office
        of Defense Health and Welfare Services, established in Office for Emergency Services by EO 8890 of Sept.
        3, 1941.

Health Care Technology, National Council on
        Established by act of July 1, 1944, as amended (92 Stat. 3447). Renamed Council on Health Care
        Technology by act of Oct. 30, 1984 (98 Stat. 2820). Name lowercased by act of Oct. 7, 1985 (99 Stat. 493).
        Terminated by act of Dec. 19, 1989 (103 Stat. 2205).

Health Facilities, Financing, Compliance, and Conversion, Bureau of
        Renamed Bureau of Health Facilities by Department of Health and Human Services Secretarial order of
        Mar. 12, 1980 (45 FR 17207).

Health Industry Advisory Committee
         Established by EO 11695 of Jan. 11, 1973. Abolished by EO 11781 of May 1, 1974.

Health Manpower, Bureau of
        Renamed Bureau of Health Professions by Department of Health and Human Services Secretarial order of
        Mar. 12, 1980 (45 FR 17207).

Health and Medical Committee
        Established by Council of National Defense order of Sept. 19, 1940. Transferred to Federal Security Agency
        by Council order approved by President Nov. 28, 1940. Reestablished in Office of Defense Health and
        Welfare Services, Office for Emergency Management, by EO 8890 of Sept. 3, 1941. Committee transferred
        to Federal Security Agency by EO 9338 of Apr. 29, 1943.

Health Reform, White House Office of
        Established by EO 13507 of April 8, 2009. Revoked by EO 13569 of April 5, 2011.

Health Resources Administration
        Established in Public Health Service. Abolished by Department of Health and Human Services Secretarial
        reorganization of Aug. 20, 1982 (47 FR 38409), and functions transferred to Health Resources and Services
        Administration.

Health Service, Public
        Originated by act of July 16, 1798 (1 Stat. 605). Transferred from the Department of the Treasury to the
        Federal Security Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939.
Health Services Administration
        Established in Public Health Service. Abolished by Department of Health and Human Services Secretarial
        reorganization of Aug. 20, 1982 (47 FR 38409), and functions transferred to Health Resources and Services
        Administration.

Health Services Industry, Committee on the
        Established by EO 11627 of Oct. 15, 1971. Abolished by EO 11695 of Jan. 11, 1973.

Health Services and Mental Health Administration
        Established in Public Health Service Apr. 1, 1968. Abolished by Department of Health, Education, and
        Welfare reorganization order and functions transferred to Centers for Disease Control, Health Resources
        Administration, and Health Services Administration, effective July 1, 1973.

Health Services Research, National Center for
        Established by act of July 23, 1974 (88 Stat. 363). Transferred from Health Resources Administration to
        Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health by Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
        reorganization, effective Dec. 2, 1977. Renamed National Center for Health Services Research and Health
        Care Technology Assessment by Secretary’s order, pursuant to act of Oct. 30, 1984 (98 Stat. 2817).
        Terminated by act of Dec. 19, 1989 (103 Stat. 2205).

Health Statistics, National Center for
        Established by act of July 23, 1974 (88 Stat. 363). Transferred from Health Resources Administration to
        Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health by the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
        reorganization, effective Dec. 2, 1977. Transferred to Centers for Disease Control by Secretary’s notice of
        Apr. 2, 1987 (52 FR 13318).

Health and Welfare Activities, Interdepartmental Committee to Coordinate
        Appointed by President Aug. 15, 1935, and reestablished by EO 7481 of Oct. 27, 1936. Terminated in
        1939.

Health and Welfare Aspects of Evacuation of Civilians, Joint Committee on
        Established August 1941 as joint committee of Office of Defense Health and Welfare Services and Office of
        Civilian Defense. Reorganized in June 1942 and renamed Joint Committee on Evacuation. Office of Defense
        Health and Welfare Services abolished by EO 9388 of Apr. 29, 1943, and functions transferred to Federal
        Security Agency. Committee terminated.

Heart and Lung Institute, National
        Renamed National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute by act of Apr. 22, 1976 (90 Stat. 402).

Heritage Conservation and Recreation Service
        Established by the Secretary of the Interior Jan. 25, 1978. Abolished by Secretarial Order 3060 of Feb. 19,
        1981, and functions transferred to National Park Service.

Hemispheric Defense Studies, Center for
       Established by Department of Defense Directive 3200.12 of Sept. 3, 1997. Abolished by act of Oct. 17,
       2006 (120 Stat. 2353).

Highway Safety Agency, National
       Established in the Department of Commerce by act of Sept. 9, 1966 (80 Stat. 731). Functions transferred
       to the Department of Transportation by act of Oct. 15, 1966 (80 Stat. 931). Functions transferred to
       National Highway Safety Bureau by EO 11357 of June 6, 1967. Bureau renamed National Highway Traffic
       Safety Administration by act of Dec. 31, 1970 (84 Stat. 1739).
Highway Safety Bureau, National See Highway Safety Agency, National

Home Economics, Bureau of Human Nutrition and See Home Economics, Office of
Home Economics, Office of
       Renamed Bureau of Home Economics by Secretary’s Memorandum 436, effective July 1, 1923, pursuant to
       act of Feb. 26, 1923 (42 Stat. 1289). Redesignated Bureau of Human Nutrition and Home Economics
       February 1943 in accordance with Research Administration Memorandum 5 issued pursuant to EO 9069
       of Feb. 23, 1942, and in conformity with Secretary’s Memorandums 960 and 986. Functions transferred to
       Agricultural Research Service by Secretary’s Memorandum 1320, supp. 4, of Nov. 2, 1953.

Home Loan Bank Administration, Federal See Home Loan Bank Board, Federal

Home Loan Bank Board See Home Loan Bank Board, Federal

Home Loan Bank Board, Federal
       Established by acts of July 22, 1932 (47 Stat. 725), June 13, 1933 (48 Stat. 128), and June 27, 1934 (48 Stat.
       1246). Grouped with other agencies to form Federal Loan Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective
       July 1, 1939. Functions transferred to Federal Home Loan Bank Administration, National Housing Agency,
       by EO 9070 of Feb. 24, 1942. Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 3, effective July 27, 1947, and functions
       transferred to Home Loan Bank Board, Housing and Home Finance Agency. Renamed Federal Home Loan
       Bank Board and made independent agency by act of Aug. 11, 1955 (69 Stat. 640). Abolished by act of Aug.
       9, 1989 (103 Stat. 354, 415), and functions transferred to Office of Thrift Supervision, Resolution Trust
       Corporation, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Federal Housing Finance Board. (See also Thrift
       Supervision, Office of).

Home Loan Bank System, Federal
       Grouped with other agencies to form Federal Loan Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1,
       1939. Functions transferred to Federal Home Loan Bank Administration, National Housing Agency, by EO
       9070 of Feb. 24, 1942. Transferred to Housing and Home Finance Agency by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947,
       effective July 27, 1947.

Home Mortgage Credit Extension Committee, National Voluntary
      Established by act of Aug. 2, 1954 (68 Stat 638). Terminated Oct. 1, 1965, pursuant to terms of act.

Home Owners’ Loan Corporation
      Established by act of June 13, 1933 (48 Stat. 128), under supervision of Federal Home Loan Bank Board.
      Grouped with other agencies to form Federal Loan Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1,
      1939. Transferred to Federal Home Loan Bank Administration, National Housing Agency, by EO 9070 of
      Feb. 24, 1942. Board of Directors abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, effective July 27, 1947, and
      functions transferred, for liquidation of assets, to Home Loan Bank Board, Housing and Home Finance
      Agency. Terminated by order of Secretary of the Home Loan Bank Board, effective Feb. 3, 1954, pursuant
      to act of June 30, 1953 (67 Stat. 121).

Homesteads, Division of Subsistence
       Established by act of June 16, 1933 (48 Stat. 205). Secretary of the Interior authorized to administer
       section 208 of act by EO 6209 of July 21, 1933. Federal Subsistence Homesteads Corporation created by
       Secretary’s order of Dec. 2, 1933, and organization incorporated under laws of Delaware. Transferred to
       Resettlement Administration by EO 7041 of May 15, 1935.

Homesteads Corporation, Federal Subsistence See Homesteads, Division of Subsistence

Hospitalization, Board of Federal
         Organized Nov. 1, 1921. Designated as advisory agency to Bureau of the Budget May 7, 1943. Terminated
         June 30, 1948, by Director’s letter of May 28, 1948.

Housing, President’s Committee on Equal Opportunity in
        Established by EO 11063 of Nov. 20, 1962. Inactive as of June 30, 1968.

Housing Administration, Federal
        Established by act of June 27, 1934 (48 Stat. 1246). Grouped with other agencies to form Federal Loan
        Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Functions transferred to Federal Housing
        Administration, National Housing Agency, by EO 9070 of Feb. 24, 1942. Transferred to Housing and Home
        Finance Agency by Reorg. Plan No. 3, effective July 27, 1947. Functions transferred to the Department of
        Housing and Urban Development by act of Sept. 9, 1965 (79 Stat. 667).

Housing Administration, Public
        Established as constituent agency of Housing and Home Finance Agency by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947,
        effective July 27, 1947. Functions transferred to the Department of Housing and Urban Development by
        act of Sept. 9, 1965 (79 Stat. 667).

Housing Agency, National
        Established by EO 9070 of Feb. 24, 1942, to consolidate housing functions relating to Federal Home Loan
        Bank Board, Federal Home Loan Bank System, Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, Home
        Owners’ Loan Corporation, U.S. Housing Corporation, Federal Housing Administration, U.S. Housing
        Authority, Defense Homes Corporation, Division of Defense Housing Coordination, Central Housing
        Committee, Farm Security Administration with respect to nonfarm housing, Public Buildings
        Administration, Division of Defense Housing, Mutual Ownership Defense Housing Division, Office of
        Administrator of Federal Works Agency, and the Departments of War and the Navy with respect to
        housing located off military installations. Agency dissolved on creation of Housing and Home Finance
        Agency by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, effective July 27, 1947.

Housing Authority, Federal Public
        Established by EO 9070 of Feb. 24, 1942. Public housing functions of Federal Works Agency, the
        Departments of War and the Navy (except housing located on military installations), and Farm Security
        Administration (nonfarm housing) transferred to Authority, and Defense Homes Corporation administered
        by the Commissioner of the Authority’. Functions transferred to Public Housing Administration, Housing
        and Home Finance Agency, by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, effective July 27, 1947.

Housing Authority, U.S.
        Established in the Department of the Interior by act of Sept. 1, 1937 (50 Stat. 888). Transferred to Federal
        Works Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Transferred to Federal Public Housing
        Authority, National Housing Agency, by EO 9070 of Feb. 24, 1942. Office of Administrator abolished by
        Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, effective July 27, 1947, and functions transferred to Public Housing
        Administration, Housing and Home Finance Agency.

Housing Corporation, U.S.
        Incorporated July 10, 1918, under laws of New York. Transferred from the Department of Labor to the
        Department of the Treasury by EO 7641 of June 22, 1937. Transferred from the Department of the
        Treasury to the Public Buildings Administration, Federal Works Agency, by EO 8186 of June 29, 1939.
        Functions transferred for liquidation to Federal Home Loan Bank Administration, National Housing
        Agency, by EO 9070 of Feb. 24, 1942. Terminated Sept. 8, 1952, by the Secretary of the Home Loan Bank
        Board.

Housing Council, National
        Established in Housing and Home Finance Agency by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, effective July 27, 1947.
        Terminated by Reorg. Plan No. 4 of 1965, effective July 27, 1965, and functions transferred to President.

Housing Division
        Established in Public Works Administration by act of June 16, 1933 (48 Stat. 195). Functions transferred to
        U.S. Housing Authority by EO 7732 of Oct. 27, 1937.

Housing Enterprise Oversight, Office of Federal
        Office and positions of Director and Deputy Director established within the Department of Housing and
        Urban Development by the act of October 28, 1992 (106 Stat. 3944). Abolished by the act of July 30, 2008
        (122 Stat. 2794), and functions, personnel, and property transferred to Federal Housing Finance Agency.
Housing Expediter, Office of the
        Established in Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion by Presidential letter of Dec. 12, 1945, to
        Housing Expediter. Functions of Housing Expediter defined by EO 9686 of Jan. 26, 1946. Housing Expediter
        confirmed in position of National Housing Administrator Feb. 6, 1946. Office of the Housing Expediter
        established by act of May 22, 1946 (60 Stat. 208). Functions of Office and National Housing Administrator
        segregated by EO 9820 of Jan. 11, 1947. Housing functions of Civilian Production Administration
        transferred to Office by EO 9836 of Mar. 22, 1947, effective Apr. 1, 1947. Rent control functions of Office
        of Temporary Controls transferred to Office by EO 9841 of Apr. 23, 1947. Office terminated by EO 10276
        of July 31, 1951, and functions transferred to Economic Stabilization Agency.

Housing Finance Board, Federal
        Established by the act of August 9, 1989 (103 Stat. 354, 415), and certain functions transferred from
        Federal Home Loan Bank Board. Abolished by the act of July 30, 2008 (122 Stat. 2797), and functions,
        personnel, and property transferred to Federal Housing Finance Agency.

Housing and Home Finance Agency
        Established by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, effective July 27, 1947. Terminated by act of Sept. 9, 1965 (79
        Stat. 667), and functions transferred to the Department of Housing and Urban Development.

Howard University
       Established by act of Mar. 2, 1867 (14 Stat. 438). Functions of the Department of the Interior transferred
       to Federal Security Agency by Reorg. Plan No. IV of 1940, effective June 30, 1940. Functions of the
       Department of Health, Education, and Welfare transferred to the Department of Education by act of Oct.
       17, 1979 (93 Stat. 678).

Human Development, Office of
       Established in Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Renamed Office of Human Development
       Services and component units transferred to or reorganized under new administrations in Office by
       Secretary’s reorganization order of July 26, 1977. Merged into the Administration for Children and
       Families by Secretary of Health and Human Services reorganization notice dated Apr. 15, 1991.

Human Development Services, Office of See Human Development, Office of

Human Embryo Stem Cell Registry
       Approved by Presidential announcement of Aug. 9, 2001 and established through National Institute of
       Health’s Departmental Notice NOT-OD-01-058 of Aug. 27, 2001. Renamed Human Pluripotent Stem Cell
       Registry by EO 13435 of June 20, 2007.

Hydrographic Office
       Jurisdiction transferred from Bureau of Navigation to Chief of Naval Operations by EO 9126 of Apr. 8,
       1942, and by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1946, effective July 16, 1946. Renamed U.S. Naval Oceanographic Office
       by act of July 10, 1962 (76 Stat. 154).


I                                           TOP OF PAGE

Imagery and Mapping Agency, National
        Established by act of Sept. 23, 1996 (110 Stat. 2677). Renamed National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency by
        act of Nov. 24, 2003 (117 Stat. 1568).

Imagery Office, Central
        Established as a Department of Defense agency on May 6, 1992. Functions transferred to National
        Imagery and Mapping Agency by act of Sept. 23, 1996 (110 Stat. 2677).
Immigration, Bureau of
       Established as branch of the Department of the Treasury by act of Mar. 3, 1891 (26 Stat. 1085).
       Transferred to Department of Commerce and Labor by act of Feb. 14, 1903 (34 Stat. 596). Made Bureau of
       Immigration and Naturalization by act of June 29, 1906 (37 Stat. 736). Made separate division after the
       Department of Labor created by act of Mar. 4, 1913 (37 Stat. 736). Consolidated into Immigration and
       Naturalization Service, Department of Labor, by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933. Transferred to the Department
       of Justice by Reorg. Plan No. V of 1940, effective June 14, 1940. Abolished by act of Nov. 25, 2002 (116
       Stat. 2205) and functions transferred to Homeland Security Department.

Immigration, Commissioners of
       Offices of commissioners of immigration of the several ports created by act of Aug. 18, 1894 (28 Stat.
       391). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. III of 1940, effective June 30, 1940, and functions transferred to
       Bureau of Immigration and Naturalization, Department of Labor.

Immigration and Naturalization, Bureau of See Immigration, Bureau of

Immigration and Naturalization, District Commissioner of
       Created by act of Aug. 18, 1894 (28 Stat. 391). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. III of 1940, effective June 30,
       1940. Functions administered by the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization, Department of
       Justice, through district immigration and naturalization directors.

Immigration and Naturalization Service See Immigration, Bureau of

Import Programs, Office of
        Established by the Secretary of Commerce Feb. 14, 1971. Functions transferred to Domestic and
        International Business Administration, effective Nov. 17, 1972.

Indian Claims Commission
         Established by act of Aug. 13, 1946 (60 Stat. 1049). Terminated by act of Oct. 8, 1976 (90 Stat. 1990), and
         pending cases transferred to U.S. Court of Claims Sept. 30, 1978.

Indian Commissioners, Board of
        Established by section 2039, Revised Statutes. Abolished by EO 6145 of May 25, 1933.

Indian Education Programs, Office of
         Established within the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, by act of June 23, 1972 (86
         Stat. 343). Renamed Bureau of Indian Education by Departmental Manual Release No. 3721 of Aug. 29,
         2006.

Indian Medical Facilities
        Functions transferred from the Department of the Interior to the Department of Health, Education, and
        Welfare, to be administered by the Surgeon General of Public Health Service, by act of Aug. 5, 1954 (68
        Stat. 674).

Indian Opportunity, National Council on
        Established by EO 11399 of Mar. 6, 1968. Terminated Nov. 26, 1974, by act of Nov. 26, 1969 (83 Stat.
        220).

Indian Policy Review Commission, American
        Established by act of Jan. 2, 1975 (88 Stat. 1910). Terminated June 30, 1977, pursuant to terms of act.

Industrial Analysis, Committee of
         Established by EO 7323 of Mar. 21, 1936. Terminated Feb. 17, 1937.
Industrial Cooperation, Coordinator for
         Established by EO 7193 of Sept. 26, 1935. Continued by EO 7324 of Mar. 30, 1936. Terminated June 30,
         1937.

Industrial Emergency Committee
         Established by EO 6770 of June 30, 1934. Consolidated with National Emergency Council by EO 6889–A of
         Oct. 29, 1934.

Industrial Pollution Control Council Staff, National
         Established by Department of Commerce Organization Order 35–3 of June 17, 1970. Staff abolished by
         departmental organization order of Sept. 10, 1973. Council inactive.

Industrial Recovery Board, National
         Established by EO 6859 of Sept. 27, 1934. Terminated by EO 7075 of June 15, 1935.

Industrial Recovery Board, Special
         Established by EO 6173 of June 16, 1933. Functions absorbed by National Emergency Council under terms
         of EO 6513 of Dec. 18, 1933.

Industrial Relations, Office of
         Activated in the Department of the Navy Sept. 14, 1945. Superseded June 22, 1966, by creation of Office
         of Civilian Manpower Management.

Industry and Trade Administration See Business and Defense Services Administration

Information, Committee for Reciprocity
        Established by EO 6750 of June 27, 1934; reestablished by EO 10004 of Oct. 5, 1948, which revoked EO
        6750. Superseded by EO 10082 of Oct. 5, 1949; abolished by EO 11075 of Jan. 15, 1963, which revoked EO
        10082.

Information, Coordinator of
        Established by Presidential order of July 11, 1941. Functions exclusive of foreign information activities
        transferred by military order of June 13, 1942, to jurisdiction of Joint Chiefs of Staff, War Department, as
        Office of Strategic Services. Foreign information functions transferred to Office of War Information by EO
        9182 of June 13, 1942.

Information, Division of
        Established pursuant to Presidential letter of Feb. 28, 1941, to Liaison Officer, Office of Emergency
        Management. Abolished by EO 9182 of June 13, 1942. Functions relating to public information on war
        effort transferred and consolidated with Office of War Information, and publication services relating to
        specific agencies of OEM transferred to those agencies.

Information, Office of Coordinator of
        Transferred, exclusive of foreign information activities, to Office of War Information by EO 9182 of June
        13, 1942. Designated Office of Strategic Services and transferred to jurisdiction of Joint Chiefs of Staff by
        military order of June 13, 1942. Terminated by EO 9621 of Sept. 20, 1945, and functions distributed to the
        Departments of State and War.

Information Administration, International
        Transferred from the Department of State to the U.S. Information Agency by Reorg. Plan No. 8 of 1953,
        effective Aug. 1, 1953.

Information Agency, U.S.
        Established by Reorg. Plan No. 8 of 1953, effective Aug. 1, 1953. Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1977,
        effective Apr. 1, 1978; replaced by and functions transferred to International Communication Agency.
        Redesignated U.S. Information Agency by act of Aug. 24, 1982 (96 Stat. 291). Abolished by act of Oct. 21,
         1998 (112 Stat. 2681–761), and functions transferred to the Department of State, effective Oct. 1, 1999.

Information and Public Affairs, Office of
        Merged with Office of Intergovernmental Affairs to form Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs by
        Order 1–85 of June 5, 1985 of the Secretary of Labor.

Information Resources Management, Office of See Telecommunications Service, Automated Data

Information Resources Management Service
        Established in the General Services Administration. Renamed Information Technology Service in 1995.

Information Security Committee, Interagency
        Established by EO 12065 of June 28, 1978. Abolished by EO 12356 of Apr. 2, 1982.

Information Security Oversight Office
        Established in General Services Administration by EO 12065 of June 28, 1978. EO 12065 revoked by EO
        12356 of Apr. 2, 1982, which provided for continuation of Office.

Information Service, Government See Information Service, U.S.

Information Service, Interim International
        Established in the Department of State by EO 9608 of Aug. 31, 1945. Abolished Dec. 31, 1945, pursuant to
        terms of order.

Information Service, U.S.
        Established in March 1934 as division of National Emergency Council. Transferred to Office of Government
        Reports by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Consolidated, along with other functions of
        Office, into Division of Public Inquiries, Bureau of Special Services, Office of War Information, by EO 9182
        of June 13, 1942. Bureau of Special Services renamed Government Information Service and transferred to
        Bureau of the Budget by EO 9608 of Aug. 31, 1945. Service transferred to Office of Government Reports by
        EO 9809 of Dec. 12, 1946.

Information Systems Council
        Established by EO 13356 of Aug. 27, 2004. Abolished by EO 13388 of Oct. 25, 2005 (70 FR 62025).

Information Technology Service
        Established in General Services Administration. Abolished by General Services Administrative Order No.
        5440.492, Aug. 21, 1996, and functions transferred to Federal Telecommunications Service.

Insane, Government Hospital for the
         Established by act of Mar. 3, 1855 (10 Stat. 682). Renamed Saint Elizabeth’s Hospital by act of July 1, 1916
         (39 Stat. 309). Transferred from the Department of the Interior to Federal Security Agency by Reorg. Plan
         No. IV of 1940, effective June 30, 1940. Transferred to Department of Health, Education, and Welfare by
         Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1953, effective Apr. 11, 1953. Functions redelegated to National Institute of Mental
         Health by Secretary’s reorganization order of Aug. 9, 1967. Property and administration transferred to
         District of Columbia Government by act of Nov. 8, 1984 (98 Stat. 3369).

Installations, Director of
          Established in the Department of Defense by act of July 14, 1952 (66 Stat. 625). Abolished by Reorg. Plan
          No. 6 of 1953, effective June 30, 1953, and functions transferred to the Secretary of Defense.

Insular Affairs, Bureau of
         Transferred from Department of War to Division of Territories and Island Possessions, the Department of
         the Interior, by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939.
Insurance Administrator, Federal
        Established by act of Aug. 1, 1968 (82 Stat. 567). Functions transferred to Federal Emergency
        Management Agency by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1978, effective Apr. 1, 1979.

Integrity and Efficiency, President’s Council on
         Established by EO 12301 of Mar. 26, 1981 (46 FR 19211). Abolished and reestablished by EO 12625 of Jan
         27, 1988 (53 FR 2812). Abolished and reestablished by EO 12805 of May 11, 1992 (57 FR 20627).

Intelligence, Office of
         Established within the Department of Energy by Public Law 106–65 of Oct. 5, 1999 (113 Stat. 955).
         Merged with Office of Counterintelligence to form Office of Intelligence and Counterintelligence by
         memorandum of March 9, 2006 of the Secretary of Energy.

Intelligence Activities, President’s Board of Consultants on Foreign
         Established by EO 10656 of Feb. 6, 1956. EO 10656 revoked by EO 10938 of May 4, 1961, and Board
         terminated. Functions transferred to President’s Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board.

Intelligence Advisory Board, President’s Foreign
         Established by EO 11460 of Mar. 20, 1969. Abolished by EO 11984 of May 4, 1977. Reestablished by EO
         12331 of Oct. 20, 1981.

Intelligence Authority, National
         Established by Presidential directive of Jan. 22, 1946. Terminated on creation of Central Intelligence
         Agency under National Security Council by act of July 26, 1947 (61 Stat. 497).

Intelligence Group, Central
         Terminated on creation of Central Intelligence Agency by act of July 26, 1947 (61 Stat. 497).

Intelligence Policy and Review, Office of
         Transferred from the Criminal Division to the National Security Division by act of Mar. 9, 2006 (120 Stat.
         249).

Inter-American Affairs, Institute of See American Republics, Office for Coordination of Commercial and Cultural
Relations between the


Inter-American Affairs, Office of See American Republics, Office for Coordination of Commercial and Cultural
Relations between the

Inter-American Affairs, Office of the Coordinator of See American Republics, Office for Coordination of
Commercial and Cultural Relations between the

Interagency. See other part of title

Interdepartmental. See also other part of title

Interdepartmental Advisory Council
        Established January 1941 to advise Coordinator of Health, Welfare, and Related Defense Activities.
        Terminated on creation of Office of Defense Health and Welfare Service Sept. 3, 1941.

Interest and Dividends, Committee on
         Established by EO 11695 of Jan. 11, 1973. Abolished by EO 11781 of May 1, 1974.

Intergovernmental Affairs, Office of
        Merged with Office of Information and Public Affairs to form Office of Public and Intergovernmental
        Affairs by Order 1–85 of June 5, 1985 of the Secretary of Labor. Renamed Office of Intergovernmental and
         External Affairs by Secretary of Health and Human Services notice of July 19, 2011 (76 FR 42710).

Intergovernmental and Interagency Affairs, Office of
        Abolished by decision of March 21, 2005 of the Secretary of Education under authority of section 413 of
        the Department of Education Organization Act.

Intergovernmental and Public Liaison, Office of
        Transferred to the Office of Legislative Affairs by the Attorney General on August 24, 2011.

Intergovernmental Relations, Advisory Commission on
        Established by act of Sept. 24, 1959 (73 Stat. 703). Terminated pursuant to act of Nov. 19, 1995 (109 Stat.
        480). Continued in existence by act of Oct. 19, 1996 (110 Stat. 4004).

Intergovernmental Relations, Commission on
        Established by act of July 10, 1953 (67 Stat. 145). Final report submitted to Congress by June 30, 1955,
        pursuant to act of Feb. 7, 1955 (69 Stat. 7).

Intergovernmental Relations, Office of
        Established by EO 11455 of Feb. 14, 1969. Functions transferred to Domestic Council by EO 11690 of Dec.
        14, 1972.

Interim Compliance Panel
         Established by Dec. 30, 1969 (83 Stat. 774). Terminated June 30, 1976, pursuant to terms of act.

Internal Revenue Service
         Functions relating to alcohol, tobacco, firearms, and explosives transferred to Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
         and Firearms by Department of Treasury order of July 1, 1972.

Internal Security Division
         Established July 9, 1945, by transfer of functions from Criminal Division. Abolished Mar. 22, 1973, and
         functions transferred to Criminal Division, Department of Justice.

International See also other part of title

International Activities, Office of
         Renamed Office of Service and Protocol by Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution internal directive of
         Jan. 11, 1985.

International Development, Agency for
         Transferred from the Department of State to U.S. International Development Cooperation Agency by
         Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1979, effective Oct. 1, 1979. Continued as agency within IDCA by IDCA Delegation of
         Authority No. 1 of Oct. 1, 1979. By act of Oct. 21, 1998 (112 Stat. 2681–790), became independent
         agency.

International Development Cooperation Agency, U.S.
         Established by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1979, effective Oct. 1, 1979. Abolished by act of Oct. 21, 1998 (112
         Stat. 2681–790) and functions transferred to the Department of State, U.S. Agency for International
         Development, and Overseas Private Investment Corporation.

Interstate Commerce Commission
         Created by act of Feb. 4, 1887 (24 Stat. 379). Certain functions as cited in act of Oct. 15, 1966 (80 Stat.
         931) transferred to the Secretary of Commerce. Functions relating to railroad and pipeline safety
         transferred to Federal Railroad Administrator and motor carrier safety to Federal Highway Administrator
         by act. Abolished by act of Dec. 29, 1995 (109 Stat. 932) and many functions transferred to the newly
         created Surface Transportation Board within the Department of Transportation.
Investigation, Bureau of
         Established by act of May 22, 1908 (35 Stat. 235). Functions consolidated with investigative functions of
         Bureau of Prohibition, Division of Investigation, Department of Justice, by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933,
         effective Mar. 2, 1934.

Investigation, Division of
         Designated as Federal Bureau of Investigation in the Department of Justice by act of Mar. 22, 1935 (49
         Stat. 77).

Investigation and Research, Board of
         Established by act of Sept. 18, 1940 (54 Stat. 952). Extended to Sept. 18, 1944, by Proc. 2559 of June 26,
         1942.

Investigations, Division of
         Established by administrative order of Apr. 27, 1933. Abolished Jan. 17, 1942, by administrative order and
         functions transferred to Branch of Field Examination, General Land Office, Department of the Interior.

Investments, Office of Foreign Direct
        Established in the Department of Commerce Jan. 2, 1968, by Departmental Organization Order 25–3 to
        carry out provisions of EO 11387 of Jan. 1, 1968. Controls on foreign investments terminated Jan. 29,
        1974.

Iraq Reconstruction, Office of the Inspector General for
        Established by act of Nov. 6, 2003 (117 Stat. 1234). Abolished by act of Oct. 17, 2006 (120 Stat. 2397).

Iraq Transition Assistance Office
         Established by EO 13431 of May 8, 2007 (72 FR 26709). Personnel and administration transferred to Iraq
         Strategic Partnership Office by EO 13541 of May 7, 2010 (75 FR 26879).


J                                            TOP OF PAGE

Jamestown-Williamsburg-Yorktown National Celebration Commission
       Established by act of Aug. 13, 1953 (67 Stat. 576). Terminated upon submission of final report to Congress
       Mar. 1, 1958.

Job Corps, Office of
        Transferred from the Employment and Training Administration to the Office of the Secretary, U.S.
        Department of Labor by act of Dec. 30, 2005 (119 Stat. 2842). Transferred from the Office of the
        Secretary, U.S. Department of Labor to the Employment and Training Administration by act of Dec. 16,
        2009 (123 Stat. 3238).

Joint. See also other part of title

Joint Resolutions of Congress See State, Department of

Judicial Procedure, Commission on International Rules of
          Established by act of Sept. 2, 1958 (72 Stat. 1743). Terminated Dec. 31, 1966, by act of Aug. 30, 1964 (78
          Stat. 700).

Justice Assistance, Research, and Statistics, Office of
         Established in the Department of Justice by act of Dec. 27, 1979 (93 Stat. 1201). Abolished by act of Oct.
         12, 1984 (98 Stat. 2091).
K                                           TOP OF PAGE

Kennedy, Commission To Report Upon the Assassination of President John F.
       Established by EO 11130 of Nov. 29, 1963. Report submitted Sept. 24, 1964, and Commission discharged
       by Presidential letter of same date.


L                                           TOP OF PAGE

Labor, President’s Committee on Migratory
         Appointed by Presidential letter of Aug. 26, 1954. Formally established by EO 10894 of Nov. 15, 1960.
         Terminated Jan. 6, 1964, by the Secretary of Labor in letter to members, with approval of President.

Labor and Commerce, Department of
        Established by act of Feb. 14, 1903 (32 Stat. 825). Reorganized into separate Departments of Labor and
        Commerce by act of Mar. 4, 1913 (37 Stat. 736).

Labor Department, Solicitor for
        Transferred from the Department of Justice to the Department of Labor by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933.

Labor-Management Advisory Committee
       Established by EO 11695 of Jan. 11, 1973. Abolished by EO 11788 of June 18, 1974.

Labor-Management Policy, President’s Advisory Committee on
       Established by EO 10918 of Feb. 16, 1961. Abolished by EO 11710 of Apr. 4, 1973.

Labor-Management Relations Services, Office of
       Established by Order 3–84 of May 3, 1984 of the Secretary of Labor. Renamed Bureau of Labor-
       Management Relations and Cooperative Programs by Secretarial Order 7–84 of Sept. 20, 1984 (49 FR
       38374).

Labor-Management Services Administration
       Office of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs transferred from Administration and constituted as
       separate unit by Order 1–84 of Jan. 20, 1984 of the Secretary of Labor (49 FR 4269). Remaining labor-
       management relations functions reassigned by Secretarial Order 3–84 of May 3, 1984.

Labor Organization, International
        Established in 1919 by Treaty of Versailles with U.S. joining in 1934. U.S. membership terminated Nov. 1,
        1977, at President’s direction. The U.S. rejoined the organization in February 1980.

Labor Relations Council, Federal
        Established by EO 11491 of Oct. 29, 1969. Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1978, effective Jan. 1, 1979,
        and functions transferred to Federal Labor Relations Authority.

Labor Standards, Apprenticeship Section, Division of
        Transferred to Federal Security Agency by EO 9139 of Apr. 18, 1942, functioning as Apprentice Training
        Service. Transferred to War Manpower Commission by EO 9247 of Sept. 17, 1942, functioning in Bureau of
        Training. Returned to the Department of Labor by EO 9617 of Sept. 19, 1945.

Labor Standards, Bureau of
        Established by Labor departmental order in 1934. Functions absorbed by Occupational Safety and Health
        Administration in May 1971.

Land Bank Commissioner See Farm Loan Board, Federal
Land Law Review Commission, Public
        Established by act of Sept. 19, 1964 (78 Stat. 982). Terminated Dec. 31, 1970, pursuant to terms of act.

Land Office, General
        Consolidated with Grazing Service into Bureau of Land Management, Department of the Interior, by
        Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1946, effective July 16, 1946.

Land Office, Office of Recorder of the General
        Created in the Department of the Interior by act of July 4, 1836 (5 Stat. 111). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No.
        III of 1940, effective June 30, 1940, and functions transferred to General Land Office.

Land Policy Section
        Established in 1934 as part of Program Planning Division, Agricultural Adjustment Administration.
        Personnel taken over by Resettlement Administration in 1935.

Land Problems, Committee on National
        Established by EO 6693 of Apr. 28, 1934. Abolished by EO 6777 of June 30, 1934.

Land Program, Director of
        Basis of program found in act of June 16, 1933 (48 Stat. 200). Special Board of Public Works established by
        EO 6174 of June 16, 1933. Land Program established by Board by resolution passed Dec. 28, 1933, and
        amended July 18, 1934. Federal Emergency Relief Administration designated to administer program Feb.
        28, 1934. Land Program transferred to Resettlement Administration by EO 7028 of Apr. 30, 1935.
        Functions of Administration transferred to the Secretary of Agriculture by EO 7530 of Dec. 31, 1936. Land
        conservation and land-utilization programs administered by Administration transferred to Bureau of
        Agricultural Economics by Secretary’s Memorandum 733. Administration of land programs placed under
        Soil Conservation Service by Secretary’s Memorandum 785 of Oct. 6, 1938.

Land Use Coordination, Office of
        Established by Secretary of Agriculture Memorandum 725 of July 12, 1937. Abolished Jan. 1, 1944, by
        General Departmental Circular 21 and functions administered by Land Use Coordinator.

Land Use and Water Planning, Office of
        Established in the Department of the Interior by Secretarial Order No. 2953 of May 7, 1973. Abolished by
        Secretarial Order No. 2988 of Mar. 11, 1976.

Law Enforcement Assistance Administration
        Established by act of June 19, 1968 (82 Stat. 197). Operations closed out by the Department of Justice due
        to lack of appropriations and remaining functions transferred to Office of Justice Assistance, Research, and
        Statistics.

Law Enforcement Training Center, Federal See Law Enforcement Training Center, Consolidated Federal

Law Enforcement Training Center, Consolidated Federal
        Established by Treasury Order No. 217, Mar. 2, 1970. Renamed Federal Law Enforcement Training Center
        by Amendment No. 1 to Treasury Order No. 217 on Aug. 14, 1975. Transferred to Department of
        Homeland Security by act of Nov. 25, 2002 (116 Stat. 2178).

Legislative Affairs, Office of
         Renamed Office of Intergovernmental and Legislative Affairs Feb. 24, 1984, by Attorney General’s Order
         1054–84 (49 FR 10177).

Lend-Lease Administration, Office of
        Established by EO 8926 of Oct. 28, 1941, to replace Division of Defense Aid Reports. Consolidated with
        Foreign Economic Administration by EO 9380 of Sept. 25, 1943.
Lewis and Clark Trail Commission
        Established by act of Oct. 6, 1964 (78 Stat. 1005). Terminated October 1969 by terms of act.

Libraries and Information Science, National Commission on
         Established by act of July 20, 1970 (84 Stat. 440). As per close out activities, the Commission was
         abolished by act of Dec. 26, 2007 (121 Stat. 2204), and functions transferred to the Institute of Museum
         and Library Services pursuant to instructions set forth in House Report 110–231 and Senate Report 110–
         107.

Library of Congress Police
         Established by act of Aug. 4, 1950 (64 Stat. 411). Personnel transferred to United States Capitol Police by
         acts of Dec. 26, 2007 (121 Stat. 2228) and Jan. 7, 2008 (121 Stat. 2546).

Lighthouses, Bureau of
        Established in the Department of Commerce by act of Aug. 7, 1789 (1 Stat. 53). Consolidated with U.S.
        Coast Guard by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939.

Lincoln Sesquicentennial Commission
         Established by joint resolution of Sept. 2, 1957 (71 Stat. 587). Terminated Mar. 1, 1960, pursuant to terms
         of joint resolution.

Liquidation, Director of
         Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 9674 of Jan. 4, 1946. Terminated by EO 9744 of
         June 27, 1946.

Liquidation Advisory Committee
         Established by EO 9674 of Jan. 4, 1946. Terminated by EO 9744 of June 27, 1946.

Literacy, National Institute for
         Established by act of July 25, 1991 (105 Stat. 333). Abolished by act of Dec. 16, 2009 (123 Stat. 3267).

Loan Agency, Federal
        Established by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939, by consolidating Reconstruction Finance
        Corporation— including subordinate units of RFC Mortgage Company, Disaster Loan Corporation, Federal
        National Mortgage Association, Defense Plant Corporation, Defense Homes Corporation, Defense Supplies
        Corporation, Rubber Reserve Company, Metals Reserve Company, and War Insurance Corporation (later
        known as War Damage Corporation)—with Federal Home Loan Bank Board, Home Owners’ Loan
        Corporation, Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, Federal Housing Administration, Electric
        Home and Farm Authority, and Export-Import Bank of Washington. Federal Home Loan Bank Board,
        Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, Home Owners’ Loan Corporation, Federal Housing
        Administration, and Defense Homes Corporation transferred to National Housing Agency by EO 9070 of
        Feb. 24, 1942. Reconstruction Finance Corporation and its units (except Defense Homes Corporation),
        Electric Home and Farm Authority, and Export-Import Bank of Washington transferred to the Department
        of Commerce by EO 9071 of Feb. 24, 1942. RFC and units returned to Federal Loan Agency by act of Feb.
        24, 1945 (59 Stat. 5). Agency abolished by act of June 30, 1947 (61 Stat. 202), and all property and records
        transferred to Reconstruction Finance Corporation.

Loan Fund, Development
        Established in International Cooperation Administration by act of Aug. 14, 1957 (71 Stat. 355). Created as
        independent corporate agency by act of June 30, 1958 (72 Stat. 261). Abolished by act of Sept. 4, 1961 (75
        Stat. 445), and functions redelegated to Agency for International Development.
Loan Policy Board
        Established by act of July 18, 1958 (72 Stat. 385). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 4 of 1965, effective July 27,
        1965, and functions transferred to Small Business Administration.
Longshoremen’s Labor Board, National
       Established in the Department of Labor by EO 6748 of June 26, 1934. Terminated by Proc. 2120 of Mar.
       11, 1935.

Low-Emission Vehicle Certification Board
       Established by act of Dec. 31, 1970 (84 Stat. 1701). Terminated by act of Mar. 14, 1980 (94 Stat. 98).

Lowell Historic Canal District Commission
        Established by act of Jan. 4, 1975 (88 Stat. 2330). Expired January 1977 pursuant to terms of act.

Loyalty Review Board
         Established Nov. 10, 1947, by U.S. Civil Service Commission, pursuant to EO 9835 of Mar. 21, 1947.
         Abolished by EO 10450 of Apr. 27, 1953.



M                                           TOP OF PAGE

Management, Budget and Evaluation, Office of
      Established within the Department of Energy pursuant to the Conference Report No. 107–258 on H.R.
      2311, Energy and Water Development Appropriations Act, 2002. Abolished by memorandum of July 28,
      2005 of the Secretary of Energy, and various functions transferred within the Department of Energy to the
      Office of Management, Office of Chief Financial Officer, and Office of Human Capital Management.

Management Improvement, Advisory Committee on
      Established by EO 10072 of July 29, 1949. Abolished by EO 10917 of Feb. 10, 1961, and functions
      transferred to Bureau of the Budget.

Management Improvement, President’s Advisory Council on
      Established by EO 11509 of Feb. 11, 1970. Inactive as of June 30, 1973.

Manpower, President’s Committee on
      Established by EO 11152 of Apr. 15, 1964. Terminated by EO 11515 of Mar. 13, 1970.

Manpower Administration
      Renamed Employment and Training Administration by Order 14–75 of Nov. 12, 1975 of the Secretary of
      Labor.

Manpower Management, Office of Civilian
      Renamed Office of Civilian Personnel by Notice 5430 of Oct. 1, 1976 of the Secretary of the Navy.

Marine Affairs, Office of
        Established by the Secretary of the Interior Apr. 30, 1970, to replace Office of Marine Resources, created
        by Secretary Oct. 22, 1968. Abolished by Secretary Dec. 4, 1970.

Marine Corps Memorial Commission, U.S.
        Established by act of Aug. 24, 1947 (61 Stat. 724). Terminated by act of Mar. 14, 1980 (94 Stat. 98).

Marine Debris Coordinating Committee
        Renamed Interagency Marine Debris Coordinating Committee by act of Dec. 22, 2006 (120 Stat. 3337).

Marine Inspection and Navigation, Bureau of See Navigation and Steamboat Inspection, Bureau of

Marine Resources and Engineering Development, National Council on
        Established in Executive Office of the President by act of June 17, 1966 (80 Stat. 203). Terminated Apr. 30,
        1971, due to lack of funding.
Maritime Administration
       Established in the Department of Commerce by Reorg. Plan No. 21 of 1950, effective May 24, 1950.
       Transferred to the Department of Transportation by act of Aug. 6, 1981 (95 Stat. 151).

Maritime Advisory Committee
       Established by EO 11156 of June 17, 1964. Terminated by EO 11427 of Sept. 4, 1968.

Maritime Board, Federal See Maritime Commission, U.S.

Maritime Commission, U.S.
       Established by act of June 29, 1936 (49 Stat. 1985), as successor agency to U.S. Shipping Board and U.S.
       Shipping Board Merchant Fleet Corporation. Training functions transferred to Commandant of Coast
       Guard by EO 9083 of Feb. 27, 1942. Functions further transferred to War Shipping Administration by EO
       9198 of July 11, 1942. Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 21 of 1950, effective May 24, 1950, which established
       Federal Maritime Board and Maritime Administration as successor agencies. Board abolished, regulatory
       functions transferred to Federal Maritime Commission, and functions relating to subsidization of
       merchant marine transferred to the Secretary of Commerce by Reorg. Plan No. 7 of 1961, effective Aug.
       12, 1961.

Maritime Labor Board
       Authorized by act of June 23, 1938 (52 Stat. 968). Mediatory duties abolished by act of June 23, 1941 (55
       Stat. 259); title expired June 22, 1942.

Marketing Administration, Surplus
        Established by Reorg. Plan No. III of 1940, effective June 30, 1940, consolidating functions vested in
        Federal Surplus Commodities Corporation and Division of Marketing and Marketing Agreements,
        Agricultural Adjustment Administration. Consolidated with other agencies into Agricultural Marketing
        Administration by EO 9069 of Feb. 23, 1942.

Marketing and Marketing Agreements, Division of
        Established in the Department of Agriculture by act of June 3, 1937 (50 Stat. 246). Consolidated with
        Federal Surplus Commodities Corporation into Surplus Marketing Administration by Reorg. Plan No. III of
        1940, effective June 30, 1940.

Mediation, U.S. Board of
        Established by act of May 20, 1926 (44 Stat. 577). Abolished by act of June 21, 1934 (48 Stat. 1193), and
        superseded by National Mediation Board, July 21, 1934.

Medical Information Systems Program Office, Tri-Service
        Renamed Defense Medical Systems Support Center by memorandum of the Assistant Secretary of
        Defense (Health Affairs) May 3, 1985.

Medical Services Administration
        Established by the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare reorganization of Aug. 15, 1967.
        Transferred from Social and Rehabilitation Service to Health Care Financing Administration by Secretary’s
        reorganization of Mar. 8, 1977 (42 FR 13262).

Medicine and Surgery, Department of
       Established in the Veterans Administration by act of Sept. 2, 1958 (72 Stat. 1243). Renamed Veterans
       Health Services and Research Administration in the Department of Veterans Affairs by act of Oct. 25, 1988
       (102 Stat. 2640). Renamed Veterans Health Administration by act of May 7, 1991 (105 Stat. 187).

Memorial Commission, National
       Established by Public Resolution 107 of Mar. 4, 1929 (45 Stat. 1699). Terminated by EO 6166 of June 10,
       1933, and functions transferred to Office of National Parks, Buildings, and Reservations, Department of
         the Interior.

Mental Health, National Institute of
        Established by act of July 3, 1946 (60 Stat. 425). Made entity within the Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental
        Health Administration by act of May 14, 1974 (88 Stat. 135). Functions transferred to the Department of
        Health and Human Services by act of Oct. 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 695). (See also act of Oct. 27, 1986; 100 Stat.
        3207–106.) Abolished by act of July 10, 1992 (106 Stat. 331). Reestablished by act of July 10, 1992 (106
        Stat. 364).

Metals Reserve Company
        Established June 28, 1940, by act of Jan. 22, 1932 (47 Stat. 5). Transferred from Federal Loan Agency to
        the Department of Commerce by EO 9071 of Feb. 24, 1942. Returned to Federal Loan Agency by act of
        Feb. 24, 1945 (59 Stat. 5). Dissolved by act of June 30, 1945 (59 Stat. 310), and functions transferred to
        Reconstruction Finance Corporation.

Metric Board, U.S.
        Established by act of Dec. 23, 1975 (89 Stat. 1007). Terminated Oct. 1, 1982, due to lack of funding.

Mexican-American Affairs, Interagency Committee on
       Established by Presidential memorandum of June 9, 1967. Renamed Cabinet Committee on Opportunities
       for Spanish-Speaking People by act of Dec. 30, 1969 (83 Stat. 838). Terminated Dec. 30, 1974, pursuant to
       terms of act.

Mexican Claims Commission, American
       Established by act of Dec. 18, 1942 (56 Stat. 1058). Terminated Apr. 4, 1947, by act of Apr. 3, 1945 (59
       Stat. 59).

Mexican Claims Commission, Special
       Established by act of Apr. 10, 1935 (49 Stat. 149). Terminated by EO 7909 of June 15, 1938.

Mexico Commission for Border Development and Friendship, U.S.
        Established through exchange of notes of Nov. 30 and Dec. 3, 1966, between U.S. and Mexico. Terminated
        Nov. 5, 1969.

Micronesian Claims Commission
       Established by act of July 1, 1971 (85 Stat. 92). Terminated Aug. 3, 1976, pursuant to terms of act.

Migration, Intergovernmental Committee for European
        Renamed Intergovernmental Committee for Migration by Resolution 624, passed by Intergovernmental
        Committee for European Migration Council, effective Nov. 11, 1980.

Migration, International Committee for
        Created in 1951. Renamed International Organization for Migration pursuant to article 29, paragraph 2, of
        the ICM constitution, effective Nov. 14, 1989.

Migratory Bird Conservation Commission
        Chairmanship transferred from the Secretary of Agriculture to the Secretary of the Interior by Reorg. Plan
        No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939.

Military Adult Sexual Assault Crimes Panel, Response Systems to
         Established by act of Jan. 2, 2013 (126 Stat. 1758). Terminated on Jan. 1, 2015 under provisions of act.

Military Air Transport Service aviation
         Renamed Military Airlift Command in U.S. Air Force by HQ MATS/ MAC Special Order G–164 of Jan. 1,
         1966.
Military Airlift Command
         Inactivate June 1, 1992.

Military Appeals, United States Court of
         Established under Article I of the Constitution of the United States pursuant to act of May 5, 1950, as
         amended. Renamed United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces by act of Oct. 5, 1994 (108 Stat.
         2831).

Military Compensation and Retirement Modernization Commission
         Established by act of Jan. 2, 2013 (126 Stat. 1788). Terminated on Dec. 2, 2015 pursuant to
         sec. 1095(a)(6), by act of Dec. 26, 2013 (127 Stat. 880).

Military Establishment, National
         Established as executive department of the Government by act of July 26, 1947 (61 Stat. 495). Designated
         Department of Defense by act of Aug. 10, 1949 (63 Stat. 579).

Military Intelligence College, Joint
         Established by DoD Directive 3305.1 of January 14, 1998. Renamed National Defense Intelligence College
         by DOD Instruction 3305.01 of Dec. 22, 2006. See also Defense Intelligence College.

Military Purchases, Interdepartmental Committee for Coordination of Foreign and Domestic
         Informal liaison committee created on Presidential notification of Dec. 6, 1939, to the Secretaries of the
         Treasury and War and the Acting Secretary of the Navy. Committee dissolved in accordance with
         Presidential letter to the Secretary of the Treasury Apr. 14, 1941, following approval of act of Mar. 11,
         1941 (55 Stat. 31).

Military Renegotiation Policy and Review Board
         Established by directive of the Secretary of Defense July 19, 1948. Abolished by Secretary’s letter of Jan.
         18, 1952, which transferred functions to Renegotiation Board.

Military Sea Transportation Service
         Renamed Military Sealift Command in U.S. Navy by COMSC notice of Aug. 1, 1970.

Militia Bureau
         Established in 1908 as Division of Militia Affairs, Office of the Secretary of War. Superseded in 1933 by
         National Guard Bureau.

Mine Health and Safety Academy, National
       Transferred from the Department of the Interior to the Department of Labor by act of July 25, 1979 (93
       Stat. 111).

Minerals Exploration, Office of
        Established by act of Aug. 21, 1958 (72 Stat. 700). Functions transferred to Geological Survey by Order
        2886 of Feb. 26, 1965 of the Secretary of the Interior.

Minerals Management Service
        Established on Jan. 19, 1982 by Secretarial order. Renamed as the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management,
        Regulation and Enforcement on June 18, 2010 by Secretarial order 3302. Reorganized into the Bureau of
        Ocean Energy Management and the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement by Secretarial
        order 3299 of May 19, 2010.

Minerals Mobilization, Office of
        Established by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to act of Sept. 8, 1950 (64 Stat. 798) and EO 10574 of
        Nov. 5, 1954, and by order of Office of Defense Mobilization. Succeeded by Office of Minerals and Solid
        Fuels Nov. 2, 1962. Office of Minerals Policy Development combined with Office of Research and
        Development in the Department of the Interior May 21, 1976, under authority of Reorg. Plan No. 3 of
        1950, to form Office of Minerals Policy and Research Analysis. Abolished Sept. 30, 1981, by Secretarial
        Order 3070 and functions transferred to Bureau of Mines.

Minerals Policy and Research Analysis, Office of See Minerals Mobilization, Office of

Minerals and Solid Fuels, Office of
        Established by the Secretary of the Interior Oct. 26, 1962. Abolished and functions assigned to Deputy
        Assistant Secretary—Minerals and Energy Policy, Office of the Assistant Secretary—Mineral Resources,
        effective Oct. 22, 1971.

Mines, Bureau of
        Established in the Department of the Interior by act of May 16, 1910 (36 Stat. 369). Transferred to the
        Department of Commerce by EO 4239 of June 4, 1925. Transferred to the Department of the Interior by
        EO 6611 of Feb. 22, 1934. Renamed United States Bureau of Mines by act of May 18, 1992 (106 Stat. 172).
        Terminated pursuant to act of Jan. 26, 1996 (110 Stat. 32). Certain functions transferred to Secretary of
        Energy by act of Apr. 26, 1996 (110 Stat. 1321–167).

Mining Enforcement and Safety Administration
        Established by Order 2953 of May 7, 1973 of the Secretary of the Interior. Terminated by departmental
        directive Mar. 9, 1978, and functions transferred to Mine Safety and Health Administration, Department
        of Labor, established by act of Nov. 9, 1977 (91 Stat. 1319).

Minority Business Enterprise, Office of
        Renamed Minority Business Development Agency by Commerce Secretarial Order DOO–254A of Nov. 1,
        1979.

Minority Health and Health Disparities, National Center on
        Established by act of act of Nov. 22, 2000 (114 Stat. 2501). Renamed National Institute on Minority Health
        and Health Disparities by act of Mar. 23, 2010 (124 Stat. 973).

Mint, Bureau of the
        Renamed U.S. Mint by Treasury Secretarial order of Jan. 9, 1984 (49 FR 5020).

Missile Sites Labor Commission
         Established by EO 10946 of May 26, 1961. Abolished by EO 11374 of Oct. 11, 1967, and functions
         transferred to Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.

Missouri Basin Survey Commission
        Established by EO 10318 of Jan. 3, 1952. Final report of Commission submitted to President Jan. 12, 1953,
        pursuant to EO 10329 of Feb. 25, 1952.

Missouri River Basin Commission
        Established by EO 11658 of Mar. 22, 1972. Terminated by EO 12319 of Sept. 9, 1981.

Mobilization, Office of Civil and Defense See Mobilization, Office of Defense and Civilian

Mobilization, Office of Defense and Civilian
        Established by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1958, effective July 1, 1958. Redesignated as Office of Civil and
        Defense Mobilization by act of Aug. 26, 1958 (72 Stat. 861), consolidating functions of Office of Defense
        Mobilization and Federal Civil Defense Administration. Civil defense functions transferred to the Secretary
        of Defense by EO 10952 of July 20, 1961, and remaining organization redesignated Office of Emergency
        Planning by act of Sept. 22, 1961 (75 Stat. 630).

Mobilization Policy, National Advisory Board on
        Established by EO 10224 of Mar. 15, 1951. EO 10224 revoked by EO 10773 of July 1, 1958.
Monetary and Financial Problems, National Advisory Council on International
       Established by act of July 31, 1945 (59 Stat. 512). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 4 of 1965, effective July 27,
       1965, and functions transferred to President. Functions assumed by National Advisory Council on
       International Monetary and Financial Policies, established by EO 11269 of Feb. 14, 1966.

Monument Commission, National
      Established by act of Aug. 31, 1954 (68 Stat. 1029). Final report submitted in 1957, and audit of business
      completed September 1964.

Monuments in War Areas, American Commission for the Protection and Salvage of Artistic and Historic
      Established by President June 23, 1943; announced by Secretary of State Aug. 20, 1943. Activities
      assumed by the Department of State Aug. 16, 1946.

Morris K. Udall Foundation
        Established by act of Mar. 19, 1992 (106 Stat 79). Renamed Morris K. Udall and Stewart L. Udall
        Foundation by act of Nov. 3, 2009 (123 Stat. 2977).

Mortgage Association, Federal National
       Chartered Feb. 10, 1938, by act of June 27, 1934 (48 Stat. 1246). Grouped with other agencies to form
       Federal Loan Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Transferred to the Department of
       Commerce by EO 9071 of Feb. 24, 1942. Returned to Federal Loan Agency by act of Feb. 24, 1945 (59 Stat.
       5). Transferred to Housing and Home Finance Agency by Reorg. Plan No. 22 of 1950, effective July 10,
       1950. Rechartered by act of Aug. 2, 1954 (68 Stat. 590) and made constituent agency of Housing and
       Home Finance Agency. Transferred with functions of Housing and Home Finance Agency to the
       Department of Housing and Urban Development by act of Sept. 9, 1965 (79 Stat. 667). Made
       Government-sponsored, private corporation by act of Aug. 1, 1968 (82 Stat. 536).

Motor Carrier Claims Commission
       Established by act of July 2, 1948 (62 Stat. 1222). Terminated Dec. 31, 1952, by acts of July 11, 1951 (65
       Stat. 116), and Mar. 14, 1952 (66 Stat. 25).

Mount Rushmore National Memorial Commission
       Established by act of Feb. 25, 1929 (45 Stat. 1300). Expenditures ordered administered by the Department
       of the Interior by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933. Transferred to National Park Service, Department of the
       Interior, by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939.

Mounted Horse Unit
      Transferred from the United States Capitol Police to the United States Park Police by Public Law 109–55 of
      Aug. 2, 2005 (119 Stat. 572).

Munitions Board
        Established in the Department of Defense by act of July 26, 1947 (61 Stat. 499). Abolished by Reorg. Plan
        No. 6 of 1953, effective June 30, 1953, and functions vested in the Secretary of Defense.

Munitions Board, Joint Army and Navy
        Organized in 1922. Placed under direction of President by military order of July 5, 1939. Reconstituted
        Aug. 18, 1945, by order approved by President. Terminated on establishment of Munitions Board by act of
        July 26, 1947 (61 Stat. 505).

Museum of American Art, National
      Renamed Smithsonian American Art Museum by Act of October 27, 2000 (114 Stat. 1463).

Museum of History and Technology, National
      Renamed National Museum of American History in Smithsonian Institution by act of Oct. 13, 1980 (94
      Stat. 1884).
Museum Services, Institute of
      Established by act of June 23, 1972 (86 Stat. 327). Transferred to Office of Educational Research and
      Improvement, Department of Education, by act of Oct. 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 678), effective May 4, 1980.
      Transferred to National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities by act of Dec. 23, 1981 (95 Stat.
      1414). Functions transferred to the Institute of Museum and Library Services by act of Sept. 30, 1996 (110
      Stat. 3009– 307).



N                                            TOP OF PAGE

Narcotics, Bureau of
        Established in the Department of the Treasury by act of June 14, 1930 (46 Stat. 585). Abolished by Reorg.
        Plan No. 1 of 1968, effective Apr. 8, 1968, and functions transferred to Bureau of Narcotics and Dangerous
        Drugs, Department of Justice.

Narcotics, President’s Council on Counter-
        Renamed President’s Drug Policy Council by EO 13023, Nov. 6, 1996 (61 FR 57767).

Narcotics Control, Cabinet Committee on International
        Established by Presidential memorandum of Aug. 17, 1971. Terminated by Presidential memorandum of
        Mar. 14, 1977.

National. See other part of title

Naval Material, Office of
       Established by act of Mar. 5, 1948 (62 Stat. 68). Abolished by the Department of Defense reorg. order of
       Mar. 9, 1966, and functions transferred to the Secretary of the Navy (31 FR 7188).

Naval Material Command See Naval Material Support Establishment

Naval Material Support Establishment
       Established by Department of the Navy General Order 5 of July 1, 1963 (28 FR 7037). Replaced by Naval
       Material Command pursuant to General Order 5 of Apr. 29, 1966 (31 FR 7188). Functions realigned to
       form Office of Naval Acquisition Support, and termination of Command effective May 6, 1985.

Naval Observatory
        Jurisdiction transferred from Bureau of Navigation to Chief of Naval Operations by EO 9126 of Apr. 8,
        1942, and by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1946, effective July 16, 1946.

Naval Oceanography Command
        Renamed Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command in 1995.

Naval Petroleum and Oil Shale Reserves, Office of
        Established by the Secretary of the Navy, as required by law (70A Stat. 457). Jurisdiction transferred to the
        Department of Energy by act of Aug. 4, 1977 (91 Stat. 581).

Naval Reserve
        Established by act of Mar. 3, 1915 (38 Stat. 940). Redesignated Navy Reserve by Public Law 109–163 of
        Jan. 6, 2006 (119 Stat. 3233).

Naval Weapons, Bureau of
       Established by act of Aug. 18, 1959 (73 Stat. 395), to replace Bureau of Ordnance and Aeronautics.
       Abolished by Department of Defense reorg. order of Mar. 9, 1966, and functions transferred to the
       Secretary of the Navy (31 FR 7188), effective May 1, 1966.
Navigation, Bureau of
        Created by act of July 5, 1884 (23 Stat. 118), as special service under the Department of the Treasury.
        Transferred to the Department of Commerce and Labor by act of Feb. 4, 1903 (32 Stat. 825). Consolidated
        with Bureau of Navigation and Steamboat Inspection by act of June 30, 1932 (47 Stat. 415). Renamed
        Bureau of Naval Personnel by act of May 13, 1942 (56 Stat. 276).

Navigation and Steamboat Inspection, Bureau of
        Renamed Bureau of Marine Inspection and Navigation by act of May 27, 1936 (49 Stat. 1380). Functions
        transferred to Bureau of Customs, Department of the Treasury, and U.S. Coast Guard by EO 9083 of Feb.
        28, 1942. Transfer made permanent and Bureau abolished by Reorg. Plan. No. 3 of 1946, effective July 16,
        1946.

Navy, Department of
        Defense housing functions transferred to Federal Public Housing Authority, National Housing Agency, by
        EO 9070 of Feb. 24, 1942.

Navy Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, Dental Division of
       Renamed Dental Corps of the Navy Bureau of Medicine and Surgery by act of Oct. 17, 2006 (120 Stat.
       2234).

Navy Commissioners, Board of
       Established by act of Feb. 7, 1815 (3 Stat. 202). Abolished by act of Aug. 31, 1842 (5 Stat. 579).

Neighborhoods, National Commission on
       Established by act of Apr. 30, 1977 (91 Stat. 56). Terminated May 4, 1979, pursuant to terms of act.

Neighborhoods, Voluntary Associations and Consumer Protection, Office of
       Abolished and certain functions transferred to Office of the Assistant Secretary for Housing—Federal
       Housing Commissioner and Office of the Assistant Secretary for Community Planning and Development.
       Primary enabling legislation, act of Oct. 31, 1978 (92 Stat. 2119), repealed by act of Aug. 13, 1981 (95 Stat.
       398). Abolishment of Office and transfer of functions carried out by Housing and Urban Development
       Secretarial order.

New England River Basins Commission
       Established by EO 11371 of Sept. 6, 1967. Terminated by EO 12319 of Sept. 9, 1981.

Nicaro Project
        Responsibility for management of Nicaro nickel producing facilities in Oriente Province, Cuba, transferred
        from Office of Special Assistant to the Administrator (Nicaro Project) to Defense Materials Service by
        General Services Administrator, effective July 7, 1959. Facilities expropriated by Cuban Government and
        nationalized Oct. 26, 1960.

Noble Training Center
        Transferred from Public Health Service to the Center for Domestic Preparedness, Department of
        Homeland Security by act of Oct. 4, 2006 (120 Stat. 1433).

Northern Mariana Islands Commission on Federal Laws
Created by joint resolution of Mar. 24, 1976 (90 Stat. 263). Terminated upon submission of final report in August
1985.

Nuclear Security Enterprise, Congressional Advisory Panel on the Governance of the
        Established by act of Jan. 2, 2013 (126 Stat. 2208). Terminated on Sept. 30, 2014 pursuant to sec. 3142, by
        act of Dec. 26, 2013 (127 Stat. 1069).

Nursing Research, National Center for
        Renamed National Institute of Nursing Research by act of June 10, 1993 (107 Stat. 178).
Nutrition Division
         Functions transferred from Department of Health, Education, and Welfare to the Department of
         Agriculture by EO 9310 of Mar. 3, 1943.


O                                            TOP OF PAGE

Ocean Mining Administration
       Established by Interior Secretarial Order 2971 of Feb. 24, 1975. Abolished by Department Manual Release
       2273 of June 13, 1980.

Oceanography, Interagency Committee on
       Established by Federal Council for Science and Technology pursuant to EO 10807 of Mar. 13, 1959.
       Absorbed by National Council on Marine Resources and Engineering Development pursuant to Vice
       Presidential letter of July 21, 1967.

Office See also other part of title

Office Space, President’s Advisory Commission on Presidential
         Established by act of Aug. 3, 1956 (70 Stat. 979). Terminated June 30, 1957, by act of Jan. 25, 1957 (71
         Stat. 4).

Official Register
          Function of preparing Official Register vested in Director of the Census by act of Mar. 3, 1925 (43 Stat.
          1105). Function transferred to U.S. Civil Service Commission by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933. Yearly
          compilation and publication required by act of Aug. 28, 1935 (49 Stat. 956). Act repealed by act of July 12,
          1960 (74 Stat. 427), and last Register published in 1959.

Ohio River Basin Commission
        Established by EO 11578 of Jan. 13, 1971. Terminated by EO 12319 of Sept. 9, 1981.

Oil and Gas, Office of
         Established by the Secretary of the Interior May 6, 1946, in response to Presidential letter of May 3, 1946.
         Transferred to Federal Energy Administration by act of May 7, 1974 (88 Stat. 100).

Oil Import Administration
        Established in the Department of the Interior by Proc. 3279 of Mar. 10, 1959. Merged into Office of Oil
        and Gas Oct. 22, 1971.

Oil Import Appeals Board
        Established by the Secretary of Commerce Mar. 13, 1959, and made part of Office of Hearings and
        Appeals Dec. 23, 1971.

On-Site Inspection Agency
         Established on Jan. 26, 1988. Functions transferred to the Defense Threat Reduction Agency by DOD
         Directive 5105.62 of Sept. 30, 1998.

Operations Advisory Group
        Established by EO 11905 of Feb. 18, 1976. Abolished by Presidential Directive No. 2 of Jan. 20, 1977.

Operations Coordinating Board
        Established by EO 10483 of Sept. 2, 1953, which was superseded by EO 10700 of Feb. 25, 1957. EO 10700
        revoked by EO 10920 of Feb. 18, 1961, and Board terminated.

Ordnance, Bureau of See Ordnance and Hydrography, Bureau of
Ordnance and Hydrography, Bureau of
       Established in the Department of the Navy by act of Aug. 31, 1842 (5 Stat. 579). Replaced under act of July
       5, 1862 (12 Stat. 510), by Bureau of Ordnance and Bureau of Navigation. Abolished by act of Aug. 18, 1959
       (73 Stat. 395), and functions transferred to Bureau of Naval Weapons.

Organization, President’s Advisory Committee on Government
        Established by EO 10432 of Jan. 24, 1953. Abolished by EO 10917 of Feb. 10, 1961, and functions
        transferred to Bureau of the Budget for termination.

Organizations Staff, International
        Functions merged with Foreign Agricultural Service by memorandum of Dec. 7, 1973 of , effective Feb. 3,
        1974.

Overseas Private Investment Corporation
       Transferred as separate agency to U.S. International Development Cooperation Agency by Reorg. Plan No.
       2 of 1979, effective Oct. 1, 1979. Became an independent agency following the abolition of IDCA by act of
       Oct. 21, 1998 (112 Stat. 2681–790).

Oversight Board (for the Resolution Trust Corporation)
        Established by act of Aug. 9, 1989 (103 Stat. 363). Renamed Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board by
        act of Dec. 12, 1991 (105 Stat. 1767). Abolished by act of July 29, 1998 (112 Stat. 908). Authority and
        duties transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury.


P                                          TOP OF PAGE

Pacific Northwest River Basins Commission
         Established by EO 11331 of Mar. 6, 1967. Terminated by EO 12319 of Sept. 9, 1981.

Packers and Stockyards Administration
        Established by Memorandum 1613, supp. 1, of May 8, 1967 of the Secretary of Agriculture. Certain
        functions consolidated into Agricultural Marketing Service by Secretary’s Memorandum 1927 of Jan. 15,
        1978. Remaining functions incorporated into the Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration
        by Secretary’s Memorandum 1010–1 dated Oct. 20, 1994.

Panama Canal
       Operation of piers at Atlantic and Pacific terminals transferred to Panama Railroad Company by EO 7021
       of Apr. 19, 1935. Panama Canal reestablished as Canal Zone Government by act of Sept. 26, 1950 (64 Stat.
       1038).

Panama Canal Commission
       Established by act of Oct. 1, 1979, as amended (22 U.S.C. 3611). U.S. responsibility terminated by
       stipulation of the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977, which transferred responsibility for the Panama Canal to
       the Republic of Panama, effective Dec. 31, 1999. Commission terminated by act of Sept. 30, 2004 (118
       Stat. 1140).

Panama Canal Company
       Established by act of June 29, 1948 (62 Stat. 1076). Abolished and superseded by Panama Canal
       Commission (93 Stat. 454).

Panama Railroad Company
       Incorporated Apr. 7, 1849, by New York State Legislature. Operated under private control until 1881,
       when original French Canal Company acquired most of its stock. Company and its successor, New Panama
       Canal Company, operated railroad as common carrier and also as adjunct in attempts to construct canal.
         In 1904 their shares of stock in Panama Railroad Company passed to ownership of U.S. as part of assets of
         New Panama Canal Company purchased under act of June 28, 1902 (34 Stat. 481). Remaining shares
         purchased from private owners in 1905. Panama Railroad Company reincorporated by act of June 29,
         1948 (62 Stat. 1075) pursuant to requirements of act of Dec. 6, 1945 (59 Stat. 597). Reestablished as
         Panama Canal Company by act of Sept. 26, 1950 (64 Stat. 1038). The Secretary of the Army was directed
         to discontinue commercial operations of Company by Presidential letter of Mar. 29, 1961.

Paperwork, Commission on Federal
       Established by act of Dec. 27, 1974 (88 Stat. 1789). Terminated January 1978 pursuant to terms of act.

Park Service, National
        Functions in District of Columbia relating to space assignment, site selection for public buildings, and
        determination of priority in construction transferred to Public Buildings Administration, Federal Works
        Agency, under Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939.

Park Trust Fund Board, National
        Established by act of July 10, 1935 (49 Stat. 477). Terminated by act of Dec. 18, 1967 (81 Stat. 656), and
        functions transferred to National Park Foundation.

Parks, Buildings, and Reservations, Office of National
         Established in the Department of the Interior by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933. Renamed National Park
         Service by act of Mar. 2, 1934 (48 Stat. 362).

Parole, Board of
         Established by act of June 25, 1948 (62 Stat. 854). Abolished by act of Mar. 15, 1976 (90 Stat. 219), and
         functions transferred to U.S. Parole Commission.

Patent Office
        Provisions of first patent act administered by the Department of State, with authority for granting patents
        vested in board comprising Secretaries of State and War and Attorney General. Board abolished, authority
        transferred to Secretary of State, and registration system established by act of Feb. 21, 1793 (1 Stat. 318).
        Office made bureau in the Department of State in October 1802, headed by Superintendent of Patents.
        Office reorganized in 1836 by act of June 4, 1836 (5 Stat. 117) under Commissioner of Patents. Office
        transferred to the Department of the Interior in 1849. Office transferred to the Department of Commerce
        by EO 4175 of Mar. 17, 1925.

Patents Board, Government
        Established by EO 10096 of Jan. 23, 1950. Abolished by EO 10930 of Mar. 24, 1961, and functions
        transferred to the Secretary of Commerce.

Pay Board
        Established by EO 11627 of Oct. 15, 1971. Abolished by EO 11695 of Jan. 11, 1973.

Payment Limitations, Commission on Application of
       Established by act of May 13, 2002 (116 Stat. 216). Abolished by acts of May 22, 2008 (122 Stat. 1025) and
       June 18, 2008 (122 Stat. 1753).

Peace Corps
        Established in the Department of State by EO 10924 of Mar. 1, 1961, and continued by act of Sept. 22,
        1961 (75 Stat. 612), and EO 11041 of Aug. 6, 1962. Functions transferred to ACTION by Reorg. Plan No. 1
        of 1971, effective July 1, 1971. Made independent agency in executive branch by act of Dec. 29, 1981 (95
        Stat. 1540).

Pennsylvania Avenue, Temporary Commission on
        Established by EO 11210 of Mar. 25, 1956. Inactive as of Nov. 15, 1969, due to lack of funding.
Pennsylvania Avenue Development Corporation
        Established by act of Oct. 27, 1972 (86 Stat. 1266). Terminated pursuant to act of Jan. 26, 1996 (110 Stat.
        32) and act of Apr. 26, 1996 (110 Stat. 1321– 198). Functions transferred to General Services
        Administration, National Capital Planning Commission, and National Park Service (61 FR 11308), effective
        Apr. 1, 1996.

Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, Office of See Labor-Management Services Administration

Pensions, Commissioner of
        Provided for by act of Mar. 2, 1833 (4 Stat. 668). Continued by act of Mar. 3, 1835 (4 Stat. 779), and other
        acts as Office of the Commissioner of Pensions. Transferred to the Department of the Interior as bureau by
        act of Mar. 3, 1849 (9 Stat. 395). Consolidated with other bureaus and agencies into Veterans
        Administration by EO 5398 of July 21, 1930.

Pensions, Office of the Commissioner of See Pensions, Commissioner of

Perry’s Victory Memorial Commission
         Created by act of Mar. 3, 1919 (40 Stat. 1322). Administration of Memorial transferred to National Park
         Service by act of June 2, 1936 (49 Stat. 1393). Commission terminated by terms of act and membership
         reconstituted as advisory board to the Secretary of Interior.

Personal Property, Office of See Supply Service, Federal

Personnel, National Roster of Scientific and Specialized
       Established by National Resources Planning Board pursuant to Presidential letter of June 18, 1940, to the
       Secretary of the Treasury. After Aug. 15, 1940, administered jointly by Board and U.S. Civil Service
       Commission. Transferred to War Manpower Commission by EO 9139 of Apr. 18, 1942. Transferred to the
       Department of Labor by EO 9617 of Sept. 19, 1945. Transferred with Bureau of Employment Security to
       Federal Security Agency by act of June 16, 1948 (62 Stat. 443). Transferred to the Department of Labor by
       Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1949, effective Aug. 20, 1949, and became inactive. Roster functions transferred to
       National Science Foundation by act of May 10, 1950 (64 Stat. 154). Reactivated in 1950 as National
       Scientific Register by Office of Education, Federal Security Agency, through National Security Resources
       Board grant of funds, and continued by National Science Foundation funds until December 1952, when
       Register integrated into Foundation’s National Register of Scientific and Technical Personnel project in
       Division of Scientific Personnel and Education.

Personnel Administration, Council of
       Established by EO 7916 of June 24, 1938, effective Feb. 1, 1939. Made unit in U.S. Civil Service Commission
       by EO 8467 of July 1, 1940. Renamed Federal Personnel Council by EO 9830 of Feb. 24, 1947. Abolished by
       act of July 31, 1953 (67 Stat. 300), and personnel and records transferred to Office of Executive Director,
       U.S. Civil Service Commission.

Personnel Council, Federal See Personnel Administration, Council of

Personnel Interchange, President’s Commission on
       Established by EO 11451 of Jan. 19, 1969. Continued by EO 12136 of May 15, 1979, and renamed
       President’s Commission on Executive Exchange. Continued by EO 12493 of Dec. 5, 1984. Abolished by EO
       12760 of May 2, 1991.

Personnel Management, Liaison Office for
       Established by EO 8248 of Sept. 8, 1939. Abolished by EO 10452 of May 1, 1953, and functions transferred
       to U.S. Civil Service Commission.

Petroleum Administration for Defense
        Established under act of Sept. 8, 1950 (64 Stat. 798) by Order 2591 of Oct. 3, 1950 of the Secretary of the
        Interior, pursuant to EO 10161 of Sept. 9, 1950. Continued by Secretary’s Order 2614 of Jan. 25, 1951,
         pursuant to EO 10200 of Jan. 3, 1951, and PAD Delegation 1 of Jan. 24, 1951. Abolished by Secretary’s
         Order 2755 of Apr. 23, 1954.

Petroleum Administration for War See Petroleum Coordinator for War, Office of

Petroleum Administrative Board
        Established Sept. 11, 1933, by the Secretary of the Interior. Terminated Mar. 31, 1936, by EO 7076 of June
        15, 1935. The Secretary of the Interior was authorized to execute functions vested in President by act of
        Feb. 22, 1935 (49 Stat. 30) by EO 7756 of Dec. 1, 1937. Secretary also authorized to establish Petroleum
        Conservation Division to assist in administering act. Records of Petroleum Administrative Board and
        Petroleum Labor Policy Board housed with Petroleum Conservation Division, Office of Oil and Gas, acting
        as custodian for the Secretary of the Interior.

Petroleum Coordinator for War, Office of
        Secretary of the Interior designated Petroleum Coordinator for National Defense pursuant to Presidential
        letter of May 28, 1941, and approved Petroleum Coordinator for War pursuant to Presidential letter of
        Apr. 20, 1942. Office abolished by EO 9276 of Dec. 2, 1942, and functions transferred to Petroleum
        Administration for War, established by same EO. Administration terminated by EO 9718 of May 3, 1946.

Petroleum Labor Policy Board
        Established by the Secretary of the Interior, as Administrator of Code of Fair Competition for Petroleum
        Industry, on recommendation of Planning and Coordination Committee Oct. 10, 1933. Reorganized by
        Secretary Dec. 19, 1933, and reorganization confirmed by order of Mar. 8, 1935. Terminated Mar. 31,
        1936, when Petroleum Administrative Board abolished by EO 7076 of June 15, 1935.

Petroleum Reserves Corporation
        Established June 30, 1943, by Reconstruction Finance Corporation. Transferred to Office of Economic
        Warfare by EO 9360 of July 15, 1943. Office consolidated into Foreign Economic Administration by EO
        9380 of Sept. 25, 1943. Functions transferred to Reconstruction Finance Corporation by EO 9630 of Sept.
        27, 1945. RFC’s charter amended Nov. 9, 1945, to change name to War Assets Corporation. Corporation
        designated by Surplus Property Administrator as disposal agency for all types of property for which
        Reconstruction Finance Corporation formerly disposal agency. Domestic surplus property functions of
        Corporation transferred to War Assets Administration by EO 9689 of Jan. 31, 1946. Reconstruction Finance
        Corporation Board of Directors ordered by President to dissolve War Assets Corporation as soon after
        Mar. 25, 1946, as practicable.

Philippine Alien Property Administration
         Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 9789 of Oct. 14, 1946. Abolished by EO 10254 of
         June 15, 1951, and functions transferred to the Department of Justice.

Philippine War Damage Commission
         Established by act of Apr. 30, 1946 (60 Stat. 128). Terminated Mar. 31, 1951, by act of Sept. 6, 1950 (64
         Stat. 712).

Photographic Interpretation Center, National
        Functions transferred to the National Imagery and Mapping Agency by act of Sept. 23, 1996 (110 Stat.
        2677).

Physical Fitness, Committee on
         Established in Office of Federal Security Administrator by EO 9338 of Apr. 29, 1943. Terminated June 30,
         1945.

Physical Fitness, President’s Council on See Youth Fitness, President’s Council on

Physician Payment Review Commission
        Established by act of Apr. 7, 1986 (100 Stat. 190). Terminated by act of Aug. 5, 1997 (111 Stat. 354).
         Assets, staff, and continuing responsibility for reports transferred to the Medicare Payment Advisory
         Commission.

Planning Board, National
        Established by Administrator of Public Works July 30, 1933. Terminated by EO 6777 of June 30, 1934.

Plant Industry, Bureau of
         Established by act of Mar. 2, 1902 (31 Stat. 922). Soil fertility and soil microbiology work of Bureau of
         Chemistry and Soils transferred to Bureau by act of May 17, 1935. Soil chemistry and physics and soil
         survey work of Bureau of Chemistry and Soils transferred to Bureau by Secretary’s Memorandum 784 of
         Oct. 6, 1938. In February 1943 engineering research of Bureau of Agricultural Chemistry and Engineering
         transferred to Bureau of Plant Industry, Soils, and Agricultural Engineering by Research Administration
         Memorandum 5 issued pursuant to EO 9069 of Feb. 23, 1942, and in conformity with Secretary’s
         Memorandums 960 and 986. Functions transferred to Agricultural Research Service by Secretary’s
         Memorandum 1320, supp. 4, of Nov. 2, 1953.

Plant Industry, Soils, and Agricultural Engineering, Bureau of See Plant Industry, Bureau of

Plant Quarantine, Bureau of See Entomology and Plant Quarantine, Bureau of

Policy Development, Office of See Domestic Council

Post Office, Department of See Postal Service

Postal Rate Commission
         Renamed Postal Regulatory Commission by act of Dec. 20, 2006 (120 Stat. 3241).

Postal Savings System
         Established by act of June 25, 1910 (36 Stat. 814). System closed by act of Mar. 28, 1966 (80 Stat. 92).

Postal Service
         Created July 26, 1775, by Continental Congress. Temporarily established by Congress by act of Sept. 22,
         1789 (1 Stat. 70), and continued by subsequent acts. Department of Post Office made executive
         department under act of June 8, 1872 (17 Stat. 283). Offices of First, Second, Third, and Fourth Assistant
         Postmasters General abolished and Deputy Postmaster General and four Assistant Postmasters General
         established by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1949, effective Aug. 20, 1949. Reorganized as U.S. Postal Service in
         executive branch by act of Aug. 12, 1970 (84 Stat. 719), effective July 1, 1971.

Power Commission, Federal
       Established by act of June 10, 1920 (41 Stat. 1063). Terminated by act of Aug. 4, 1977 (91 Stat. 578), and
       functions transferred to the Department of Energy.

Preparedness, Office of
        Renamed Federal Preparedness Agency by General Services Administrator’s order of June 26, 1975.

Preparedness Agency, Federal
        Functions transferred from General Services Administration to Federal Emergency Management Agency
        by EO 12148 of July 20, 1979.

Presidential. See other part of title

Press Intelligence, Division of
         Established in August 1933. Made division of National Emergency Council July 10, 1935. Continued in
         Office of Government Reports by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Transferred to Office of
         War Information by EO 9182 of June 13, 1942, functioning in Bureau of Special Services. Office abolished
         by EO 9608 of Aug. 31, 1945, and Bureau transferred to Bureau of the Budget. Upon reestablishment of
         Office of Government Reports, by EO 9809 of Dec. 12, 1946, Division of Press Intelligence made unit of
         Office.

Price Administration, Office of
        Established by EO 8734 of Apr. 11, 1941, combining Price Division and Consumer Division of National
        Defense Advisory Commission. Renamed Office of Price Administration by EO 8875 of Aug. 28, 1941, which
        transferred Civilian Allocation Division to Office of Production Management. Consolidated with other
        agencies into Office of Temporary Controls by EO 9809 of Dec. 12, 1946, except Financial Reporting
        Division, transferred to Federal Trade Commission.

Price Commission
        Established by EO 11627 of Oct. 15, 1971. Abolished by EO 11695 of Jan. 11, 1973.

Price Decontrol Board
        Established by act of July 25, 1946 (60 Stat. 669). Effective period of act of Jan. 30, 1942 (56 Stat. 23),
        extended to June 30, 1947, by joint resolution of June 25, 1946 (60 Stat. 664).

Price Stability for Economic Growth, Cabinet Committee on
         Established by Presidential letter of Jan. 28, 1959. Abolished by Presidential direction Mar. 12, 1961.

Price Stabilization, Office of
         Established by General Order 2 of Economic Stabilization Administrator Jan. 24, 1951. Director of Price
         Stabilization provided for in EO 10161 of Sept. 9, 1950. Terminated Apr. 30, 1953, by EO 10434 of Feb. 6,
         1953, and provisions of acts of June 30, 1952 (66 Stat. 296) and June 30, 1953 (67 Stat. 131).

Prices and Costs, Committee on Government Activities Affecting
         Established by EO 10802 of Jan. 23, 1959. Abolished by EO 10928 of Mar. 23, 1961.

Printing Office, Government
         Established by act of June, 23, 1860. Renamed Government Publishing Office by act of Dec. 16, 2014
         (128 Stat. 2537).

Priorities Board
          Established by order of Council of National Defense, approved Oct. 18, 1940, and by EO 8572 of Oct. 21,
          1940. EO 8572 revoked by EO 8629 of Jan. 7, 1941.

Prison Industries, Inc., Federal
         Established by EO 6917 of Dec. 11, 1934. Transferred to the Department of Justice by Reorg. Plan No. II of
         1939, effective July 1, 1939.

Prison Industries Reorganization Administration
         Functioned from Sept. 26, 1935, to Sept. 30, 1940, under authority of act of Apr. 8, 1935 (49 Stat. 115),
         and of EO’s 7194 of Sept. 26, 1935, 7202 of Sept. 28, 1935, and 7649 of June 29, 1937. Terminated due to
         lack of funding.

Private Sector Programs, Office of
         Functions transferred to the Office of Citizen Exchanges within the Bureau of Educational and Cultural
         Affairs, USIA, by act of Feb. 16, 1990 (104 Stat. 56).

Processing tax
        Agricultural Adjustment Administration’s function of collecting taxes declared unconstitutional by U.S.
        Supreme Court Jan. 6, 1936. Functions under acts of June 28, 1934 (48 Stat. 1275), Apr. 21, 1934 (48 Stat.
        598), and Aug. 24, 1935 (49 Stat. 750) discontinued by repeal of these laws by act of Feb. 10, 1936 (49
        Stat. 1106).

Processing Tax Board of Review
        Established in the Department of the Treasury by act of June 22, (49 Stat. 1652). Abolished by act of Oct.
        21, 1942 (56 Stat. 967).

Proclamations See State, Department of

Procurement, Commission on Government
       Established by act of Nov. 26, 1969 (83 Stat. 269). Terminated Apr. 30, 1973, due to expiration of
       statutory authority.

Procurement and Assignment Service
       Established by President Oct. 30, 1941. Transferred from Office of Defense Health and Welfare Services to
       War Manpower Commission by EO 9139 of Apr. 18, 1942. Transferred to Federal Security Agency by EO
       9617 of Sept. 19, 1945, which terminated Commission.

Procurement Division
       Established in the Department of the Treasury by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933. Renamed Bureau of Federal
       Supply by Department of the Treasury Order 73 of Nov. 19, 1946, effective Jan. 1, 1947. Transferred to
       General Services Administration as Federal Supply Service by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 380).

Procurement Policy, Office of Federal
       Established within Office of Management and Budget by act of Aug. 30, 1974 (88 Stat. 97). Abolished due
       to lack of funding and functions transferred to Office of Management and Budget by act of Oct 28, 1993
       (107 Stat. 1236).

Product Standards Policy, Office of
        Formerly separate operating unit under Assistant Secretary for Productivity, Technology, and Innovation,
        Department of Commerce. Transferred to National Bureau of

Production Areas, Committee for Congested
        Established in Executive Office of the President by EO 9327 of Apr. 7, 1943. Terminated Dec. 31, 1944, by
        act of June 28, 1944 (58 Stat. 535).

Production Authority, National
        Established in the Department of Commerce Sept. 11, 1950, by EO’s 10161 of Sept. 9, 1950, 10193 of Dec.
        16, 1950, and 10200 of Jan. 3, 1951. Abolished by order of Oct. 1, 1953 of the Secretary of Commerce, and
        functions merged into Business and Defense Services Administration.

Production Management, Office of
        Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 8629 of Jan. 7, 1941. Abolished by EO 9040 of Jan.
        24, 1942, and personnel and property transferred to War Production Board.
Production and Marketing Administration
        Established by Secretary of Agriculture Memorandum 1118 of Aug. 18, 1945. Functions transferred under
        Department reorganization by Secretary’s Memorandum 1320, supp. 4, of Nov. 2, 1953.

Productivity Council, National
        Established by EO 12089 of Oct. 23, 1978. EO 12089 revoked by EO 12379 of Aug. 17, 1982.

Programs, Bureau of International
       Established by the Secretary of Commerce Aug. 8, 1961, by Departmental Orders 173 and 174. Abolished
       by Departmental Order 182 of Feb. 1, 1963, which established Bureau of International Commerce.
       Functions transferred to Domestic and International Business Administration, effective Nov. 17, 1972.

Programs, Office of Public
       Established in the National Archives and Records Administration. Reorganized by Archivist under Notice
       96–260, Sept. 23, 1996, effective Jan. 6, 1997. Functions restructured and transferred to Office of Records
       Services—Washington, DC.
Prohibition, Bureau of
         Established by act of May 27, 1930 (46 Stat. 427). Investigative functions consolidated with functions of
         Bureau of Investigation into Division of Investigation, Department of Justice. by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933,
         which set as effective date Mar. 2, 1934, or such later date as fixed by President. All other functions
         performed by Bureau of Prohibition ordered transferred to such division in the Department of Justice as
         deemed desirable by Attorney General.

Property, Office of Surplus
        Established in Procurement Division, Department of the Treasury, by EO 9425 of Feb. 19, 1944, and act of
        Oct. 3, 1944 (58 Stat. 765), under general direction of Surplus Property Board established by same
        legislation. Transferred to the Department of Commerce by EO 9541 of Apr. 19, 1945. Terminated by EO
        9643 of Oct. 19, 1945, and activities and personnel transferred to Reconstruction Finance Corporation.

Property Administration, Surplus See War Property Administration, Surplus

Property Board, Surplus See War Property Administration, Surplus

Property Council, Federal
        Established by EO 11724 of June 25, 1973, and reconstituted by EO 11954 of Jan. 7, 1977. Terminated by
        EO 12030 of Dec. 15, 1977.

Property Management and Disposal Service See Emergency Procurement Service

Property Office, Surplus
        Established in Division of Territories and Island Possessions, Department of the Interior, under Regulation
        1 of Surplus Property Board, Apr. 2, 1945. Transferred to War Assets Administration by EO 9828 of Feb.
        21, 1947.

Property Review Board
        Established by EO 12348 of Feb. 25, 1982. EO 12348 revoked by EO 12512 of Apr. 29, 1985.

Protective Service, Federal
         Functions established in the Federal Works Agency by act of June 1, 1948 (62 Stat. 281). Functions
         transferred to General Services Administrator by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 380). Established as an
         agency within General Services Administration by GSA Administrator on Jan. 11, 1971 (ADM. 5440.46).
         Transferred to Homeland Security Department by act of Nov. 25, 2002 (116 Stat. 2178).

Prospective Payment Assessment Commission
        Established by act of Apr. 20, 1983 (97 Stat. 159). Terminated by act of Aug. 5, 1997 (111 Stat. 354).
        Assets, staff, and continuing responsibility for reports transferred to the Medicare Payment Advisory
        Commission.

Provisions and Clothing, Bureau of
         Established by acts of Aug. 31, 1842 (5 Stat. 579), and July 5, 1862 (12 Stat. 510). Designated Bureau of
         Supplies and Accounts by act of July 19, 1892 (27 Stat. 243). Abolished by Department of Defense reorg.
         order of Mar. 9, 1966, and functions transferred to the Secretary of the Navy (31 FR 7188).

Public See other part of title

Publications Commission, National Historical
         Established by act of Oct. 22, 1968 (82 Stat. 1293). Renamed National Historical Publications and Records
         Commission by act of Dec. 22, 1974 (88 Stat. 1734).

Puerto Rican Hurricane Relief Commission
        Established by act of Dec. 21, 1928 (45 Stat. 1067). No loans made after June 30, 1934, and Commission
        abolished June 3, 1935, by Public Resolution 22 (49 Stat. 320). Functions transferred to Division of
         Territories and Island Possessions, Department of the Interior. After June 30, 1946, collection work
         performed in Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration. Following termination of Administration,
         remaining collection functions transferred to the Secretary of Agriculture by act of July 11, 1956 (70 Stat.
         525).

Puerto Rico, U.S.-Puerto Rico Commission on the Status of
        Established by act of Feb. 20, 1964 (78 Stat. 17). Terminated by terms of act.

Puerto Rico Reconstruction Administration
        Established in the Department of the Interior by EO 7057 of May 28, 1935. Terminated Feb. 15, 1955, by
        act of Aug. 15, 1953 (67 Stat. 584).




R                                            TOP OF PAGE

Radiation Biology Laboratory See Radiation and Organisms, Division of

Radiation Council, Federal
        Established by EO 10831 of Aug. 14, 1959, and act of Sept. 23, 1959 (73 Stat. 688). Abolished by Reorg.
        Plan No. 3 of 1970, effective Dec. 2, 1970, and functions transferred to Environmental Protection Agency.

Radiation and Organisms, Division of
        Established by Secretarial order of May 1, 1929, as part of Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory.
        Renamed Radiation Biology Laboratory by Secretarial order of Feb. 16, 1965. Merged with Chesapeake
        Center for Environmental Studies by Secretarial order of July 1, 1983, to form Smithsonian Environmental
        Research Center.

Radio Commission, Federal
        Established by act of Feb. 23, 1927 (44 Stat. 1162). Abolished by act of June 19, 1934 (48 Stat. 1102), and
        functions transferred to Federal Communications Commission.

Radio Division
        Established by National Emergency Council July 1, 1938. Transferred to Office of Education, Federal
        Security Agency, by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Terminated June 30, 1940, by terms
        of act of June 30, 1939 (53 Stat. 927).

Radio Propagation Laboratory, Central
        Transferred from National Bureau of Standards to Environmental Science Services Administration by the
        Department of Commerce Order 2–A, effective July 13, 1965.

Radiological Health, National Center for Devices and
        Renamed Center for Devices and Radiological Health by Food and Drug Administration notice of Mar. 9,
        1984 (49 FR 10166).

Rail Public Counsel, Office of
          Established by act of Feb. 5, 1976 (90 Stat. 51). Terminated Dec. 1, 1979, due to lack of funding.

Railroad Administration, U.S. See Railroads, Director General of

Railroad and Airline Wage Board
         Established by Economic Stabilization Administrator’s General Order 7 of Sept. 27, 1951, pursuant to act
         of Sept. 8, 1950 (64 Stat. 816). Terminated Apr. 30, 1953, by EO 10434 of Feb. 6, 1953, and acts of June
         30, 1952 (66 Stat. 296), and June 30, 1953 (67 Stat. 131).
Railroads, Director General of
        Established under authority of act of Aug. 29, 1916 (39 Stat. 645). Organization of U.S. Railroad
        Administration announced Feb. 9, 1918. Office abolished by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1,
        1939, and functions transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury.

Railway Association, U.S.
        Established by act of Jan. 2, 1974 (87 Stat. 985). Terminated Apr. 1, 1987, by act of Oct. 21, 1986 (100 Stat.
        1906).

Railway Labor Panel, National
        Established by EO 9172 of May 22, 1942. EO 9172 revoked by EO 9883 of Aug. 11, 1947.

Reagan Centennial Commission, Ronald
        Established by act of June 2, 2009 (123 Stat. 1767). Terminated May 31, 2011, by act of May 12, 2011 (125
        Stat. 215).

Real Estate Board, Federal
         Established by EO 8034 of Jan. 14, 1939. Abolished by EO 10287 of Sept. 6, 1951.

Reclamation, Bureau of See Reclamation Service

Reclamation Service
       Established July 1902 in Geological Survey by the Secretary of the Interior, pursuant to act of June 17,
       1902 (32 Stat. 388). Separated from Survey in 1907 and renamed Bureau of Reclamation June 1923.
       Power marketing functions transferred to the Department of Energy by act of Aug. 4, 1977 (91 Stat. 578).
       Bureau renamed Water and Power Resources Service by Secretarial Order 3042 of Nov. 6, 1979. Renamed
       Bureau of Reclamation by Secretarial Order 3064 of May 18, 1981.

Reconciliation Service
         Established by Director of Selective Service pursuant to EO 11804 of Sept. 16, 1974. Program terminated
         Apr. 2, 1980.

Reconstruction Finance Corporation
        Established Feb. 2, 1932, by act of Jan. 22, 1932 (47 Stat. 5). Grouped with other agencies to form Federal
        Loan Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Transferred to the Department of
        Commerce by EO 9071 of Feb. 24, 1942. Returned to Federal Loan Agency by act of Feb. 24, 1945 (59 Stat.
        5). Agency abolished by act of June 30, 1947 (61 Stat. 202), and functions assumed by Corporation.
        Functions relating to financing houses or site improvements, authorized by act of Aug. 10, 1948 (61 Stat.
        1275), transferred to Housing and Home Finance Agency by Reorg. Plan No. 23 of 1950, effective July 10,
        1950. Corporation Board of Directors, established by act of Jan. 22, 1932 (47 Stat. 5), abolished by Reorg.
        Plan No. 1 of 1951, effective May 1, 1951, and functions transferred to Administrator and Loan Policy
        Board established by same plan, effective Apr. 30, 1951. Act of July 30, 1953 (67 Stat. 230), provided for
        RFC succession until June 30, 1954, and for termination of its lending powers Sept. 28, 1953. Certain
        functions assigned to appropriate agencies for liquidation by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1954, effective July 1,
        1954. Corporation abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1957, effective June 30, 1957, and functions
        transferred to Housing and Home Finance Agency, General Services Administration, Small Business
        Administration, and the Department of the Treasury.

Records Administration, Office of
        Established in the National Archives and Records Administration. Reorganized by Archivist under Notice
        96–260, Sept. 23, 1996, effective Jan. 6, 1997. Functions restructured and transferred to Office of Records
        Services—Washington, DC.

Records Centers, Office of Federal
        Established in the National Archives and Records Administration. Reorganized by Archivist under Notice
        96–260, Sept. 23, 1996, effective Jan. 6, 1997. Functions restructured and transferred to Office of
        Regional Records Services.

Records and Information Management, Office of
        Functions transferred from National Archives and Records Service to Automated Data and
        Telecommunications Service by General Services Administrator’s decision, effective Jan. 10, 1982,
        regionally and Apr. 1, 1982, in Washington, DC.

Recovery Administration, Advisory Council, National
        Established by EO 7075 of June 15, 1935. Transferred to the Department of Commerce by EO 7252 of Dec.
        21, 1935, and functions ordered terminated not later than Apr. 1, 1936, by same order. Committee of
        Industrial Analysis created by EO 7323 of Mar. 21, 1936, to complete work of Council.

Recovery Administration, National
        Established by President pursuant to act of June 16, 1933 (48 Stat. 194). Provisions of title I of act
        repealed by Public Resolution 26 of June 14, 1935 (49 Stat. 375), and extension of Administration in
        skeletonized form authorized until Apr. 1, 1936. Office of Administrator, National Recovery
        Administration, created by EO 7075 of June 15, 1935. Administration terminated by EO 7252 of Dec. 21,
        1935, which transferred Division of Review, Division of Business Corporation, and Advisory Council to the
        Department of Commerce for termination of functions by Apr. 1, 1936. Consumers’ Division transferred to
        the Department of Labor by same order.

Recovery Review Board, National
        Established by EO 6632 of Mar. 7, 1934. Abolished by EO 6771 of June 30, 1934.

Recreation, Bureau of Outdoor
        Established in the Department of the Interior by act of May 28, 1963 (77 Stat. 49). Terminated by
        Secretary’s order of Jan. 25, 1978, and functions assumed by Heritage Conservation and Recreation
        Service.

Recreation and Natural Beauty, Citizens’ Advisory Committee on
        Established by EO 11278 of May 4, 1966. Terminated by EO 11472 of May 29, 1969.

Recreation and Natural Beauty, President’s Council on
        Established by EO 11278 of May 4, 1966. Terminated by EO 11472 of May 29, 1969.

Recreation Resources Review Commission, Outdoor
        Established by act of June 28, 1958 (72 Stat. 238). Final report submitted to President January 1962 and
        terminated Sept. 1, 1962.

Regional Action Planning Commissions
        Authorized by act of Aug. 26, 1965 (79 Stat. 552). Federal role abolished through repeal by act of Aug. 13,
        1981 (95 Stat. 766). At time of repeal, eight commissions—Coastal Plains, Four Corners, New England, Old
        West Ozarks, Pacific Northwest, Southwest Border, Southwest Border Region, and Upper Great Lakes—
        affected.

Regional Archives, Office of Special and
        Established in the National Archives and Records Administration. Reorganized by Archivist under Notice
        96–260, Sept. 23, 1996, effective Jan. 6, 1997. Functions restructured and transferred between Office of
        Records Services—Washington, DC and Office of Regional Records Services.

Regional Councils, Federal
        Established by EO 12314 of July 22, 1981. Abolished by EO 12407 of Feb. 22, 1983.

Regional Operations, Executive Director of
        Established in Food and Drug Administration by order of May 20, 1971 of the Secretary of Health,
        Education, and Welfare. Merged into Office of Regulatory Affairs by order of Nov. 5, 1984 of the Secretary
         of Health and Human Services.

Regulations and Rulings, Office of
        Established in the U.S. Customs and Border Protection. Abolished by act of Oct. 13, 2006 (120 Stat. 1924)
        and functions transferred to the Office of International Trade.

Regulatory Council, U.S.
        Disbanded by Vice Presidential memorandum of Mar. 25, 1981. Certain functions continued in Regulatory
        Information Service Center.

Regulatory Relief, Presidential Task Force on
        Establishment announced in President’s remarks Jan. 22, 1981. Disbanded and functions transferred to
        Office of Management and Budget in August 1983.

Rehabilitation Services Administration
         Functions transferred from Department of Health, Education, and Welfare to Office of Special Education
         and Rehabilitative Services, Department of Education, by act of Oct. 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 678), effective May
         4, 1980.

Relief Corporation, Federal Surplus
         Organized under powers granted to President by act of June 16, 1933 (48 Stat. 195). Charter granted by
         State of Delaware Oct. 4, 1933, and amended Nov. 18, 1935, changing name to Federal Surplus
         Commodities Corporation and naming the Secretary of Agriculture, Administrator of Agricultural
         Adjustment Administration, and Governor of Farm Credit Administration as Board of Directors. Continued
         as agency under the Secretary of Agriculture by acts of June 28, 1937 (50 Stat. 323) and Feb. 16, 1938 (52
         Stat. 38). Consolidated with Division of Marketing and Marketing Agreements into Surplus Marketing
         Administration by Reorg. Plan No. III of 1940, effective June 30, 1940. Merged into Agricultural Marketing
         Administration by EO 9069 of Feb. 23, 1942.

Relief and Rehabilitation Operations, Office of Foreign
         Established in the Department of State as announced by White House Nov. 21, 1942. Consolidated with
         Foreign Economic Administration by EO 9380 of Sept. 25, 1943.

Renegotiation Board
        Established by act of Mar. 23, 1951 (65 Stat. 7). Terminated Mar. 31, 1979, by act of Oct. 10, 1978 (92
        Stat. 1043).

Rent Advisory Board
        Established by EO 11632 of Nov. 22, 1971. Abolished by EO 11695 of Jan. 11, 1973.

Rent Stabilization, Office of
        Established by General Order 9 of Economic Stabilization Administrator July 31, 1951, pursuant to act of
        June 30, 1947 (61 Stat. 193), and EO’ s 10161 of Sept. 9, 1950, and 10276 of July 31, 1951. Abolished by
        EO 10475 of July 31, 1953, and functions transferred to Office of Defense Mobilization. Office of Research
        and Development combined with Office of Minerals Policy Development in the Department of the Interior
        May 21, 1976, under authority of Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1950, effective May 24, 1950, to form Office of
        Minerals Policy and Research Analysis. Abolished Sept. 30, 1981, by Secretarial Order 3070 and functions
        transferred to Bureau of Mines.

Reports, Office of Government
        Established July 1, 1939, to perform functions of National Emergency Council abolished by Reorg. Plan No.
        II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Established as administrative unit of Executive Office of the President by
        EO 8248 of Sept. 8, 1939. Consolidated with Office of War Information, Office for Emergency
        Management, by EO 9182 of June 13, 1942. Reestablished in Executive Office of the President by EO 9809
        of Dec. 12, 1946, which transferred to it functions of Media Programming Division and Motion Picture
        Division, Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion, and functions transferred from Bureau of Special
        Services, Office of War Information, to Bureau of the Budget by EO 9608 of Aug. 31, 1945. Subsequent to
        enactment of act of July 30, 1947 (61 Stat. 588), functions of Office restricted to advertising and motion
        picture liaison and operation of library. Terminated June 30, 1948.

Research, Office of University
        Transferred from Office of Program Management and Administration, Research and Special Programs
        Administration, to Office of Economics, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy and International
        Affairs, under authority of the Department of Transportation appropriation request for FY 1985, effective
        Oct. 1, 1984.

Research and Development Board
        Established in the Department of Defense by act of July 26, 1947 (61 Stat. 499). Abolished by Reorg. Plan
        No. 6 of 1953, effective June 30, 1953, and functions vested in the Secretary of Defense.

Research and Development Board, Joint
        Established June 6, 1946, by charter of Secretaries of War and Navy. Terminated on creation of Research
        and Development Board by act of July 26, 1947 (61 Stat. 506).

Research and Intelligence Service, Interim
        Established in the Department of State by EO 9621 of Sept. 20, 1945. Abolished Dec. 31, 1945, pursuant to
        terms of order.

Research and Special Programs Administration
        Established by act of Oct. 24, 1992 (106 Stat. 3310). Abolished and certain duties and powers transferred
        to both the Pipeline Hazardous Materials Safety Administration and the Administrator of the Research
        and Innovative Technology Administration, Department of Transportation, by act of Nov. 30, 2004 (118
        Stat. 2424–2426).

Research Resources, Division of
        Established in National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services. Renamed National
        Center for Research Resources by Secretarial notice of Feb. 23, 1990 (55 FR 6455) and act of June 10, 1993
        (107 Stat. 178).

Research Service, Cooperative State
        Established by Secretary of Agriculture Memorandum 1462, supp. 1, of Aug. 31, 1961. Consolidated into
        Science and Education Administration by Secretary’s order of Jan. 24, 1978. Reestablished as Cooperative
        State Research Service by Secretarial order of June 16, 1981.

Research and Service Division, Cooperative
        Functions transferred to the Secretary of Agriculture in Farmer Cooperative Service by act of Aug. 6, 1953
        (67 Stat. 390).

Resettlement Administration
        Established by EO 7027 of Apr. 30, 1935. Functions transferred to the Department of Agriculture by EO
        7530 of Dec. 31, 1936. Renamed Farm Security Administration by Secretary’s Memorandum 732 of Sept.
        1, 1937. Abolished by act of Aug. 14, 1946 (60 Stat. 1062) and functions incorporated into the Farmers’
        Home Administration, effective Jan. 1, 1947. Farmers’ Home Administration abolished, effective Dec. 27,
        1994, under authority of Secretary’s Memorandum 1010–1 dated Oct. 20, 1994 (59 FR 66441). Functions
        assumed by the Consolidated Farm Service Agency and the Rural Housing and Community Development
        Service.

Resolution Trust Corporation
        Established by act of Aug. 9, 1989 (103 Stat. 369). Board of Directors of the Corporation abolished by act
        of Dec. 12, 1991 (105 Stat. 1769). Corporation functions terminated pursuant to act of Dec. 17, 1993 (107
        Stat. 2369).
Resources Board and Advisory Committee, National
        Established by EO 6777 of June 30, 1934. Abolished by EO 7065 of June 7, 1935, and functions transferred
        to National Resources Committee.

Resources Committee, National
        Established by EO 7065 of June 7, 1935. Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939, and
        functions transferred to National Resources Planning Board in Executive Office of the President. Board
        terminated by act of June 26, 1943 (57 Stat. 169).

Resources Planning Board, National See Resources Committee, National

Retired Executives, Service Corps of
         Established in ACTION by act of Oct. 1, 1973 (87 Stat. 404). Transferred to Small Business Administration
         by EO 11871 of July 18, 1975.

Retraining and Reemployment Administration
         Established by EO 9427 of Feb. 24, 1944, and act of Oct. 3, 1944 (58 Stat. 788). Transferred from Office of
         War Mobilization and Reconversion to the Department of Labor by EO 9617 of Sept. 19, 1945. Terminated
         pursuant to terms of act.

Revenue Sharing, Office of
       Established by the Secretary of the Treasury to administer programs authorized by acts of Oct. 20, 1972
       (86 Stat. 919), and July 22, 1976 (90 Stat. 999). Transferred from the Office of the Secretary to Assistant
       Secretary (Domestic Finance) by Department of the Treasury Order 242, rev. 1, of May 17, 1976.

Review, Division of
        Established in National Recovery Administration by EO 7075 of June 15, 1935. Transferred to the
        Department of Commerce by EO 7252 of Dec. 21, 1935, and functions terminated Apr. 1, 1936.
        Committee of Industrial Analysis created by EO 7323 of Mar. 21, 1936, to complete work of Division.

RFC Mortgage Company
       Organized under laws of Maryland Mar. 14, 1935, pursuant to act of Jan. 22, 1932 (47 Stat. 5). Grouped
       with other agencies to form Federal Loan Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939.
       Transferred to the Department of Commerce by EO 9071 of Feb. 24, 1942. Returned to Federal Loan
       Agency by act of Feb. 24, 1945 (59 Stat. 5). Assets and liabilities transferred to Reconstruction Finance
       Corporation by act of June 30, 1947 (61 Stat. 207).

River Basins, Neches, Trinity, Brazos, Colorado, Guadalupe, San Antonio, Nueces, and San Jacinto, and
Intervening Areas, U.S. Study Commission on
        Established by act of Aug. 28, 1958 (72 Stat. 1058). Terminated June 30, 1962.

River Basins, Savannah, Altamaha, Saint Mary’s, Apalachicola-Chattahoochee, and Perdido-Escambia, and
Intervening Areas, U.S. Study Commission on
        Established by act of Aug. 28, 1958 (72 Stat. 1090). Terminated Dec. 23, 1962.

Road Inquiry, Office of
        Established by the Secretary of Agriculture under authority of act of Aug. 8, 1894 (28 Stat. 264). Federal
        aid for highways to be administered by the Secretary of Agriculture through Office of Public Roads and
        Rural Engineering authorized by act of July 11, 1916 (39 Stat. 355), known as Bureau of Public Roads after
        July 1918. Transferred to Federal Works Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939, and
        renamed Public Roads Administration. Transferred to General Services Administration as Bureau of Public
        Roads by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 380). Transferred to the Department of Commerce by Reorg. Plan
        No. 7 of 1949, effective Aug. 20, 1949. Transferred to the Secretary of Transportation by act of Oct. 15,
        1966 (80 Stat. 931), and functions assigned to Federal Highway Administration.

Roads, Bureau of Public See Road Inquiry, Office of
Roads Administration, Public See Road Inquiry, Office of

Roads and Rural Engineering, Office of Public See Road Inquiry, Office of

Rock Creek and Potomac Parkway Commission
        Established by act of Mar. 14, 1913 (37 Stat. 885). Abolished by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933, and functions
        transferred to Office of National Parks, Buildings, and Reservations, Department of the Interior.

Roosevelt Centennial Commission, Theodore
       Established by joint resolution of July 28, 1955 (69 Stat. 383). Terminated Oct. 27, 1959, pursuant to terms
       of act.

Roosevelt Library, Franklin D.
       Functions assigned to National Park Service by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1946, effective July 16, 1946,
       transferred to General Services Administration by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1963, effective July 27, 1963.

Roosevelt Library, Trustees of the Franklin D.
       Established by joint resolution of July 18, 1939 (53 Stat. 1063). Transferred to General Services
       Administration by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 381). Abolished by act of Mar. 5, 1958 (72 Stat. 34), and
       Library operated by National Archives and Records Service, General Services Administration.

Roosevelt Memorial Commission, Franklin Delano
       Established by joint resolution of Aug. 11, 1955 (69 Stat. 694). Terminated by act of Nov. 14, 1997 (111
       Stat. 1601).

Rubber Development Corporation
        Establishment announced Feb. 20, 1943, by the Secretary of Commerce. Organized under laws of
        Delaware as subsidiary of Reconstruction Finance Corporation. Assumed all activities of Rubber Reserve
        Company relating to development of foreign rubber sources and procurement of rubber therefrom.
        Functions transferred to Office of Economic Warfare by EO 9361 of July 15, 1943. Office consolidated into
        Foreign Economic Administration by EO 9380 of Sept. 25, 1943. Office returned to Reconstruction Finance
        Corporation by EO 9630 of Sept. 27, 1945. Certificate of incorporation expired June 30, 1947.

Rubber Producing Facilities Disposal Commission
        Established by act of Aug. 7, 1953 (67 Stat. 408). Functions transferred to Federal Facilities Corporation by
        EO 10678 of Sept. 20, 1956.

Rubber Reserve Company
        Established June 28, 1940, under act of Jan. 22, 1932 (47 Stat. 5). Transferred from Federal Loan Agency
        to the Department of Commerce by EO 9071 of Feb. 24, 1942. Returned to Federal Loan Agency by act of
        Feb. 24, 1945 (59 Stat. 5). Dissolved by act of June 30, 1945 (59 Stat. 310), and functions transferred to
        Reconstruction Finance Corporation.

Rural Areas Development, Office of
        Established by Secretary of Agriculture memorandum in 1961 (revised Sept. 21, 1962). Renamed Rural
        Community Development Service by Secretary’s Memorandum 1570 of Feb. 24, 1965.

Rural Business and Cooperative Development Service
        Established within the Department of Agriculture by Secretary’s Memorandum 1020–34 dated Dec. 31,
        1991. Renamed Rural Business-Cooperative Service (61 FR 2899), effective Jan. 30, 1996.

Rural Community Development Service
        Established by Secretary of Agriculture Memorandum 1570 of Feb. 25, 1965, to supersede Office of Rural
        Areas Development. Abolished Feb. 2, 1970, by Secretary’s Memorandum 1670 of Jan. 30, 1970, and
        functions transferred to other agencies in the Department of Agriculture.
Rural Development Administration
        Established within the Department of Agriculture by Secretary’s Memorandum 1020–34 dated Dec. 31,
        1991. Abolished Dec. 27, 1994 (59 FR 66441) under authority of Secretary’s Memorandum 1010–1 dated
        Oct. 20, 1994. Functions assumed by the Rural Business and Cooperative Development Service.

Rural Development Committee See Rural Development Program, Committee for

Rural Development Policy, Office of
        Established initially as Office of Rural Development Policy Management and Coordination, Farmers Home
        Administration, by Secretary of Agriculture Memorandum 1020–3 of Oct. 26, 1981. Abolished in 1986 due
        to lack of funding.

Rural Development Program, Committee for
        Established by EO 10847 of Oct. 12, 1959. Abolished by EO 11122 of Oct. 16, 1963, which established
        Rural Development Committee. Committee superseded by EO 11307 of Sept. 30, 1966, and functions
        assumed by the Secretary of Agriculture.

Rural Development Service
        Established by Agriculture Secretarial order in 1973. Functions transferred to Office of Rural Development
        Coordination and Planning, Farmers Home Administration, by Secretarial order in 1978.

Rural Electrification Administration
         Established by EO 7037 of May 11, 1935. Functions transferred by EO 7458 of Sept. 26, 1936, to Rural
         Electrification Administration established by act of May 20, 1936 (49 Stat. 1363). Transferred to the
         Department of Agriculture by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Abolished by Secretary’s
         Memorandum 1010–1 dated Oct. 20, 1994, and functions assumed by Rural Utilities Service.

Rural Housing and Community Development Service
        Established by act of Oct. 13, 1994 (108 Stat. 3219). Renamed Rural Housing Service (61 FR 2899),
        effective Jan. 30, 1996.

Rural Rehabilitation Division
        Established April 1934 by act of May 12, 1933 (48 Stat. 55). Functions transferred to Resettlement
        Administration by Federal Emergency Relief Administrator’s order of June 19, 1935.




S                                            TOP OF PAGE

Saint Elizabeth’s Hospital See Insane, Government Hospital for the

Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation
        Established by act of May 13, 1954 (68 Stat. 92). Secretary of Commerce given direction of general policies
        of Corporation by EO 10771 of June 20, 1958. Transferred to the Department of Transportation by act of
        Oct. 15, 1966 (80 Stat. 931).

Salary Stabilization, Office of See Salary Stabilization Board

Salary Stabilization Board
         Established May 10, 1951, by Economic Stabilization Administrator’s General Order 8. Stabilization
         program administered by Office of Salary Stabilization. Terminated Apr. 30, 1953, by EO 10434 of Feb. 6,
         1953, and acts of June 30, 1952 (66 Stat. 296), and June 30, 1953 (67 Stat. 131).

Sales Manager, Office of the General
         Established by the Secretary of Agriculture Feb. 29, 1976. Consolidated with Foreign Agricultural Service
         by Secretary’s Memorandum 2001 of Nov. 29, 1979.

Savings Bonds, Interdepartmental Committee for the Voluntary Payroll Savings Plan for the Purchase of U.S.
        Established by EO 11532 of June 2, 1970. Superseded by EO 11981 of Mar. 29, 1977, which established
        Interagency Committee for the Purchase of U.S. Savings Bonds.

Savings and Loan Advisory Council, Federal
         Established by act of Oct. 6, 1972 (86 Stat. 770). Continued by act of Dec. 26, 1974 (88 Stat. 1739).
         Terminated by act of Aug. 9, 1989 (103 Stat. 422).

Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, Federal
         Established by act of June 27, 1934 (48 Stat. 1246). Grouped with other agencies to form Federal Loan
         Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Transferred to Federal Home Loan Bank
         Administration, National Housing Agency, by EO 9070 of Feb. 24, 1942. Board of Trustees abolished by
         Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, effective July 27, 1947, and functions transferred to Home Loan Bank Board.
         Abolished by act of Aug. 9, 1989 (103 Stat. 354).

Savings Bonds Division, United States
        Established by Departmental Order 62 of Dec. 26, 1945, as successor to the War and Finance Division,
        War Savings Staff, and Defense Savings Staff. Functions transferred to Bureau of Public Debt by
        Departmental Order 101–05 of May 11, 1994, and Division renamed Savings Bond Marketing Office.

Science, Engineering, and Technology, Federal Coordinating Council for
         Established by act of May 11, 1976 (90 Stat. 471). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1977, effective Feb.
         26, 1978, and functions transferred to President. Functions redelegated to Director of the Office of
         Science and Technology Policy and Federal Coordinating Council for Science, Engineering, and Technology,
         established by EO 12039 of Feb. 24, 1978.

Science, Engineering, and Technology Panel, Intergovernmental
         Established by act of May 11, 1976 (90 Stat. 465). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1977, effective Feb.
         26, 1978, and functions transferred to President. Functions redelegated to Director of Office of Science
         and Technology Policy by EO 12039 of Feb. 24, 1978, which established Intergovernmental Science,
         Engineering, and Technology Advisory Panel.

Science Advisory Committee, President’s
        Established by President Apr. 20, 1951, and reconstituted Nov. 22, 1957. Terminated with Office of
        Science and Technology, effective July 1, 1973.

Science Exhibit-Century 21 Exposition, U.S.
         Established Jan. 20, 1960, by Department of Commerce Order 167. Abolished by revocation of order on
         June 5, 1963.

Science and Technology, Federal Council for See Scientific Research and Development, Interdepartmental
Committee on

Science and Technology, Office of
         Established by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1962, effective June 8, 1962. Office abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of
         1973, effective June 30, 1973, and functions transferred to National Science Foundation.

Science and Technology, President’s Committee on
         Established by act of May 11, 1976 (90 Stat. 468). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1977, effective Feb.
         26, 1978, and functions transferred to President.

Scientific and Policy Advisory Committee
          Established by act of Sept. 26, 1961 (75 Stat. 631). Terminated Apr. 30, 1996 under terms of act.
Scientific Research and Development, Interdepartmental Committee on
          Established by EO 9912 of Dec. 24, 1947. EO 9912 revoked by EO 10807 of Mar. 13, 1959, which
          established Federal Council for Science and Technology. Abolished by act of May 11, 1976 (90 Stat. 472).

Scientific Research and Development, Office of
          Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 8807 of June 28, 1941. Terminated by EO 9913 of
          Dec. 26, 1947, and property transferred to National Military Establishment for liquidation.

Scientists and Engineers, National Committee for the Development of
         Established by President Apr. 3, 1956. Renamed President’s Committee on Scientists and Engineers May 7,
         1957. Final report submitted Dec. 17, 1958, and expired Dec. 31, 1958.

Scientists and Engineers, President’s Committee on See Scientists and Engineers, National Committee for the
Development of

Screw Thread Commission, National
        Established by act of July 18, 1918 (40 Stat. 912). Terminated by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933, and records
        transferred to the Department of Commerce, effective Mar. 2, 1934. Informal Interdepartmental Screw
        Thread Committee established on Sept. 14, 1939, consisting of representatives of the Departments of
        War, the Navy, and Commerce.

Sea Grant Review Panel, National
        Established by act of Oct. 8, 1976 (90 Stat. 1967). Renamed National Sea Grant Advisory Board by act of
        Oct. 13, 2008 (122 Stat. 4207.

Secret Service, United States See Secret Service Division

Secret Service Division
         Established July 5, 1865, as a Bureau under Treasury Department. Acknowledged as distinct agency within
         Treasury Department in 1883. White House Police Force created on October 1, 1922, and placed under
         supervision of Secret Service Division in 1930. White House Police Force renamed Executive Protective
         Service by act of June 30, 1970 (84 Stat. 358). Executive Protective Service renamed U.S. Secret Service
         Uniformed Division by act of Nov. 15, 1977 (91 Stat. 1371). Treasury Police Force merged into Secret
         Service on Oct. 5, 1986. U.S. Secret Service transferred to Homeland Security Department by act of Nov.
         25, 2002 (116 Stat. 2224).

Security and Safety Performance Assurance, Office of
         Established by Secretary of Energy memorandum of December 2, 2003. Abolished by Secretary’s
         Memorandum 2006-007929 of Aug. 30, 2006 and functions transferred to the Office of Health, Safety and
         Security.

Security, Commission on Government
         Established by act of Aug. 9, 1955 (69 Stat. 595). Terminated Sept. 22, 1957, pursuant to terms of act.

Security, Office of the Director for Mutual See Security Agency, Mutual

Security Agency, Federal
         Established by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939, grouping under one administration Office
         of Education, Public Health Service, Social Security Board, U.S. Employment Service, Civilian Conservation
         Corps, and National Youth Administration. Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1953, effective Apr. 11, 1953,
         and functions and units transferred to Department of Health, Education, and Welfare.

Security Agency, Mutual
         Established and continued by acts of Oct. 10, 1951 (65 Stat. 373) and June 20, 1952 (66 Stat. 141). Agency
         and Office of Director for Mutual Security abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 7 of 1953, effective Aug. 1, 1953,
         and functions transferred to Foreign Operations Administration, established by same plan.
Security and Individual Rights, President’s Commission on Internal
         Established by EO 10207 of Jan. 23, 1951. Terminated by EO 10305 of Nov. 14, 1951.

Security Resources Board, National
         Established by act of July 26, 1947 (61 Stat. 499). Transferred to Executive Office of the President by
         Reorg. Plan No. 4 of 1949, effective Aug. 20, 1949. Functions of Board transferred to Chairman and Board
         made advisory to him by Reorg. Plan No. 25 of 1950, effective July 10, 1950. Functions delegated by
         Executive order transferred to Office of Defense Mobilization by EO 10438 of Mar. 13, 1953. Board
         abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1953, effective June 12, 1953, and remaining functions transferred to
         Office of Defense Mobilization.

Security Training Commission, National
         Established by act of June 19, 1951 (65 Stat. 75). Expired June 30, 1957, pursuant to Presidential letter of
         Mar. 25, 1957.

Seed Loan Office
        Authorized by Presidential letters of July 26, 1918, and July 26, 1919, to the Secretary of Agriculture.
        Further authorized by act of Mar. 3, 1921 (41 Stat. 1347). Office transferred to Farm Credit Administration
        by EO 6084 of Mar. 27, 1933.

Selective Service Appeal Board, National
         Established by EO 9988 of Aug. 20, 1948. Inactive as of Apr. 11, 1975.

Selective Service Records, Office of See Selective Service System

Selective Service System
         Established by act of Sept. 16, 1940 (54 Stat. 885). Placed under jurisdiction of War Manpower
         Commission by EO 9279 of Dec. 5, 1942, and designated Bureau of Selective Service. Designated Selective
         Service System, separate agency, by EO 9410 of Dec. 23, 1943. Transferred for liquidation to Office of
         Selective Service Records established by act of Mar. 31, 1947 (61 Stat. 31). Transferred to Selective Service
         System by act of June 24, 1948 (62 Stat. 604).

Self-Help Development and Technical Development, Office of
         Established in National Consumer Cooperative Bank by act of Aug. 20, 1978 (92 Stat. 499). Abolished by
         act of Aug. 13, 1981 (95 Stat. 437), and assets transferred to Consumer Cooperative Development
         Corporation, Department of Commerce, Dec. 30, 1982.

Services, Bureau of Special See Office of War Information

Services, Division of Central Administrative
         Established by Liaison Officer for Emergency Management pursuant to Presidential letter of Feb. 28, 1941.
         Terminated by EO 9471 of Aug. 25, 1944, and functions discontinued or transferred to constituent
         agencies of Office for Emergency Management and other agencies.

Shipbuilding Stabilization Committee
        Originally organized by National Defense Advisory Commission in 1940. Established August 1942 by War
        Production Board. Transferred to the Department of Labor from Civilian Production Administration,
        successor agency to Board, by EO 9656 of Nov. 15, 1945. Terminated June 30, 1947.

Shipping Board, U.S.
        Established by act of Sept. 7, 1916 (39 Stat. 729). Abolished by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933, and functions,
        including those with respect to U.S. Shipping Board Merchant Fleet Corporation, transferred to U.S.
        Shipping Board Bureau, Department of Commerce, effective Mar. 2, 1934. Separation of employees
        deferred until Sept. 30, 1933, by EO 6245 of Aug. 9, 1933. Functions assumed by U.S. Maritime
        Commission Oct. 26, 1936, pursuant to act of June 29, 1936 (49 Stat. 1985).
Shipping Board Bureau, U.S. See Shipping Board, U.S.

Shipping Board Emergency Fleet Corporation, U.S.
        Established Apr. 16, 1917, under authority of act of Sept. 7, 1916 (39 Stat. 729). Renamed U.S. Shipping
        Board Merchant Fleet Corporation by act of Feb. 11, 1927 (44 Stat. 1083). Terminated Oct. 26, 1936,
        under provisions of act of June 29, 1936 (49 Stat. 1985), and functions transferred to U.S. Maritime
        Commission.

Shipping Board Merchant Fleet Corporation, U.S. See Shipping Board Emergency Fleet Corporation, U.S.

Ships, Bureau of
         Established by act of June 20, 1940 (54 Stat. 493), to replace Bureau of Engineering and Bureau of
         Construction and Repair. Abolished by Department of Defense reorg. order of Mar. 9, 1966, and functions
         transferred to the Secretary of the Navy (31 FR 7188).

Simpson Historical Research Center, Albert F.
       Renamed Headquarters USAF Historical Research Center by special order of Dec. 16, 1983 of the Secretary
       of Defense.

Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization, Office of
        Established within certain Defense Departments by act of Oct. 24, 1978 (92 Stat. 1770). Renamed Office
        of Small Business Programs by Public Law 109–163 of Jan. 6, 2006 (119 Stat. 3399).

Smithsonian Symposia and Seminars, Office of
       Renamed Office of Interdisciplinary Studies by Smithsonian Institution announcement of Mar. 16, 1987.

Social Development Institute, Inter-American
         Established by act of Dec. 30, 1969 (83 Stat. 821). Renamed Inter-American Foundation by act of Feb. 7,
         1972 (86 Stat. 34).

Social Protection, Committee on
         Established in Office of Defense Health and Welfare Services by administrative order June 14, 1941.
         Functions transferred to Federal Security Agency by EO 9338 of Apr. 29, 1943.

Social and Rehabilitation Service
         Established by the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare reorganization of Aug. 15, 1967. Abolished
         by Secretary’s reorganization of Mar. 8, 1977 (42 FR 13262), and constituent units—Medical Services
         Administration, Assistance Payments Administration, Office of Child Support Enforcement, and Public
         Services Administration—transferred.

Social Security Administration See Social Security Board

Social Security Board
         Established by act of Aug. 14, 1935 (49 Stat. 620). Incorporated into Federal Security Agency by Reorg.
         Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Social Security Board abolished and Social Security
         Administration established by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1946 (5 U.S.C. app.), effective July 16, 1946, and
         functions of the Board transferred to Federal Security Administrator. Social Security Administration
         transferred from the Federal Security Agency by Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1953 (5 U.S.C. app.),
         effective Apr. 11, 1953, to the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Social Security
         Administration became an independent agency in the executive branch by act of Aug. 15, 1994 (108 Stat.
         1464), effective Mar. 31, 1995.

Soil Conservation Service See Soil Erosion Service
Soil Erosion Service
         Established in the Department of the Interior following allotment made Aug. 25, 1933. Transferred to the
         Department of Agriculture by Secretary of Interior administrative order of Mar. 25, 1935. Made Soil
         Conservation Service by order of the Secretary of Agriculture, Apr. 27, 1935, pursuant to provisions of act
         of Apr. 27, 1935 (49 Stat. 163). Certain functions of Soil Conservation Service under jurisdiction of the
         Department of the Interior transferred from the Department of Agriculture to the Department of the
         Interior by Reorg. Plan No. IV of 1940, effective June 30, 1940. Soil Conservation Service abolished by act
         of Oct. 13, 1994 (108 Stat. 3225) and functions assumed by the Natural Resources Conservation Service.

Soils, Bureau of See Agricultural and Industrial Chemistry, Bureau of and Plant Industry, Bureau of

Solicitor General, Office of Assistant
          Established in the Department of Justice by act of June 16, 1933 (48 Stat. 307). Terminated by Reorg. Plan
          No. 2 of 1950, effective May 24, 1950.

Southeastern Power Administration
       Established by the Secretary of the Interior in 1943 to carry out functions under act of Dec. 22, 1944 (58
       Stat. 890). Transferred to the Department of Energy by act of Aug. 4, 1977 (91 Stat. 578).

Southwestern Power Administration
       Established by the Secretary of the Interior in 1943 to carry out functions under act of Dec. 22, 1944 (58
       Stat. 890). Transferred to the Department of Energy by act of Aug. 4, 1977 (91 Stat. 578).

Space Access and Technology, Office of
        Established in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Abolished by Administrator’s order of
        Feb. 24, 1997.

Space Communications, Office of
        Established in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Abolished by Administrator’s order of
        Feb. 24, 1997.

Space Payload Technology Organization, Joint Operationally Responsive
        Established by act of Jan. 6, 2006 (119 Stat. 3408). Abolished by acts of Oct. 17, 2006 (120 Stat. 2358) and
        Dec. 20, 2006 (120 Stat. 3286).

Space Science, Office of See Space and Terrestrial Applications, Office of

Space Science Board
        Renamed Space Studies Board by authority of the National Research Council, National Academy of
        Sciences, effective May 8, 1989.

Space Station, Office of
        Established in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Abolished in 1990 and remaining
        functions transferred to the Office of Space Flight.

Space Technology Laboratories, National
        Renamed John C. Stennis Space Center by EO 12641 of May 20, 1988.

Space and Terrestrial Applications, Office of
        Combined with Office of Space Science to form Office of Space Science and Applications by National
        Aeronautics and Space Administrator’s announcement of Sept. 29, 1981.

Space Tracking and Data Systems, Office of
        Renamed Office of Space Operations by National Aeronautics and Space Administrator’s announcement
        of Jan. 9, 1987.
Space Transportation Operations, Office of
        Combined with Office of Space Transportation Systems to form Office of Space Transportation Systems,
        National Aeronautics and Space Administration, effective July 1982.

Space Transportation Systems, Office of See Space Transportation Operations, Office of

Spanish-Speaking People, Cabinet Committee on Opportunities for See Mexican-American Affairs, Interagency
Committee on

Special. See other part of title

Specifications Board, Federal
         Established by Bureau of the Budget Circular 42 of Oct. 10, 1921. Transferred from Federal Coordinating
         Service to Procurement Division by order of Oct. 9, 1933 of the Secretary of the Treasury. Board
         superseded by Federal Specifications Executive Committee, set up by Director of Procurement under
         Circular Letter 106 of July 16, 1935.

Sport Fisheries and Wildlife, Bureau of
         Established in the Department of the Interior by act of Aug. 8, 1956 (70 Stat. 1119). Bureau replaced by
         U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service pursuant to act of Apr. 22, 1974 (88 Stat. 92).

Standards, National Bureau of See Weights and Measures, Office of Standard

State, Department of
         Duty of Secretary of State of procuring copies of all statutes of the States, as provided for in act of Sept.
         28, 1789 (R.S. 206), abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 20 of 1950, effective May 24, 1950. Functions of
         numbering, editing, and distributing proclamations and Executive orders transferred from the
         Department of State to the Division of the Federal Register, National Archives, by EO 7298 of Feb. 18,
         1936. Duty of Secretary of State of publishing Executive proclamations and treaties in newspapers in
         District of Columbia, provided for in act of July 31, 1876 (19 Stat. 105), abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 20 of
         1950, effective May 24, 1950. Functions concerning publication of U.S. Statutes at Large, acts and joint
         resolutions in pamphlet form known as slip laws, and amendments to the Constitution; electoral votes for
         President and Vice President; and Territorial papers transferred from the Department of State to the
         Administrator of the General Services Administration by Reorg. Plan No. 20 of 1950. (See also Archives
         Establishment, National)

State and Local Cooperation, Division of
        Established by Advisory Commission to Council of National Defense Aug. 5, 1940. Transferred to Office of
        Civilian Defense.

State and Local Government Cooperation, Committee on
        Established by EO 11627 of Oct 15, 1971. Abolished by EO 11695 of Jan. 11, 1973.

State Technical Services, Office of
         Established by the Secretary of Commerce Nov. 19, 1965, pursuant to act of Sept. 14, 1965 (79 Stat. 697).
         Abolished by Secretary, effective June 30, 1970.

Statistical Board, Central
          Organized Aug. 9, 1933, by EO 6225 of July 27, 1933. Transferred to Bureau of the Budget by Reorg. Plan
          No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Expired July 25, 1940, and functions taken over by Division of
          Statistical Standards, Bureau of the Budget.

Statistical Committee, Central
          Established by act of July 25, 1935 (49 Stat. 498). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1,
          1939, and functions transferred to Bureau of the Budget.
Statistical Policy Coordination Committee
          Established by EO 12013 of Oct. 7, 1977. Abolished by EO 12318 of Aug. 21, 1981.

Statistical Reporting Service
          Established by Memorandum 1446, supp. 1, part 3, of 1961 of the Secretary of Agriculture. Consolidated
          with other departmental units into Economics, Statistics, and Cooperatives Service by Secretary’s
          Memorandum 1927, effective Dec. 23, 1977. Redesignated as Statistical Reporting Service by Secretary’s
          order of Oct. 1, 1981. Renamed National Agricultural Statistics Service.

Statistics Administration, Social and Economic
          Established Jan. 1, 1972, by the Secretary of Commerce. Terminated by Department of Commerce
          Organization Order 10–2, effective Aug. 4, 1975 (40 FR 42765). Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bureau
          of the Census restored as primary operating units of the Department of Commerce by Organization
          Orders 35–1A and 2A, effective Aug. 4, 1975.

Statutes at Large See State, Department of

Statutes of the States See State, Department of

Steam Engineering, Bureau of
       Established in the Department of the Navy by act of July 5, 1862 (12 Stat. 510). Redesignated as Bureau of
       Engineering by act of June 4, 1920 (41 Stat. 828). Abolished by act of June 20, 1940 (54 Stat. 492), and
       functions transferred to Bureau of Ships.

Steamboat Inspection Service
       President authorized to appoint Service by act of June 28, 1838 (5 Stat. 252). Secretary of Treasury
       authorized to establish boards of local inspectors at enumerated ports throughout the U.S. by act of Feb.
       28, 1871 (16 Stat. 440). Authority to appoint boards of local inspectors delegated to Secretary of
       Commerce and Labor by act of Mar. 4, 1905 (33 Stat. 1026). Consolidated with Bureau of Navigation and
       Steamboat Inspection by act of June 30, 1932 (47 Stat. 415).

Stock Catalog Board, Federal Standard
        Originated by act of Mar. 2, 1929 (45 Stat. 1461). Transferred from Federal Coordinating Service to
        Procurement Division by order of Oct. 9, 1933 of the Secretary of the Treasury.

Strategic Defense Initiative Organization
         Established in 1986 as a separate agency of the Department of Defense. Renamed Ballistic Missile
         Defense Organization by Deputy Secretary’s memorandum in May 1993.

Strategic Posture of the United States, Commission on the Implementation of the New
         Established by act of Jan. 6, 2006 (119 Stat. 3431). Terminated by act of Jan. 28, 2009 (122 Stat. 328)

Strategic Services, Office of See Information, Office of Coordinator of

Strategic Trade, Office of
         Established in the U.S. Customs and Border Protection pursuant to Customs Service Reorganization plan,
         effective Sept. 30, 1995. Abolished by act of Oct. 13, 2006 (120 Stat. 1924) and functions transferred to
         the Office of International Trade.

Subversive Activities Control Board
        Established by act of Sept. 23, 1950 (64 Stat. 987). Terminated June 30, 1973, due to lack of funding.

Sugar Division
        Created by act of May 12, 1933 (48 Stat. 31), authorized by act of Sept. 1, 1937 (50 Stat. 903). Taken from
        Agricultural Adjustment Administration and made independent division of the Department of Agriculture
        by Secretary’s Memorandum 783, effective Oct. 16, 1938. Placed under Agricultural Conservation and
        Adjustment Administration by EO 9069 of Feb. 23, 1942, functioning as Sugar Agency. Functions
        transferred to Food Distribution Administration by EO 9280 of Dec. 5, 1942.

Sugar Rationing Administration
        Established by Memorandum 1190 of Mar. 31, 1947, of the Secretary of Agriculture under authority of act
        of Mar. 31, 1947 (61 Stat. 35). Terminated Mar. 31, 1948, on expiration of authority.

Supplies and Accounts, Bureau of See Provisions and Clothing, Bureau of

Supplies and Shortages, National Commission on
         Established by act of Sept. 30, 1974 (88 Stat. 1168). Terminated Mar. 31, 1977, pursuant to terms of act.

Supply, Bureau of Federal See Procurement Division

Supply, Office of
        Renamed Office of Procurement and Property by Smithsonian Institution announcement of Nov. 4, 1986.

Supply Committee, General
        Established by act of June 17, 1910 (36 Stat. 531). Abolished by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933, effective Mar.
        2, 1934, and functions transferred to Procurement Division, the Department of the Treasury.

Supply Priorities and Allocations Board
        Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 8875 of Aug. 28, 1941. Abolished by EO 9024 of
        Jan. 16, 1942, and functions transferred to War Production Board.

Supply Service, Federal
        Renamed Office of Personal Property by General Services Administration (GSA) order, effective Sept. 28,
        1982; later renamed Office of Federal Supply and Services by GSA order of Jan. 22, 1983; then
        redesignated Federal Supply Service. Merged with Federal Technology Service to form Federal Acquisition
        Service by GSA Order No. 5440.591 of Sept. 9, 2005. See also act of Oct. 6, 2006 (120 Stat. 1735).

Surveys and Maps, Federal Board of See Surveys and Maps of the Federal Government, Board of

Surveys and Maps of the Federal Government, Board of
        Established by EO 3206 of Dec. 30, 1919. Renamed Federal Board of Surveys and Maps by EO 7262 of Jan.
        4, 1936. Abolished by EO 9094 of Mar. 10, 1942, and functions transferred to Director, Bureau of the
        Budget.

Space System Development, Office of
        Established in the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Renamed Office of Space Access and
        Technology in 1995.


T                                           TOP OF PAGE

Tariff Commission, U.S.
         Established by act of Sept. 8, 1916 (39 Stat. 795). Renamed U.S. International Trade Commission by act of
         Jan. 3, 1975 (88 Stat. 2009).

Tax Appeals, Board of
       Established as an independent agency within the executive branch by act of June 2, 1924 (43 Stat. 336).
       Continued by acts of Feb. 26, 1926 (44 Stat. 105) and Feb. 10, 1939 (53 Stat. 158). Renamed Tax Court of
       the United States by act of Aug. 16, 1954 (68A Stat. 879). Renamed United States Tax Court by act of Dec.
       30, 1969 (83 Stat. 730).
Technical Advisory Board for First Responder Interoperability
        Established by act of Feb. 22, 2012 (126 Stat. 208). Terminated on July 6, 2012 by operation of law.

Technical Cooperation Administration
        Transferred from the Department of State to Mutual Security Agency by EO 10458 of June 1, 1953.
        Transferred to Foreign Operations Administration by Reorg. Plan No. 7 of 1953, effective Aug. 1, 1953.

Technical Services, Office of
        Designated unit of Office of the Secretary of Commerce by Department Order 179, July 23, 1962.
        Functions transferred to National Bureau of Standards by Order 90 of Jan. 30, 1964.

Technology Administration
        Established by act of Oct. 24, 1988 (102 Stat. 2593). Abolished by act of Aug. 9, 2007 (121 Stat. 587) and
        functions absorbed by National Institute of Standards and Technology, Department of Commerce.

Technology Assessment, Office of
        Created by act of Oct. 13, 1972 (86 Stat. 797). Office inactive as of Sept. 30, 1995.

Technology, Automation, and Economic Progress, National Commission on
        Established by act of Aug. 19, 1964 (78 Stat. 463). Terminated January 1966 pursuant to terms of act.

Technology Service, Federal
        Merged with Federal Supply Service to form Federal Acquisition Service by General Services
        Administration Order No. 5440.591 of Sept. 9, 2005. See also act of Oct. 6, 2006 (120 Stat. 1735).

Telecommunications Adviser to the President
       Established in Executive Office of the President by EO 10297 of Oct. 9, 1951. EO 10297 revoked by EO
       10460 of June 16, 1953, and functions transferred to Director of Office of Defense Mobilization.

Telecommunications Management, Director of
       Established in Office of Emergency Planning by EO 10995 of Feb. 16, 1962. Assignment of radio
       frequencies delegated to Government agencies and foreign diplomatic establishments by EO 11084 of
       Feb. 16, 1963. Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1970, effective Apr. 20, 1970.

Telecommunications Policy, Office of
       Established in Executive Office of the President by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1970, effective Apr. 20, 1970.
       Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1977, effective Mar. 26, 1978, and certain functions transferred to
       President with all other functions transferred to the Department of Commerce.

Telecommunications Service, Automated Data
       Renamed Office of Information Resources Management by General Services Administration order of Aug.
       17, 1982. Later renamed Information Resources Management Service.

Temporary Controls, Office of
       Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 9809 of Dec. 12, 1946, consolidating Office of
       War Mobilization and Reconversion, Office of Economic Stabilization, Office of Price Administration, and
       Civilian Production Administration. Functions with respect to Veterans’ Emergency Housing Program
       transferred to Housing Expediter by EO 9836 of Mar. 22, 1947. Functions with respect to distribution and
       price of sugar products transferred to the Secretary of Agriculture by act of Mar. 31, 1947 (61 Stat. 36).
       Office terminated by EO 9841 of Apr. 23, 1947, and remaining functions redistributed.

Temporary Emergency Court of Appeals
       Established by act of Dec. 22, 1971 (85 Stat. 749). Abolished by act of Oct. 29, 1992, effective Apr. 30,
       1993 (106 Stat. 4507). Court’s jurisdiction and pending cases transferred to the United States Court of
       Appeals for the Federal Circuit.
Territorial Affairs, Office of
         Established by Interior Secretarial Order 2951 of Feb. 6, 1973. Abolished by Departmental Manual Release
         2270 of June 6, 1980, and functions transferred to Office of Assistant Secretary for Territorial and
         International Affairs.

Territorial papers See State, Department of

Territories, Office of
         Established by the Secretary of the Interior July 28, 1950. Functions reassigned to Deputy Assistant
         Secretary for Territorial Affairs in Office of the Assistant Secretary—Public Land Management, Department
         of the Interior, by Secretarial Order 2942, effective July 1, 1971.

Terrorism, Cabinet Committee To Combat
        Established by Presidential memorandum of Sept. 25, 1972. Terminated by National Security Council
        memorandum of Sept. 16, 1977.

Terrorist Threat Integration Center
         Established on May 1, 2003, pursuant to Presidential initiative. Transferred to the National
         Counterterrorism Center by act of Dec. 17, 2004 (118 Stat. 3697).

Textile National Industrial Relations Board
         Established by administrative order of June 28, 1934. Abolished by EO 6858 of Sept. 26, 1934, which
         created Textile Labor Relations Board in connection with the Department of Labor. Board terminated July
         1, 1937, and functions absorbed by U.S. Conciliation Service, Department of Labor.

Textile National Industrial Relations Board, Cotton
         Established by original Code of Fair Competition for the Cotton Textile Industry, as amended July 10, 1934.
         Abolished by EO 6858 of Sept. 26, 1934.

Textile Work Assignment Board, Cotton
         Amendments to Code of Fair Competition for Cotton Textile Industry approved by EO 6876 of Oct. 16,
         1934, and Cotton Textile Work Assignment Board appointed by Textile Labor Relations Board. Board
         expired June 15, 1935.

Textile Work Assignment Board, Silk
         Appointed by Textile Labor Relations Board following President’s approval of amendments to Code of Fair
         Competition for Silk Textile Industry by EO 6875 of Oct. 16, 1934. Terminated June 15, 1935.

Textile Work Assignment Board, Wool
         Established by EO 6877 of Oct. 16, 1934. Terminated June 15, 1935.

Textiles, Office of
          Established by the Secretary of Commerce Feb. 14, 1971. Functions transferred to Domestic and
          International Business Administration, effective Nov. 17, 1972.

Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board. See Oversight Board (of the Resolution Trust Corporation).

Thrift Supervision, Office of
         Established by act of August 9, 1989 (103 Stat. 352). Abolished by act of July 21. 2010, (124 Stat. 1522),
         and functions transferred to Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance
         Corporation, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, and Consumer Financial Protection Bureau.
         .
Trade, Special Adviser to the President on Foreign
         Established by EO 6651 of Mar. 23, 1934. Terminated on expiration of National Recovery Administration.

Trade Administration, International See Business and Defense Services Administration
Trade Agreements, Interdepartmental Committee on
        Established by Secretary of State in 1934 and reestablished by EO 9832 of Feb. 25, 1947. Abolished by EO
        11075 of Jan. 15, 1963.

Trade and Development Program
        Established by act of Sept. 4, 1961, as amended (88 Stat. 1804). Designated separate entity within the U.S.
        International Development Cooperation Agency by act of Sept. 4, 1961, as amended (102 Stat. 1329).
        Renamed Trade and Development Agency by act of Oct. 28, 1992 (106 Stat. 3657).

Trade Expansion Act Advisory Committee
        Established by EO 11075 of Jan. 15, 1963. Abolished by EO 11846 of Mar. 27, 1975, and records
        transferred to Trade Policy Committee established by same EO.

Trade Negotiations, Office of the Special Representative for
        Renamed Office of the U.S. Trade Representative by EO 12188 of Jan. 4, 1980.

Trade Policy Committee
        Established by EO 10741 of Nov. 25, 1957. Abolished by EO 11075 of Jan. 15, 1963.

Traffic Safety, President’s Committee for
          Established by Presidential letter of Apr. 14, 1954. Continued by EO 10858 of Jan. 13, 1960. Abolished by
          EO 11382 of Nov. 28, 1967.

Traffic Safety Agency, National
          Established in the Department of Commerce by act of Sept. 9, 1966 (80 Stat. 718). Activity transferred to
          the Department of Transportation by act of Oct. 15, 1966 (80 Stat. 931). Responsibility placed in National
          Highway Safety Bureau by EO 11357 of June 6, 1967.

Training and Employment Service, U.S.
         Established in Manpower Administration, Department of Labor, Mar. 17, 1969. Abolished by Secretary’s
         letter of Dec. 6, 1971, and functions assigned to Office of Employment Development Programs and U.S.
         Employment Service.

Training School for Boys, National See District of Columbia, Reform-School of the

Transportation, Federal Coordinator of
        Established by act of June 16, 1933 (48 Stat. 211). Expired June 16, 1936, under provisions of Public
        Resolution 27 (49 Stat. 376).

Transportation, Office of
        Established in the Department of Agriculture by Secretary’s Memorandum 1966 dated Dec. 12, 1978.
        Abolished by Secretary’s Memorandum 1030–25 dated Dec. 28, 1990.

Transportation and Communications Service
        Established by General Services Administrator Oct. 19, 1961. Abolished by Administrator’s order, effective
        July 15, 1972. Motor equipment, transportation, and public utilities responsibilities assigned to Federal
        Supply Service; telecommunications function assigned to Automated Data Telecommunications Service.

Transportation and Public Utilities Service
        Abolished by General Services Administration order of Aug. 17, 1982. Functions transferred to various
        GSA organizations.

Transportation Safety Board, National
        Established in the Department of Transportation by act of Oct. 15, 1966 (80 Stat. 935). Abolished by act of
         Jan. 3, 1975 (88 Stat. 2156), which established independent National Transportation Safety Board.

Transportation Security Administration
        Established by act of Nov. 19, 2001 (115 Stat. 597). Functions transferred from Department of
        Transportation to Department of Homeland Security by act of Nov. 25, 2002 (116 Stat. 2178).

Transportation Statistics, Bureau of
        Established by act of Dec. 18, 1991 (105 Stat. 2172). Transferred to Research and Innovative Technology
        Administration, Transportation Department, by act of Nov. 30, 2004 (118 Stat. 2424).

Travel Service, U.S.
         Replaced by U.S. Travel and Tourism Administration, Department of Commerce, pursuant to act of Oct.
         16, 1981 (95 Stat. 1014).

Travel and Tourism Administration, U.S.
         Established by act of Oct. 16, 1981 (95 Stat. 1014). Abolished by act of Oct. 11, 1996 (110 Stat. 3407).

Travel and Tourism Advisory Board
         Established by act of Oct. 16, 1981 (95 Stat. 1017). Abolished by act of Oct. 11, 1996 (110 Stat. 3407).

Treasury, Office of the Assistant Secretary of the— Electronics and Information Technology
        Established by Secretary’s Order 114–1 of Mar. 14, 1983. Abolished by Secretary’s Order 114–3 of May 17,
        1985, and functions transferred to Office of the Assistant Secretary for Management. Certain provisions
        effective Aug. 31, 1985 (50 FR 23573).

Treasury, Solicitor of the
        Position established when certain functions of Solicitor of the Treasury transferred to the Department of
        Justice by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933. Solicitor of the Treasury transferred from the Department of Justice
        to the Department of the Treasury by same order. Office of Solicitor of the Treasury abolished by act of
        May 10, 1934 (48 Stat. 758), and functions transferred to General Counsel, the Department of the
        Treasury.

Treasury Police Force See Secret Service Division

Treasury Secretary, Assistant
        Office abolished by Reorg. Plan No. III of 1940, effective June 30, 1940, and functions transferred to Fiscal
        Assistant Secretary, Department of the Treasury.

Treasury Under Secretary for Enforcement, Office of
        Established by act of Oct. 28, 1993 (107 Stat. 1234). Office abolished by act of Dec. 8, 2004 (118 Stat.
        3245), and functions transferred to the Office of the Under Secretary for Terrorism and Financial Crimes,
        Department of the Treasury.

Treaties See State, Department of

Typhus Commission, U.S. of America
        Established in Department of War by EO 9285 of Dec. 24, 1942. Abolished June 30, 1946, by EO 9680 of
        Jan. 17, 1946.


U                                            TOP OF PAGE

U.S. See other part of title

Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, School of Medicine of the
         Renamed F. Edward He´bert School of Medicine by act of Sept. 24, 1983 (97 Stat. 704).

United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
        U.S. membership in UNESCO authorized by act of July 30, 1946 (60 Stat. 712). Announcement of U.S.
        intention to withdraw made Dec. 28, 1983, in accordance with UNESCO constitution. Official U.S.
        withdrawal effective Dec. 31, 1984, by Secretary of State’s letter of Dec. 19, 1984. The U.S. maintained
        status as an observer mission in UNESCO from 1984-2003, and rejoined the organization in October 2003.

Upper Mississippi River Basin Commission
       Established by EO 11659 of Mar. 22, 1972. Terminated by EO 12319 of Sept. 9, 1981.

Urban Affairs, Council for
        Established in Executive Office of the President by EO 11452 of Jan. 23, 1969. Terminated by EO 11541 of
        July 1, 1970.

Urban Mass Transportation Administration
       Functions regarding urban mass transportation established in the Department of Housing and Urban
       Development by act of July 9, 1964 (78 Stat. 302). Most functions transferred to the Department of
       Transportation by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1968, effective June 30, 1968 (82 Stat. 1369), and joint
       responsibility assigned to the Departments of Transportation and Housing and Urban Development for
       functions relating to research, technical studies, and training. Transportation and Housing and Urban
       Development Under Secretaries agreed in November 1969 that the Department of Transportation should
       be focal point for urban mass transportation grant administration; at which time functions transferred to
       the Department of Transportation. Renamed Federal Transit Administration by act of Dec. 18, 1991 (105
       Stat. 2088).

Urban Renewal Administration
       Established in Housing and Home Finance Agency by Administrator’s Organizational Order 1 of Dec. 23,
       1954. Functions transferred to the Department of Housing and Urban Development by act of Sept. 9, 1965
       (78 Stat. 667), and Administration terminated.

Utilization and Disposal Service
          Established July 1, 1961, by Administrator of General Services and assigned functions of Federal Supply
          Service and Public Buildings Service. Functions transferred to Property Management and Disposal Service
          July 29, 1966.




V                                            TOP OF PAGE

Veterans Administration
        Legal work in defense of suits against the U.S. arising under act of June 7, 1924 (43 Stat. 607), transferred
        to the Department of Justice by EO 6166 of June 10, 1933. Transfer deferred to Sept. 10, 1933, by EO
        6222 of July 27, 1933. Established as an independent agency under the President by Executive Order 5398
        of July 21, 1930, in accordance with the act of July 3, 1930 (46 Stat. 1016) and the act of Sept. 2, 1958 (72
        Stat. 1114). Made an executive department in the executive branch and redesignated the Department of
        Veterans Affairs by act of Oct. 25, 1988 (102 Stat. 2635).

Veterans Appeals, U.S. Court of
        Established by act of Nov. 18, 1988 (102 Stat. 4113). Renamed U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims
        by act of Nov. 11, 1998 (112 Stat. 3341).

Veterans Education Appeals Board See Veterans Tuition Appeals Board
Veterans Employment and Training, Advisory Committee on
        Renamed Advisory Committee on Veterans Employment, Training, and Employer Outreach by act of June
        15, 2006 (120 Stat. 403).

Veterans Employment Service
        Renamed Veterans’ Employment and Training Service by Order 4–83 of Mar. 24, 1983 of the Secretary of
        Labor (48 FR 14092).

Veterans Health Administration See Medicine and Surgery, Department of

Veterans Health Services and Research Administration See Medicine and Surgery, Department of

Veterans Placement Service Board
        Established by act of June 22, 1944 (58 Stat. 293). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1949, effective Aug.
        20, 1949, and functions transferred to the Secretary of Labor.

Veterans Tuition Appeals Board
        Established by act of Aug. 24, 1949 (63 Stat. 654). Functions assumed by Veterans Education Appeals
        Board established by act of July 13, 1950 (64 Stat. 336). Board terminated by act of Aug. 28, 1957 (71 Stat.
        474).

Veterinary Medicine, Bureau of
        Established in Food and Drug Administration, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Renamed
        Center for Veterinary Medicine by FDA notice of Mar. 9, 1984 (49 FR 10166).

Virgin Islands
          Public works programs under act of Dec. 20, 1944 (58 Stat. 827), transferred from General Services
          Administrator to the Secretary of the Interior by Reorg. Plan No. 15 of 1950, effective May 24, 1950.

Virgin Islands Company
          Established in 1934. Reincorporated as Government corporation by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 350).
          Program terminated June 30, 1965, and Corporation dissolved July 1, 1966.

Virgin Islands Corporation See Virgin Islands Company

Visitor Facilities Advisory Commission, National
         Established by act of Mar. 12, 1968 (82 Stat. 45). Expired Jan. 5, 1975, pursuant to act of Oct. 6, 1972 (86
         Stat. 776).

Vocational and Adult Education, Office of
        Established by act of Oct. 17, 1979 (93 Stat. 674). Renamed Office of Career, Technical, and Adult
        Education by act of Jan. 17, 2014 (128 Stat. 399).

Vocational Rehabilitation, Office of
        Established to administer provisions of act of July 6, 1943 (57 Stat. 374). Other duties delegated by acts of
        Aug. 3, 1954 (68 Stat. 652), Nov. 8, 1965 (79 Stat. 1282), July 12, 1960 (74 Stat. 364), and July 10, 1954 (68
        Stat. 454). Redesignated Vocational Rehabilitation Administration Jan. 28, 1963. Made component of
        newly created Social and Rehabilitation Service as Rehabilitation Services Administration by Department
        of Health, Education, and Welfare reorganization of Aug. 15, 1967.

Vocational Rehabilitation Administration See Vocational Rehabilitation, Office of

Voluntary Citizen Participation, State Office of
        Renamed State Office of Volunteerism in ACTION by notice of Apr. 18, 1986 (51 FR 13265), effective May
        18, 1986.
Volunteer Service, International, Secretariat for
        Established in 1962 by International Conference on Middle Level Manpower called by President.
        Terminated Mar. 31, 1976, due to insufficient funding.

Volunteers in Service to America
        Established by act of Nov. 8, 1966 (80 Stat. 1472). Service administered by Office of Economic Opportunity
        and functions transferred to ACTION by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1971, effective July 1, 1971.


W                                            TOP OF PAGE

Wage Adjustment Board
       Established May 29, 1942, by the Secretary of Labor at Presidential direction of May 14, 1942, to
       accomplish purpose of act of Mar. 3, 1931 (46 Stat. 1494), as amended by acts of Aug. 30, 1935 (49 Stat.
       1011), and Jan. 30, 1942 (56 Stat. 23). Disbanded on termination of National Wage Stabilization Board.

Wage and Price Stability, Council on
       Established in Executive Office of the President by act of Aug. 24, 1974 (88 Stat. 750). Abolished by EO
       12288 of Jan. 29, 1981. Funding ceased beyond June 5, 1981, by act of June 5, 1981 (95 Stat. 74), and
       authorization for appropriations repealed by act of Aug. 13, 1981 (95 Stat. 432).

Wage and Price Stability Program See Wage and Price Stability, Council on

Wage Stabilization Board
       Established by EO 10161 of Sept. 9, 1950. Reconstituted by EO 10377 of July 25, 1952. Terminated Apr.
       30, 1953, by EO 10434 of Feb. 6, 1953, and acts of June 30, 1952 (66 Stat. 296), and June 30, 1953 (67
       Stat. 131).

Wage Stabilization Board, National See Defense Mediation Board, National

Wallops Flight Center, Wallops Island, VA
        Formerly separate field installation of National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Made component
        of Goddard Space Flight Center by NASA Management Instruction 1107.10A of Sept. 3, 1981.

War, Solid Fuels Administration for
        Established in the Department of the Interior by EO 9332 of Apr. 19, 1943. Absorbed Office of Solid Fuels
        Coordinator for War (originally established as Office of Solid Fuels Coordinator for National Defense)
        pursuant to Presidential letter of Nov. 5, 1941; later changed by Presidential letter of May 25, 1942.
        Terminated by EO 9847 of May 6, 1947.

War Assets Administration
       Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 9689 of Jan. 31, 1946. Functions transferred to
       Surplus Property Administration by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1947, effective July 1, 1947, and agency renamed
       War Assets Administration. Abolished by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 738), and functions transferred for
       liquidation to General Services Administration.

War Assets Corporation See Petroleum Reserves Corporation

War Claims Commission
        Established by act of July 3, 1948 (62 Stat. 1240). Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1954, effective July 1,
        1954, and functions transferred to Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the U.S.

War Commodities Division
       Established in Office of Foreign Economic Coordination by Department of State Order of Aug. 27, 1943.
       Office abolished by departmental order of Nov. 6, 1943, pursuant to EO 9380 of Sept. 25, 1943, which
         established Foreign Economic Administration in Office for Emergency Management.

War Communications, Board of See Defense Communications Board

War Contracts Price Adjustment Board
       Established by act of Feb. 25, 1944 (58 Stat. 85). Abolished by act of Mar. 23, 1951 (65 Stat. 7), and
       functions transferred to Renegotiation Board, established by same act, and General Services
       Administrator.

War Damage Corporation See War Insurance Corporation

War, Department of
       Established by act of Aug. 7, 1789 (1 Stat. 49), succeeding similar department established prior to
       adoption of the Constitution. Three military departments—Army; Navy, including naval aviation and U.S.
       Marine Corps; and Air Force—reorganized under National Military Establishment by act of July 26, 1947
       (61 Stat. 495).

War Finance Corporation
        Established by act of Apr. 5, 1918 (40 Stat. 506). Functions and obligations transferred by Reorg. Plan No.
        II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939, to the Secretary of the Treasury for liquidation not later than Dec. 31,
        1939.

War Food Administration See Food Production and Distribution, Administration of

War Information, Office of
        Established in Office of Emergency Management by EO 9182 of June 13, 1942, consolidating Office of
        Facts and Figures; Office of Government Reports; Division of Information, Office for Emergency
        Management; and Foreign Information Service—Outpost, Publications, and Pictorial Branches,
        Coordinator of Information. Abolished by EO 9608 of Aug. 31, 1945. Bureau of Special Services and
        functions with respect to review of publications of Federal agencies transferred to Bureau of the Budget.
        Foreign information activities transferred to the Department of State.

War Insurance Corporation
        Established Dec. 13, 1941, by act of June 10, 1941 (55 Stat. 249). Charter filed Mar. 31, 1942. Renamed
        War Damage Corporation by act of Mar. 27, 1942 (56 Stat. 175). Transferred from Federal Loan Agency to
        the Department of Commerce by EO 9071 of Feb. 24, 1942. Returned to Federal Loan Agency by act of
        Feb. 24, 1945 (59 Stat. 5). Agency abolished by act of June 30, 1947 (61 Stat. 202), and functions assumed
        by Reconstruction Finance Corporation. Powers of War Damage Corporation, except for purposes of
        liquidation, terminated as of Jan. 22, 1947.

War Labor Board, National See Defense Mediation Board, National

War Manpower Commission
      Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 9139 of Apr. 18, 1942. Terminated by EO 9617 of
      Sept. 19, 1945, and functions, except Procurement and Assignment Service, transferred to the
      Department of Labor.

War Mobilization, Office of
      Established by EO 9347 of May 27, 1943. Transferred to Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion by
      EO 9488 of Oct. 3, 1944.

War Mobilization and Reconversion, Office of
      Established by act of Oct. 3, 1944 (58 Stat. 785). Consolidated with other agencies by EO 9809 of Dec. 12,
      1946, to form Office of Temporary Controls. Media Programming Division and Motion Picture Division
      transferred to Office of Government Reports, reestablished by same order. Certain other functions
      transferred to President and the Secretary of Commerce.
War Mobilization and Reconversion Advisory Board, Office of
      Established by act of Oct. 3, 1944 (58 Stat. 788). Transferred to Office of Temporary Controls by EO 9809
      of Dec. 12, 1946.

War Plants Corporation, Smaller
        Established by act of June 11, 1942 (56 Stat. 351). Functions transferred by EO 9665 of Dec. 27, 1945, to
        Reconstruction Finance Corporation and the Department of Commerce. Abolished by act of June 30, 1947
        (61 Stat. 202), and functions transferred for liquidation to General Services Administration by Reorg. Plan
        No. 1 of 1957, effective July 1, 1957.

War and Post War Adjustment Policies, Advisory Unit on
       Established in Office of War Mobilization by Presidential direction Nov. 6, 1943. Report submitted Feb. 15,
       1944, and Unit Director and Assistant Director submitted letter to Director of War Mobilization ending
       their work May 12, 1944.

War Production Board
       Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 9024 of Jan. 16, 1942. Board terminated and
       successor agency, Civilian Production Administration, established by EO 9638 of Oct. 4, 1945.

War Property Administration, Surplus
       Established in Office of War Mobilization by EO 9425 of Feb. 19, 1944. Terminated on establishment of
       Surplus Property Board by act of Oct. 3, 1944 (58 Stat. 768). Surplus Property Administration established in
       Office of War Mobilization and Reconversion by act of Sept. 18, 1945 (59 Stat. 533), and Board abolished.
       Domestic functions of Administration merged into War Assets Corporation, Reconstruction Finance
       Corporation, by EO 9689 of Jan. 31, 1946. Foreign functions transferred to the Department of State by
       same order. Transfers made permanent by Reorg. Plan No. 1 of 1947, effective July 1, 1947.

War Refugee Board
       Established in Executive Office of the President by EO 9417 of Jan. 22, 1944. Terminated by EO 9614 of
       Sept. 14, 1945.

War Relations, Agricultural, Office for See Farm Products, Division of

War Relief Agencies, President’s Committee on
        Established by Presidential letter of Mar. 13, 1941. President’s War Relief Control Board established by EO
        9205 of July 25, 1942, to succeed Committee. Board terminated by EO 9723 of May 14, 1946, and
        functions transferred to the Department of State.

War Relief Control Board, President’s See President’s Committee on War Relief Agencies

War Relocation Authority
        Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 9102 of Mar. 18, 1942. Transferred to the
        Department of the Interior by EO 9423 of Feb. 16, 1944. Terminated by EO 9742 of June 25, 1946.

War Resources Board
       Established in August 1939 as advisory committee to work with Joint Army and Navy Munitions Board.
       Terminated by President Nov. 24, 1939.

War Resources Council See Defense Resources Committee

War Shipping Administration
        Established in Office for Emergency Management by EO 9054 Feb. 7, 1942. Terminated by act of July 8,
        1946 (60 Stat. 501), and functions transferred to U.S. Maritime Commission, effective Sept. 1, 1946.

Water, Office of Saline
         Established to perform functions vested in the Secretary of the Interior by act of July 29, 1971 (85 Stat.
         159). Merged with Office of Water Resources Research to form Office of Water Research and Technology
         by Secretary’s Order 2966 of July 26, 1974.

Water Commission, National
       Established by act of Sept. 26, 1968 (82 Stat. 868). Terminated Sept. 25, 1973, pursuant to terms of act.

Water Policy, Office of
       Established by Department of the Interior Manual Release 2374 of Dec. 29, 1981, under authority of
       Assistant Secretary. Abolished by Secretarial Order No. 3096 of Oct. 19, 1983, and functions transferred to
       Geological Survey and Office of Policy Analysis.

Water Pollution Control Administration, Federal
       Established under the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare by act of Oct. 2, 1965 (79 Stat. 903).
       Transferred to the Department of the Interior by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1966, effective May 10, 1966.
       Renamed Federal Water Quality Administration by act of Apr. 3, 1970. Abolished by Reorg. Plan No. 3 of
       1970, effective Dec. 2, 1970, and functions transferred to Environmental Protection Agency.

Water and Power Resources Service
        Renamed Bureau of Reclamation May 18, 1981, by Interior Secretarial Order 3064.

Water Quality Administration, Federal See Water Pollution Control Administration, Federal Water
Research and Technology, Office of
        Established by Interior Secretarial Order 2966 of July 26, 1974. Abolished by Secretarial order of Aug. 25,
        1982, and functions transferred to Bureau of Reclamation, Geological Survey, and Office of Water Policy.

Water Resources Council
       Established by act of July 22, 1965 (89 Stat 575). Inactive as of Oct. 1, 1982.

Water Resources Research, Office of
       Established to perform functions vested in the Secretary of the Interior by act of July 17, 1964 (78 Stat.
       329). Merged with Office of Saline Water to form Office of Water Research and Technology by Secretary’s
       Order 2966 of July 26, 1974.

Watergate Special Prosecution Force
       Established by Attorney General order, effective May 25, 1973. Terminated by Attorney General order,
       effective June 20, 1977.

Waterways Corporation, Inland
       Incorporated under act of June 3, 1924 (43 Stat. 360). Transferred from the Department of War to the
       Department of Commerce by Reorg. Plan No. II of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Corporation sold to Federal
       Waterways Corporation under contract of July 24, 1953. Renamed Federal Barge Lines, Inc. Liquidated by
       act of July 19, 1963 (77 Stat. 81).

Weather Bureau
       Established in the Department of Agriculture by act of Oct. 1, 1890 (26 Stat. 653). Transferred to the
       Department of Commerce by Reorg. Plan No. IV of 1940, effective June 30, 1940. Functions transferred to
       Environmental Science Services Administration by Reorg. Plan No. 2 of 1965, effective July 13, 1965.

Weather Control, Advisory Committee on
       Established by act of Aug. 13, 1953 (67 Stat. 559). Act of Aug. 28, 1957 (71 Stat. 426), provided for
       termination by Dec. 31, 1957.

Weed and Seed, Executive Office of
       Abolished by Public Law 109–162 of Jan. 5, 2006 (119 Stat. 3107). Functions transferred to Office of Weed
        and Seed Strategies, Office of Justice Programs, within the Department of Justice.

Weights and Measures, Office of Standard
        Renamed National Bureau of Standards by act of Mar. 3, 1901 (31 Stat. 1449). Bureau transferred from
        the Department of the Treasury to the Department of Commerce and Labor by act of Feb. 14, 1903 (32
        Stat. 825). Bureau established within the Department of Commerce by act of Mar. 4, 1913 (37 Stat. 736).
        Renamed National Institute of Standards and Technology by act of Aug. 23, 1988 (102 Stat. 1827).

Welfare Administration
        Established by the Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare reorganization of Jan. 28, 1963.
        Components consisted of Bureau of Family Services, Children’s Bureau, Office of Juvenile Delinquency and
        Youth Development, and Cuban Refugee Staff. These functions reassigned to Social and Rehabilitation
        Service by Department reorganization of Aug. 15, 1967.

White House Police Force See Secret Service Division

Wilson Memorial Commission, Woodrow
        Established by act of Oct. 4, 1961 (75 Stat. 783). Terminated on submittal of final report to President and
        Congress Sept. 29, 1966.

Women, Interdepartmental Committee on the Status of
      Established by EO 11126 of Nov. 1, 1963. Terminated by EO 12050 of Apr. 4, 1978.

Women, President’s Commission on the Status of
      Established by EO 10980 of Dec. 14, 1961. Submitted final report to President Oct. 11, 1963.

Women’s Army Auxiliary Corps
      Established by act of May 14, 1942 (56 Stat. 278). Repealed in part and superseded by act of July 1, 1943
      (57 Stat. 371), which established Women’s Army Corps. Corps abolished by the Secretary of Defense Apr.
      24, 1978, pursuant to provisions of 10 U.S.C. 125A.

Women’s Business Enterprise Division
      Renamed Office of Women’s Business Enterprise by Small Business Administrator’s reorganization,
      effective Aug. 19, 1981. Renamed Office of Women’s Business Ownership Aug. 19, 1982.

Women’s Reserve
      Established in U.S. Coast Guard by act of Nov. 23, 1942 (56 Stat. 1020).

Women’s Year, 1975, National Commission on the Observance of International
      Established by EO 11832 of Jan. 9, 1975. Continued by act of Dec. 23, 1975 (89 Stat. 1003). Terminated
      Mar. 31, 1978, pursuant to terms of act.

Wood Utilization, National Committee on
       Established by Presidential direction in 1925. Abolished by EO 6179–B of June 16, 1933.

Work Projects Administration See Works Progress Administration

Work-Training Programs, Bureau of
       Abolished by reorganization of Manpower Administration and functions assigned to U.S. Training and
       Employment Service, effective Mar. 17, 1969.

Working Group on Streamlining Paperwork for Executive Nominations
       Established by act of Aug. 10, 2012 (126 Stat. 1292). Terminated July 7, 2013, pursuant to terms of act.

Working Life, Productivity and Quality of, National Center for
        Established by act of Nov. 28, 1975 (89 Stat. 935). Authorized appropriations expired Sept. 30, 1978, and
        functions assumed by National Productivity Council.

Works, Advisory Committee on Federal Public
        Established by President Oct. 5, 1955. Abolished by President Mar. 12, 1961, and functions assigned to
        Bureau of the Budget.

Works Administration, Federal Civil
       Established by EO 6420–B of Nov. 9, 1933. Function of employment expired March 1934. Function of
       settling claims continued under Works Progress Administration.

Works Administration, Public See Emergency Administration of Public Works, Federal

Works Agency, Federal
       Established by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Functions relating to defense housing
       transferred to Federal Public Housing Authority, National Housing Agency, by EO 9070 of Feb. 24, 1942.
       Abolished by act of June 30, 1949 (63 Stat. 380), and functions transferred to General Services
       Administration.

Works Emergency Housing Corporation, Public
       Established by EO 6470 of Nov. 29, 1933. Incorporated under laws of State of Delaware. Abolished and
       liquidated as of Aug. 14, 1935, by filing of certificate of surrender of corporate rights.

Works Emergency Leasing Corporation, Public
       Incorporated Jan. 3, 1934, under laws of Delaware by direction of Administrator of Public Works.
       Terminated with filed certificate of dissolution with secretary of state of Delaware Jan. 2, 1935.

Works Progress Administration
       Established by EO 7034 of May 6, 1935, and continued by subsequent yearly emergency relief
       appropriation acts. Renamed Work Projects Administration by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1,
       1939, which provided for consolidation of Works Progress Administration into Federal Works Agency.
       Transferred by President to Federal Works Administrator Dec. 4, 1942.

Works, Special Board of Public See Land Program, Director of


Y                                           TOP OF PAGE

Yards and Docks, Bureau of
        Established by acts of Aug. 31, 1842 (5 Stat. 579), and July 5, 1862 (12 Stat. 510). Abolished by
        Department of Defense reorg. order of Mar. 9, 1966, and functions transferred to the Secretary of the
        Navy (31 FR 7188).

Youth Administration, National
        Established in Works Progress Administration by EO 7086 of June 26, 1935. Transferred to Federal Security
        Agency by Reorg. Plan No. I of 1939, effective July 1, 1939. Transferred to Bureau of Training, War
        Manpower Commission, by EO 9247 of Sept. 17, 1942. Terminated by act of July 12, 1943 (57 Stat. 539).

Youth Crime, President’s Committee on Juvenile Delinquency and
        Established by EO 10940 of May 11, 1961. Terminated by EO 11529 of Apr. 24, 1970.

Youth Fitness, President’s Council on
         Established by EO 10673 of July 16, 1956. Renamed President’s Council on Physical Fitness by EO 11074 of
         Jan. 8, 1963. Renamed President’s Council on Physical Fitness and Sports by EO 11398 of Mar. 4, 1968.
         Abolished and reestablished by EO 13265 of June 6, 2002. Renamed President's Council on Fitness, Sports,
        and Nutrition by EO 13545 of June 22, 2010.

Youth Opportunity, President’s Council on
       Established by EO 11330 of Mar. 5, 1967. Inactive as of June 30, 1971; EO 11330 revoked by EO 12379 of
       Aug. 17, 1982.

Youth Programs, Office of
        Established in the Department of the Interior by Secretarial Order No. 2985 of Jan. 7, 1965. Functions
        moved to Office of Historically Black College and University Programs and Job Corps, Office of the
        Secretary, by Departmental Manual Release 2788 of Mar. 22, 1988.




Revised: 31 December 2015
THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT MANUAL

            Boards, Commissions, and Committees

Below is a list of Federal boards, commissions, councils, etc., not listed elsewhere in the
Manual, which were established by congressional or Presidential action, whose
functions are not strictly limited to the internal operations of a parent department or
agency and which are authorized to publish documents in the Federal Register. While
the editors have attempted to compile a complete and accurate listing, suggestions for
improving coverage of this guide are welcome. Please address your comments to the
Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration,
Washington, DC 20408. Phone, 202-741-6040. E-mail, fedreg.info@nara.gov. Internet,
www.ofr.gov.

Federal advisory committees, as defined by the Federal Advisory Committee Act, as
amended (5 U.S.C. app.), have not been included here. Information on Federal advisory
committees may be obtained from the Committee Management Secretariat, General
Services Administration, General Services Building (MC), Room G-230, Washington, DC
20405. Phone, 202-273-3556. Internet, www.gsa.gov/committeemanagement.

Administrative Committee of the Federal Register

Office of the Federal Register, National Archives and Records Administration, 8601
Adelphi Road, College Park, MD 20740-6001. Phone, 202-741-6000. E-mail,
fedreg.info@nara.gov. Internet, www.ofr.gov.

Advisory Council on Historic Preservation

401 F. Street NW., Suite 308, Washington, DC 20001-2637. Phone, 202-517-0200. E-
mail, achp@achp.gov. Internet, www.achp.gov.

American Battle Monuments Commission

2300 Clarendon Boulevard, Court House Plaza 2, Suite 500, Arlington, VA 22201. Phone,
703-696-6900. E-mail, info@abmc.gov. Internet, www.abmc.gov.

Appalachian Regional Commission

1666 Connecticut Avenue NW., Suite 700, Washington, DC 20009-1068. Phone, 202-
884-7700. E-mail, info@arc.gov. Internet, www.arc.gov.
Architectural and Transportation Barriers Compliance Board1

1331 F Street NW., Suite 1000, Washington, DC 20004-1111. Phone, 202-272-0080, toll
free, 800-872-2253 or TTY, 202-272-0082, toll free, 800-993-2822. Fax, 202-272-0081. E-
mail, info@access-board.gov. Internet, www.access-board.gov.

Arctic Research Commission

4350 North Fairfax Drive, Suite 510, Arlington, VA 22203. Phone, 703-525-0111. Fax,
703-525-0114. E-mail, info@arctic.gov. Internet, www.arctic.gov.

Arthritis and Musculoskeletal Interagency Coordinating Committee

1 AMS Circle, Bethesda, MD 20892-3675. Phone, 301-495-4484. Fax, 301-480-2814. E-
mail, NIAMSInfo@mail.nih.gov. Internet, www.niams.nih.gov.

Barry M. Goldwater Scholarship and Excellence in Education Program

Phone, 319-688-4335. Internet, www.act.org/goldwater.

Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board

2175 K Street NW., Suite 400, Washington, DC 20037-1809. Phone, 202-261-7600. Fax,
202-261-7650. Internet, www.csb.gov.

Citizens' Stamp Advisory Committee

United States Postal Service c/o Stamp Development, 475 L’Enfant Plaza SW., Room
3300, Washington, DC 20260-3501. Internet, http://about.usps.com/who-we-are/csac.

U.S. Commission of Fine Arts

National Building Museum, 401 F Street NW., Suite 312, Washington, DC 20001-2728.
Phone, 202-504-2200. Fax, 202-504-2195. E-mail, cfastaff@cfa.gov. Internet,
www.cfa.gov.




1
    Also known as the Access Board.
Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States

Department of the Treasury, 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20220.
Phone, 202-622-1860. E-mail, CFIUS@treasury.gov. Internet,
http://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/international/Pages/Committee-on-Foreign-Investment-
in-US.aspx




Committee for the Implementation of Textile Agreements

Office of Textiles and Apparel, U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230.
Phone, 202-482-5078. Fax, 202-482-2331. E-mail, OTEXA@trade.gov. Internet,
otexa.ita.doc.gov/cita.htm.

Committee for Purchase From People Who Are Blind or Severely Disabled

1401 S. Clark Street, Suite 10800, Arlington, VA 22202-3259. Phone, 703-603-7740. Fax,
703-608-0655. E-mail, info@abilityone.gov. Internet, www.abilityone.gov.

Coordinating Council on Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention

Department of Justice, Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention, 810 7th
Street NW., Washington, DC 20531. Phone, 202-616-7567. Fax, 202-307-2819. E-mail,
ddunston@aeioonline.com. Internet, www.juvenilecouncil.gov.

Delaware River Basin Commission

25 State Police Drive, P.O. Box 7360, West Trenton, NJ 08628-0360. Phone, 609-883-
9500. Fax, 609-883-9522. E-mail, clarke.rupert@drbc.state.nj.us. Internet,
www.nj.gov/drbc.

Endangered Species Program

5275 Leesburg Pike, Falls Church, VA 22041. Phone, 703-358-2171. Internet,
www.fws.gov/endangered.

Export Administration Operating Committee

Department of Commerce, Bureau of Industry and Security, 14th Street and Constitution
Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20230. Phone, 202-482-4811. Internet,
www.bis.doc.gov/index.htm.
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council

3501 Fairfax Drive, D8073a, Arlington, VA 22226. Phone, 703-516-5590. Internet,
www.ffiec.gov.

Federal Financing Bank

Department of the Treasury, 1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20220.
Phone, 202-622-2470. Fax, 202-622-0707. E-mail, ffb@do.treas.gov. Internet,
www.treasury.gov/ffb.

Federal Interagency Committee on Education

Department of Education, 400 Maryland Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20202. Phone,
202-401-3673. Internet, ed.gov/about/bdscomm/list/com.html.

Federal Laboratory Consortium for Technology Transfer

Washington, DC Liaison Office. Phone, 240-444-1383. E-mail,
gkjones.ctr@federallabs.org. Internet, www.federallabs.org.

Federal Library and Information Center Committee

Library of Congress, 101 Independence Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20540-4935. Phone,
202-707-4800. Internet, www.loc.gov/flicc/.

Harry S. Truman Scholarship Foundation

712 Jackson Place NW., Washington, DC 20006. Phone, 202-395-4831. Fax, 202-395-
6995. E-mail, office@truman.gov. Internet, www.truman.gov.

Indian Arts and Crafts Board

U.S. Department of the Interior, Room MS 2528-MIB, 1849 C Street NW., Washington,
DC 20240. Phone, 202-208-3773. E-mail, iacb@ios.doi.gov. Internet, www.iacb.doi.gov.

J. William Fulbright Foreign Scholarship Board

Department of State, Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs, 2200 C Street NW.,
Washington, DC 20522-0500. Phone, 202-203-7010. E-mail, fulbright@state.gov.
Internet, fulbright.state.gov.
James Madison Memorial Fellowship Foundation

1613 Duke Street Alexandria, VA 22314. Phone, 571-858-4200. Internet,
www.jamesmadison.com.

Japan-US Conference on Cultural and Educational Interchange (CULCON)

1201 15th Street NW., Suite 330, Washington, DC 20005. Phone, 202-653-9800. Fax,
202-653-9802. E-mail, culcon@jusfc.gov. Internet, culcon.jusfc.gov.

Joint Board for the Enrollment of Actuaries

Internal Revenue Service, SE: RPO, REFM, 1111 Constitution Avenue, NW, Park 4, Floor
4, Washington, DC 20224. Fax, 703-414-2225. E-mail, nhqjbea@irs.gov. Internet,
www.irs.gov/taxpros/actuaries/index.html.

Marine Mammal Commission

4340 East-West Highway, Suite 700, Bethesda, MD 20814. Phone, 301-504-0087. Fax,
301-504-0099. E-mail, mmc@mmc.gov. Internet, www.mmc.gov.

Medicare Payment Advisory Commission

425 Eye St., N.W. Suite 701 Washington, DC 20001. Phone, 202-
220-3700. Fax, 202-220-3759. Internet, www.medpac.gov.

Migratory Bird Conservation Commission

Secretary, Migration Bird Conservation Commission, Mail Code: ARLSQ-622, 4401 North
Fairfax Drive, Arlington, VA 22203-1610. Phone, 703-358-1713. Fax, 703-358-2223.
Email, realty@fws.gov. Internet, www.fws.gov/refuges/realty/mbcc.html.

Mississippi River Commission

Mississippi River Commission, 1400 Walnut Street, Vicksburg, MS 39180-0080. Phone,
601-634-5757. E-mail, cemvd-pa@usace.army.mil. Internet, www.mvd.usace.army.mil/

Morris K. and Stewart L. Udall Foundation

130 South Scott Avenue, Tucson, AZ 85701-1922. Phone, 520-901-8500. Fax, 520-670-
5530. Internet, www.udall.gov.
National Council on Disability

1331 F Street NW., Suite 850, Washington, DC 20004. Phone, 202-272-2004. TTY, 202-
272-2074. Fax, 202-272-2022. E-mail, ncd@ncd.gov. Internet, www.ncd.gov.

National Indian Gaming Commission

90 K Street NE., Suite 200, Washington, DC 20002. Phone, 202-632-7003. Fax, 202-632-
7066. E-mail, contactus@nigc.gov. Internet, www.nigc.gov.

National Park Foundation

1201 Eye Street NW., Suite 550B, Washington, DC 20005. Phone, 202-354-6460. Fax,
202-371-2066. E-mail, ask-npf@nationalparks.org. Internet, www.nationalparks.org.

Northwest Power and Conservation Council

851 SW. Sixth Avenue, Suite 1100, Portland, OR 97204. Phone, 503-222-5161 or 800-
452-5161. Fax, 503-820-2370. E-mail, info@nwcouncil.org. Internet,
www.nwcouncil.org.

Office of Navajo and Hopi Indian Relocation

201 East Birch Avenue, Flagstaff, AZ 86001. Phone, 928-779-2721. TTY, 800-877-8339.
Fax, 928-774-1977. E-mail, webmaster@onhir.gov. Internet, http://onhir.gov

Permanent Committee for the Oliver Wendell Holmes Devise

Library of Congress, Manuscript Division, 101 Independence Avenue SE., #102,
Washington, DC 20540. Phone, 202-707-5383.

President's Intelligence Advisory Board

New Executive Office Building, Room 5020, Washington, DC 20502. Phone, 202-456-
2352. Fax, 202-395-3403. Internet, www.whitehouse.gov/administration/eop/piab.

Presidio Trust

103 Montgomery Street, P.O. Box 29052, San Francisco, CA 94129-0052. Phone, 415-
561-5300. TTY, 415-561-5301. Fax, 415-561-5315. E-mail, presidio@presidiotrust.gov.
Internet, www.presidio.gov.
Social Security Advisory Board

400 Virginia Avenue SW., Suite 625, Washington, DC 20024. Phone, 202-475-7700. Fax,
202-475-7715. E-mail, ssab@ssab.gov. Internet, www.ssab.gov.

Susquehanna River Basin Commission

4423 North Front Street, Harrisburg, PA 17110. Phone, 717-238-0423. Fax, 717-238-
2436. E-mail, srbc@srbc.net. Internet, www.srbc.net.

Trade Policy Staff Committee

Office of the United States Trade Representative, 600 17th Street NW.,Washington, DC
20508. Phone, 202-395-3475. Fax, 202-395-4549. Internet, www.ustr.gov.

United States Nuclear Waste Technical Review Board

2300 Clarendon Boulevard, Suite 1300, Arlington, VA 22201. Phone, 703-235-4473. Fax,
703-235-4495. Internet, www.nwtrb.gov.

Veterans Day National Committee

Department of Veterans Affairs, 810 Vermont Avenue NW., Mail Code 002C,
Washington, DC 20420. Phone, 202-461-5386. E-mail, vetsday@va.gov. Internet,
www1.va.gov/opa/vetsday.

White House Commission on Presidential Scholars

Department of Education, 400 Maryland Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20202-8173.
Phone, 202-401-0961. Fax, 202-260-7464. E-mail, presidential.scholars@ed.gov.
Internet, www.ed.gov/programs/psp/index.html.




                         (Last Revised: December 22, 2015)
THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT MANUAL

                  Other International Organizations

Below is a list of other international organizations that do not have separate entries
elsewhere in the Manual. The United States participates in these organizations in accordance
with the provisions of treaties, other international agreements, congressional legislation, or
executive arrangements. In some cases, no financial contribution is involved.

Various commissions, councils, or committees subsidiary to the organizations listed here are
not named separately on this list. These include the international bodies for drugs and crime,
which are subsidiary to the United Nations.

This listing is provided for reference purposes and should not be considered exhaustive. For
more information on international organizations and United States participation in them,
contact the State Department's Bureau of International Organization Affairs. Phone, 202-647-
9600. Internet, http://go.usa.gov/UjzR.

I. Specialized Agencies of the United Nations and Related Organizations

Food and Agricultural Organization
International Atomic Energy Agency
International Civil Aviation Organization
International Fund for Agriculture Development
International Labor Organization
International Maritime Organization
International Telecommunication Union
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
Universal Postal Union
World Health Organization
World Intellectual Property Organization
World Meteorological Organization

II. Peacekeeping and Political Missions Administered by the United Nations Department of
Peacekeeping Operations

Africa

African Union/United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei (UNISFA)
United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO)
United Nations Mission in Liberia (UNMIL)
United Nations Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS)
United Nations Operation in Côte d'Ivoire (UNOCI)
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
       (MONUSCO)
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
       Republic (MINUSCA)

Americas

United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH)

Middle East

United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (UNAMA)
United Nations Disengagement Observer Force (UNDOF)
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan (UNMOGIP)
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization (UNTSO)

Europe

United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP)

III. Inter-American Organizations

Border Environment Cooperation Commission Caribbean Postal Union
Inter-American Center of Tax Administrators
Inter-American Children’s Institute
Inter-American Commission of Human Rights
Inter-American Commission of Women
Inter-American Committee Against Terrorism
Inter-American Committee on Natural Disaster Reduction
Inter-American Council for Integral Development
Inter-American Drug Abuse Control Commission
Inter-American Institute for Cooperation in Agriculture
Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
Inter-American Investment Corporation
Inter-American Telecommunications Commission
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission
Pan American Health Organization
Pan American Institute of Geography and History
Postal Union of the Americas, Spain and Portugal

IV. Regional Organizations

Antarctic Treaty System
Arctic Council
Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation
Asia Pacific Energy Research Center
Colombo Plan for Cooperative Economic and Social Development in Asia and the Pacific
Commission for Environmental Cooperation
Commission for Labor Cooperation
International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas
NATO Parliamentary Assembly
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization
North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission
North Pacific Coast Guard Forum
North Pacific Marine Science Organization
Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization
Secretariat of the Pacific Community
South Pacific Regional Environment Program
Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission

V. Other International Organizations

Bioversity International
Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR)
Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
Community of Democracies
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Organization
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR)
COSPAS-SARSAT (Search and Rescue Satellite System)
Global Biodiversity Information Facility
Global Environment Facility
Hague Conference on Private International Law)
Human Frontier Science Program
International Ocean Discovery Program
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC)
International Bureau for the Permanent Court of Arbitration
International Bureau of Weights and Measures
International Center for Agricultural Research in the Dry Areas
International Center for the Study of the Preservation and the Restoration of Cultural
       Property
International Coffee Organization
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC)
International Cotton Advisory Committee
International Council for the Exploration of the Seas
International Court of Justice
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL)
International Customs Tariffs Bureau
International Development Law Organization
International Energy Agency
International Energy Forum
International Fertilizer Development Center
International Grains Council
International Hydrographic Organization
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
International Institute for the Unification of Private Law
International Mobile Satellite Organization
International Organization of Legal Metrology
International Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions
United Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women
International Science and Technology Center
International Seed Testing Association
International Telecommunications Satellite Organization
International Tropical Timber Organization
International Union of Credit and Investment Insurers (Berne Union)
International Whaling Commission
Iran-United States Claims Tribunal
Multinational Force and Observers
Nuclear Energy Agency (NEA)
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty
Regional Environmental Center for Central and Eastern Europe
Science and Technology Center in Ukraine
Standards and Trade Development Facility
Wassenaar Arrangement
World Association for Waterborne Transport Infrastructure
World Association of Investment Promotion Agencies
World Customs Organization
World Heritage Fund
World Organization for Animal Health
World Trade Organization (WTO)
VI. Special Voluntary Programs

Asian Vegetable Research and Development Center
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES)
Global Fund to Fight HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria
International Council for Science
International Crop Research Institute for Semi-Arid Tropics
International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
International Food Policy Research Institute
International Fund for Agricultural Development
International Institute of Tropical Agriculture
Joint United Nations Program on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS)
Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization
Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol
Ramsar Convention on Wetlands
United Nations Capital Development Fund
United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
United Nations Democracy Fund
United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM)
United Nations Development Program
United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
United Nations Environment Program
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Programs
United Nations Human Settlements Program (UN HABITAT)
United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA)
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA)
United Nations Voluntary Fund for Technical Cooperation in the Field of Human Rights
United Nations Voluntary Fund for the Victims of Torture
United Nations World Food Program
World Agroforestry Center



                           (Last Revised: December 22, 2015)
THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT MANUAL

                    Selected Bilateral Organizations

Below is a list of bilateral organizations in which the United States participates with its two
neighbors, Mexico and Canada. This listing is for reference purposes only and should not be
considered exhaustive.

Border Environment Cooperation Commission

United States Section: P.O. Box 221648, El Paso, TX 79913. Phone, 877-277-1703. Fax, 915-
975-8280. E-mail, becc@cocef.org. Internet, www.becc.org.

Mexican Section: Bulevar Tomas Fernadez 8069, Ciudad Juarez, Chihuahua, 32470. Phone,
011-52-656-688-4600. Fax, 011-52-656-625-6180. Internet, www.cocef.org.

Great Lakes Fishery Commission

2100 Commonwealth Boulevard, Suite 100, Ann Arbor, MI 48105. Telephone,
734-662-3209. Fax, 734-741-2010. Email, info@glfc.org. Internet, www.glfc.org.

International Boundary Commission, United States and Canada

United States Section: 2000 L Street NW., Suite 615, Washington, DC 20036. Phone, 202-
736-9102. Fax, 202-632-2008. E-mail, hipsleyk@ibcusca.org. Internet,
www.internationalboundarycommission.org.

Canadian Section: 575-615 Booth Street, Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0E9 Canada. Phone, (613) 944-
4515. Fax, (613) 992-1122. E-mail, ibc-cfi@nrcan.gc.ca. Internet,
www.internationalboundarycommission.org.

International Boundary and Water Commission, United States and Mexico

United States Section: Suite C-100, 4171 North Mesa Street, El Paso, TX 79902. Phone, 800-
262-8857. Internet, www.ibwc.state.gov.

Mexican Section: Avenue Universidad 2180, Zona Chamizal, C.P. 32310, Ciudad Juarez,
Chihuahua, 32310. Phone, 011-52-656-639-7951 or 011-52-656-613-7311. Fax, 011-52-656-
613-9943. E-mail, cilamex@cila.gob.mx. Internet, www.sre.gob.mx/cila.
International Joint Commission—United States and Canada

United States Section: 2000 L Street NW., Suite 615, Washington, DC 20440. Phone, 202-
736-9009. Fax, 202-632-2007. E-mail: commission@washington.ijc.org. Internet,
www.ijc.org.

Canadian Section: 234 Laurier Avenue West, 22d Floor, Ottawa, Ontario K1P 6K6. Phone,
613-995-2984. Fax, 613-993-5583. E-mail: commission@ottawa.ijc.org. Internet,
www.ijc.org.

Great Lakes Regional Office: 100 Ouellette Avenue, 8th Floor, Windsor, Ontario N9A 6T3.
Phone, 519-257-6700. Fax, 519-257-6740. E-mail: commission@windsor.ijc.org. Internet,
www.ijc.org.

International Pacific Halibut Commission

2320 W. Commodore Way, Suite 300, Seattle, WA 98199-1287. Phone, 206-634-1838. Fax,
206-632-2983. Internet, www.iphc.int.

Joint Mexican-United States Defense Commission

United States Section: Room 2E773, The Pentagon, Washington, DC 20318. Phone, 703-695-
8164.

Mexican Section: 6th Floor, 1911 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Mexican Embassy, Washington,
DC 20006. Phone, 202-728-1748.

Permanent Joint Board on Defense—United States and Canada

United States Section: Room 2E773, The Pentagon, Washington, DC 20318. Phone, 703-695-
8164.

Canadian Section: Director of Western Hemisphere, 101 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, ON K1A
0K2. Phone, 613-992-4423.




                           (Last Revised: December 22, 2015)
 THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT MANUAL
         Commonly Used Agency Acronyms
ABMC       AMERICAN BATTLE MONUMENTS COMMISSION
ACF        ADMINISTRATION OF CHILDREN AND FAMILIES
ACFR       ADMINISTRATIVE COMMITTEE OF THE FEDERAL REGISTER
ADF        AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FOUNDATION
AFRH       ARMED FORCES RETIREMENT HOME
AHRQ       AGENCY FOR HEALTHCARE RESEARCH AND QUALITY
AMS        AGRICULTURAL MARKETING SERVICE
AMTRAK     NATIONAL RAILROAD PASSENGER CORPORATION
AOA        ADMINISTRATION ON AGING
APHIS      ANIMAL AND PLANT HEALTH INSPECTION SERVICE
APPAL      APPALACHIAN STATES LOW LEVEL RADIOACTIVE WASTE COMMISSION
ARCTIC     ARCTIC RESEARCH COMMISSION
ARS        AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH SERVICE
ARTS       NATIONAL FOUNDATION ON THE ARTS AND THE HUMANITIES
ATBCB      ARCHITECTURAL AND TRANSPORTATION BARRIERS COMPLIANCE BOARD
ATF        ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, FIREARMS, AND EXPLOSIVES BUREAU
ATSDR      AGENCY FOR TOXIC SUBSTANCES AND DISEASE REGISTRY
BBG        BROADCASTING BOARD OF GOVERNORS
BEA        BUREAU OF ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
BGSEEF     BARRY M. GOLDWATER SCHOLARSHIP AND EXCELLENCE IN EDUCATION
           FOUNDATION
BIA        BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
BIS        BUREAU OF INDUSTRY AND SECURITY
BLM        BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT
BLS        BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS
BOP        FEDERAL PRISONS BUREAU
BOR        BUREAU OF RECLAMATION
BPA        BONNEVILLE POWER ADMINISTRATION
BPD        BUREAU OF PUBLIC DEBT
CBO        CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE
CCC        COMMODITY CREDIT CORPORATION
CCJJDP     COORDINATING COUNCIL ON JUVENILE JUSTICE AND DELINQUENCY
           PREVENTION
CDC        CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION
CDFI       COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS FUND
CEQ        COUNCIL ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
CFTC     COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION
CFPB     CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU
CIA      CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
CITA     COMMITTEE FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF TEXTILE AGREEMENTS
CMS      CENTERS FOR MEDICARE & MEDICAID SERVICES
CNCS     CORPORATION FOR NATIONAL AND COMMUNITY SERVICE
COE      CORPS OF ENGINEERS
COFA     COMMISSION OF FINE ARTS
COLC     COPYRIGHT OFFICE, LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
COPS     COMMUNITY ORIENTED POLICING SERVICES
CORP     CORPORATION FOR NATIONAL AND COMMUNITY SERVICE
CPPBSD   COMMITTEE FOR PURCHASE FROM PEOPLE WHO ARE BLIND OR
         SEVERELY DISABLED
CPSC     CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION
CRB      COPYRIGHT ROYALTY BOARD, LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
CRC      CIVIL RIGHTS COMMISSION
CSB      CHEMICAL SAFETY AND HAZARD INVESTIGATION BOARD
CSEO     CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT OFFICE
CSOSA    COURT SERVICES AND OFFENDER SUPERVISION AGENCY FOR THE
         DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA
CSREES   COOPERATIVE STATE RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND EXTENSION SERVICE
DARPA    DEFENSE ADVANCED RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY
DARS     DEFENSE ACQUISITION REGULATIONS SYSTEM
DC       DENALI COMMISSION
DCAA     DEFENSE CONTRACT AUDIT AGENCY
DEA      DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION
DEPO     DISABILITY EMPLOYMENT POLICY OFFICE
DFAS     DEFENSE FINANCE AND ACCOUNTING SERVICES
DHS      DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
DIA      DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
DISA     DEFENSE INFORMATION SYSTEMS AGENCY
DLA      DEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY
DNFSB    DEFENSE NUCLEAR FACILITIES SAFETY BOARD
DOC      DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
DOD      DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
DOE      DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
DOI      DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
DOJ      DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
DOL      DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
DOS      DEPARTMENT OF STATE
DOT      DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
DRBC     DELAWARE RIVER BASIN COMMISSION
DSCA     DEFENSE SECURITY COOPERATION AGENCY
DSS      DEFENSE SECURITY SERVICE
DTRA     DEFENSE THREAT REDUCTION AGENCY
EAB      BUREAU OF ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
EAC      ELECTION ASSISTANCE COMMISSION
EBSA     EMPLOYEE BENEFITS SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
ECAB     EMPLOYEES' COMPENSATION APPEALS BOARD
ECSA     ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS ADMINISTRATION
ED       DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
EDA      ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATION
EEOC     EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
EERE     ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE ENERGY OFFICE
EIA      ENERGY INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION
EIB      EXPORT IMPORT BANK OF THE UNITED STATES
EOA      ENERGY OFFICE, AGRICULTURE DEPARTMENT
EOIR     EXECUTIVE OFFICE FOR IMMIGRATION REVIEW
EOP      EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT
EPA      ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
ERS      ECONOMIC RESEARCH SERVICE
ESA      EMPLOYMENT STANDARDS ADMINISTRATION
ETA      EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING ADMINISTRATION
FAA      FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION
FAR      FEDERAL ACQUISITION REGULATION
FAS      FOREIGN AGRICULTURAL SERVICE
FASAB    FEDERAL ACCOUNTING STANDARDS ADVISORY BOARD
FBI      FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
FCA      FARM CREDIT ADMINISTRATION
FCC      FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
FCIC     FEDERAL CROP INSURANCE CORPORATION
FCSIC    FARM CREDIT SYSTEM INSURANCE CORPORATION
FDA      FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
FDIC     FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION
FEC      FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION
FEMA     FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
FERC     FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION
FFIEC    FEDERAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS EXAMINATION COUNCIL
FHEO     FAIR HOUSING AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
FHFA     FEDERAL HOUSING FINANCE AGENCY
FHFB     FEDERAL HOUSING FINANCE BOARD
FHWA     FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
FINCEN   FINANCIAL CRIMES ENFORCEMENT NETWORK
FINCIC   FINANCIAL CRISIS INQUIRY COMMISSION
FISCAL   FISCAL SERVICE
FLETC    FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING CENTER
FLRA     FEDERAL LABOR RELATIONS AUTHORITY
FMC      FEDERAL MARITIME COMMISSION
FMCS     FEDERAL MEDIATION AND CONCILIATION SERVICE
FMCSA    FEDERAL MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ADMINISTRATION
FNS      FOOD AND NUTRITION SERVICE
FPPO     FEDERAL PROCUREMENT POLICY OFFICE
FR       OFFICE OF THE FEDERAL REGISTER
FRA      FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION
FRS      FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
FRTIB    FEDERAL RETIREMENT THRIFT INVESTMENT BOARD
FS       FOREST SERVICE
FSA      FARM SERVICE AGENCY
FSIS     FOOD SAFETY AND INSPECTION SERVICE
FTA      FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION
FTC      FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION
FTZB     FOREIGN TRADE ZONES BOARD
FWS      FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
GAO      GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
GEO      GOVERNMENT ETHICS OFFICE
GIPSA    GRAIN INSPECTION, PACKERS AND STOCKYARDS ADMINISTRATION
GPO      GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE
GSA      GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
HHS      DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
HHSIG    INSPECTOR GENERAL OFFICE, HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
         DEPARTMENT
HOPE     BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE HOPE FOR HOMEOWNERS PROGRAM
HPAC     HISTORIC PRESERVATION, ADVISORY COUNCIL
HRSA     HEALTH RESOURCES AND SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
HST      HARRY S. TRUMAN SCHOLARSHIP FOUNDATION
HUD      DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
IAF      INTER AMERICAN FOUNDATION
ICEB     IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT BUREAU
IHS      INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE
IIO      INTERNATIONAL INVESTMENT OFFICE
IRS      INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE
ISOO     INFORMATION SECURITY OVERSIGHT OFFICE
ITA      INTERNATIONAL TRADE ADMINISTRATION
ITC      INTERNATIONAL TRADE COMMISSION
JBEA     JOINT BOARD FOR ENROLLMENT OF ACTUARIES
LMSO     LABOR MANAGEMENT STANDARDS OFFICE
LOC        LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
LSC        LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION
MARAD      MARITIME ADMINISTRATION
MBDA       MINORITY BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT AGENCY
MCC        MILLENNIUM CHALLENGE CORPORATION
MDA        MISSILE DEFENSE AGENCY
MISS       MISSISSIPPI RIVER COMMISSION
MKU        MORRIS K. UDALL SCHOLARSHIP AND EXCELLENCE IN NATIONAL
           ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY FOUNDATION
MMC        MARINE MAMMALCOMMISSION
MMS        MINERALS MANAGEMENT SERVICE
MSHA       MINE SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
MSHFRC     FEDERAL MINE SAFETY AND HEALTH REVIEW COMMISSION
MSPB       MERIT SYSTEMS PROTECTION BOARD
NARA       NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS ADMINISTRATION
NASA       NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
NASS       NATIONAL AGRICULTURAL STATISTICS SERVICE
NCA        NATIONAL CEMETERY ADMINISTRATION
NCD        NATIONAL COUNCIL ON DISABILITY
NCLIS      NATIONAL COMMISSION ON LIBRARIES AND INFORMATION SCIENCE
NCPPCC     NATIONAL CRIME PREVENTION AND PRIVACY COMPACT COUNCIL
NCS        NATIONAL COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
NCUA       NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION
NEC        NATIONAL ECONOMIC COUNCIL
NEIGHBOR   NEIGHBORHOOD REINVESTMENT CORPORATION
NHTSA      NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION
NIFA       NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
NIGC       NATIONAL INDIAN GAMING COMMISSION
NIH        NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH
NIL        NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR LITERACY
NIST       NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
NLRB       NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD
NMB        NATIONAL MEDIATION BOARD
NNSA       NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
NOAA       NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION
NPREC      NATIONAL PRISON RAPE ELIMINATION COMMISSION
NPS        NATIONAL PARK SERVICE
NRC        NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION
NRCS       NATURAL RESOURCES CONSERVATION SERVICE
NSA        NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY/CENTRAL SECURITY SERVICE
NSF        NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
NTIA       NATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION
          ADMINISTRATION
NTSB      NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD
NWTRB     NUCLEAR WASTE TECHNICAL REVIEW BOARD
OCC       COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY
ODNI      OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
OEPNU     OFFICE OF ENERGY POLICY AND NEW USES
OFAC      OFFICE OF FOREIGN ASSETS CONTROL
OFCCP     OFFICE OF FEDERAL CONTRACT COMPLIANCE PROGRAMS
OFHEO     FEDERAL HOUSING ENTERPRISE OVERSIGHT OFFICE
OFPP      OFFICE OF FEDERAL PROCUREMENT POLICY
OJJDP     JUVENILE JUSTICE AND DELINQUENCY PREVENTION OFFICE
OJP       JUSTICE PROGRAMS OFFICE
OMB       OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET
ONDCP     OFFICE OF NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL POLICY
ONHIR     OFFICE OF NAVAJO AND HOPI INDIAN RELOCATION
OPIC      OVERSEAS PRIVATE INVESTMENT CORPORATION
OPM       OFFICE OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT
OPPM      OFFICE OF PROCUREMENT AND POLICY MANAGEMENT
OSC       OFFICE OF SPECIAL COUNSEL
OSHA      OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
OSHRC     OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH REVIEW COMMISSION
OSM       OFFICE OF SURFACE MINING RECLAMATION AND ENFORCEMENT
OSTP      OFFICE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY
OTS       OFFICE OF THRIFT SUPERVISION
PACIFIC   PACIFIC NORTHWEST ELECTRIC POWER AND CONSERVATION PLANNING
          COUNCIL
PBGC      PENSION BENEFIT GUARANTY CORPORATION
PC        PEACE CORPS
PHMSA     PIPELINE AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY ADMINISTRATION
PHS       PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE
PRC       POSTAL REGULATORY COMMISSION
PRES      PRESIDENTIAL DOCUMENTS
PT        PRESIDIO TRUST
PTO       PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE
RATB      RECOVERY ACCOUNTABILITY AND TRANSPARENCY BOARD
RBS       RURAL BUSINESS COOPERATIVE SERVICE
RHS       RURAL HOUSING SERVICE
RISC      REGULATORY INFORMATION SERVICE CENTER
RITA      RESEARCH AND INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGY ADMINISTRATION
RMA       RISK MANAGEMENT AGENCY
RRB       RAILROAD RETIREMENT BOARD
RTB       RURAL TELEPHONE BANK
RUS      RURAL UTILITIES SERVICE
SAMHSA   SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
SBA      SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
SEC      SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
SIGIR    SPECIAL INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR IRAQ RECONSTRUCTION
SJI      STATE JUSTICE INSTITUTE
SLSDC    SAINT LAWRENCE SEAWAY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
SRBC     SUSQUEHANNA RIVER BASIN COMMISSION
SSA      SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
SSS      SELECTIVE SERVICE SYSTEM
STB      SURFACE TRANSPORTATION BOARD
SWPA     SOUTHWESTERN POWER ADMINISTRATION
TA       TECHNOLOGY ADMINISTRATION
TREAS    DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
TSA      TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
TTB      ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO TAX AND TRADE BUREAU
TVA      TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY
URMCC    UTAH RECLAMATION MITIGATION AND CONSERVATION COMMISSION
USA      ARMY DEPARTMENT
USAF     AIR FORCE DEPARTMENT
USAID    UNITED STATES AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
USBC     BUREAU OF THE CENSUS
USCBP    CUSTOMS AND BORDER PROTECTION BUREAU
USCC     U.S. CHINA ECONOMIC AND SECURITY REVIEW COMMISSION
USCERT   UNITED STATES COMPUTER EMERGENCY READINESS TEAM
USCG     COAST GUARD
USCIS    U.S. CITIZENSHIP AND IMMIGRATION SERVICES
USDA     DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
USEIB    EXPORT IMPORT BANK
USGS     U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
USHMM    UNITED STATES HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL MUSEUM
USIP     UNITED STATES INSTITUTE OF PEACE
USJC     JUDICIAL CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES
USMINT   UNITED STATES MINT
USN      NAVY DEPARTMENT
USPC     PAROLE COMMISSION
USPS     POSTAL SERVICE
USSC     UNITED STATES SENTENCING COMMISSION
USSS     SECRET SERVICE
USTR     OFFICE OF UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE
USUHS    UNIFORMED SERVICES UNIVERSITY OF THE HEALTH SCIENCES
VA       DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
VCNP   VALLES CALDERA TRUST
VETS   VETERANS EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING SERVICE
WAPA   WESTERN AREA POWER ADMINISTRATION
WCPO   WORKERS COMPENSATION PROGRAMS OFFICE
WHD    WAGE AND HOUR DIVISION

                (Last Revised: September 16, 2015)
 THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT MANUAL

                         LINKS TO EXTERNAL RESOURCES



Defense Technical Information Center          Dictionary of Military Terms and Acronyms


Government Publishing Office                  Agencies in the Code of Federal Regulations


GovSpeak                                      Government Acronyms and Abbreviations


Louisiana State University Library            Federal Agency Directory


USA.gov                                       A-Z Index of State and Federal Websites




                                       REVISED ON 10 FEB 2017
THE UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT MANUAL
                       Contact Information and News

Welcome to the Office of the Federal Register's Government Manual Web site, home of
The United States Government Manual (USGM). The USGM contains agency leadership
tables, descriptions of agency activities and programs, and sources of information.

The Office of the Federal Register (OFR) and Government Publishing Office collaborate
to produce a digital edition of the USGM. Printed editions of the USGM stopped after
2013. Today, the USGM is an annually updated, online publication.

For USGM-related questions, contact the OFR's Daily Issue unit. Phone, 202-741-6050.
Email, govman@gpo.gov.
________________________________________________________________________

7 AUG 2017

The production of the USGM is no longer tied to an annual cycle of updating agency
information. Henceforth, the USGM’s content will be updated on a year-round basis.
________________________________________________________________________

2 AUG 2017

Agency entries have been updated for the 2017 edition.

The editors of the Daily Issue unit continue a long-term overhaul of the USGM. Changes
are being introduced piecemeal, some here and a few there, giving the USGM’s content
and style an unevenness. As these editors generally improve and bring uniformity to the
publication, feedback from the public—comments, constructive criticism, ideas, and
suggestions—is valued and thoughtfully considered. Email, govman@gpo.gov. Phone,
202-741-6050.
________________________________________________________________________

10 FEB 2017

In response to a suggestion received from a representative of the news media, USGM
editors added the "Archives of USGM Editions" to the list of resources available on the
home page.
________________________________________________________________________

                                 REVISED: 7 AUG 2017
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                                         Congress
                                                        The Senate
                                                The House of Representatives




The United States Government Manual




     CONGRESS
    ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEENTH CONGRESS


    http://www.congress.gov


    The Congress of the United States was created by Article I, section 1, of the Constitution, adopted by the Constitutional

    Convention on September 17, 1787, providing that “All legislative Powers herein granted shall be vested in a Congress of

    the United States, which shall consist of a Senate and House of Representatives."
The first Congress under the Constitution met on March 4, 1789, in the Federal Hall in New York City. The membership

then consisted of 20 Senators and 59 Representatives.*


* New York ratified the Constitution on July 26, 1788, but did not elect its Senators until July 15 and 16, 1789. North

Carolina did not ratify the Constitution until November 21, 1789; Rhode Island ratified it on May 29, 1790.


Congressional Record
Proceedings of Congress are published in the Congressional Record, which is issued each day when Congress is in

session. Publication of the Record began March 4, 1873. It was the first record of debate officially reported, printed,

and published directly by the Federal Government. The Daily Digest of the Congressional Record, printed in the back

of each issue of the Record, summarizes the proceedings of that day in each House and each of their committees and

subcommittees, respectively. The Digest also presents the legislative program for each day and, at the end of the

week, gives the program for the following week. Its publication was begun March 17, 1947.


Congressional Record (Bound), 1873–2016

https://www.govinfo.gov/app/collection/crecb
Congressional Record (Daily), 1994–Present

https://www.govinfo.gov/app/collection/CREC

Sessions
Article I, section 4, of the Constitution makes it mandatory that "The Congress shall assemble at least once in every

Year. . . ." Under this provision, also, the date for convening Congress was designated originally as the first Monday in

December, "unless they shall by Law appoint a different Day." Eighteen acts were passed, up to 1820, providing for the

meeting of Congress on other days of the year. From 1820 to 1934, however, Congress met regularly on the first

Monday in December. In 1934 the 20th amendment changed the convening of Congress to January 3, unless

Congress "shall by law appoint a different day." In addition, the President, according to Article II, section 3, of the

Constitution "may, on extraordinary Occasions, convene both Houses, or either of them, and in Case of Disagreement

between them, with Respect to the Time of Adjournment, he may adjourn them to such Time as he shall think proper.

. . ."

https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/constitution-transcript#toc-section-4-

Powers of Congress
Article I, section 8, of the Constitution defines the powers of Congress. Included are the powers to assess and collect

taxes—called the chief power; to regulate commerce, both interstate and foreign; to coin money; to establish post

offices and post roads; to establish courts inferior to the Supreme Court; to declare war; and to raise and maintain an

army and navy. Congress is further empowered "To provide for calling forth the Militia to execute the Laws of the

Union, suppress Insurrections and repel Invasions;" and "To make all Laws which shall be necessary and proper for

carrying into Execution the foregoing Powers, and all other Powers vested by this Constitution in the Government of

the United States, or in any Department or Officer thereof."

https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/constitution-transcript#toc-section-8-

Amendments to the Constitution
Another power vested in the Congress is the right to propose amendments to the Constitution, whenever two-thirds

of both Houses shall deem it necessary. Should two-thirds of the State legislatures demand changes in the

Constitution, it is the duty of Congress to call a constitutional convention. Proposed amendments shall be valid as part

of the Constitution when ratified by the legislatures or by conventions of three-fourths of the States, as one or the

other mode of ratification may be proposed by Congress.


Prohibitions Upon Congress
Article I, section 9, of the Constitution also imposes prohibitions upon Congress. "The Privilege of the Writ of Habeas

Corpus shall not be suspended, unless when in Cases of Rebellion or Invasion the public Safety may require it." A bill

of attainder or an ex post facto law cannot be passed. No export duty can be imposed. Ports of one State cannot be

given preference over those of another State. "No money shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in Consequence of

Appropriations made by Law. . . ." No title of nobility may be granted.

https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/constitution-transcript#toc-section-9-

Rights of Members
According to Article I, section 6, Members of Congress are granted certain privileges. In no case, except in treason,

felony, and breach of the peace, can Members be arrested while attending sessions of Congress "and in going to and

returning from the same. . . ." Furthermore, the Members cannot be questioned in any other place for remarks made

in Congress. Each House may expel a Member of its body by a two-thirds vote.

https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/constitution-transcript#toc-section-6-

Enactment of Laws
In order to become law, all bills and joint resolutions, except those proposing a constitutional amendment, must pass

both the House of Representatives and the Senate and either be signed by the President or be passed over the

President's veto by a two-thirds vote of both Houses of Congress. Section 7 of Article I states: "If any Bill shall not be

returned by the President within ten Days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the Same shall

be a Law, in like Manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by their Adjournment prevent its Return, in which

Case it shall not be a Law." When a bill or joint resolution is introduced in the House, the usual procedure for its

enactment into law is as follows: assignment to House committee having jurisdiction; if favorably considered, it is

reported to the House either in its original form or with recommended amendments; if the bill or resolution is passed

by the House, it is messaged to the Senate and referred to the committee having jurisdiction; in the Senate committee

the bill, if favorably considered, may be reported in the form as received from the House, or with recommended

amendments; the approved bill or resolution is reported to the Senate, and if passed by that body, is returned to the

House; if one body does not accept the amendments to a bill by the other body, a conference committee comprised

of Members of both bodies is usually appointed to effect a compromise; when the bill or joint resolution is finally

approved by both Houses, it is signed by the Speaker (or Speaker pro tempore) and the Vice President (or President

pro tempore or acting President pro tempore) and is presented to the President; and once the President's signature is

affixed, the measure becomes a law. If the President vetoes the bill, it cannot become a law unless it is re-passed by a

two-thirds vote of both Houses.



The Senate
The Capitol, Washington, DC 20510


202-224-3121

http://www.senate.gov




Constitutionally Mandated Officers


 President of the Senate / Vice President of the United
                                                        J.D. Vance
 States




 President pro tempore                                 Charles Grassley

http://www.senate.gov/senators/leadership.htm



Political Party Leaders


 Majority Leader—Democrat                              Charles E. Schumer




 Minority Leader—Republican                            A. Mitchell McConnell

https://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/common/briefing/Majority_Minority_Leaders.htm#3



Senate-Elected Officers and Officials


 Chaplain                                              Barry C. Black


 Parliamentarian                                       Elizabeth C. MacDonough




 SECRETARIES


 for the Majority                                      Gary B. Myrick


 for the Minority                                      Robert M. Duncan


 for the Senate                                        Sonceria Berry
  Sergeant at Arms                                           Jennifer A. Hemingway, Acting

https://www.senate.gov/history/officers.htm



  The above list of key personnel was updated 3–2021.


Organizational Chart

Overview
The Senate comprises 100 Members, 2 from each State. Senators are elected to serve for a term of 6 years.

There are three classes of Senators, and a new class is elected every 2 years. Senators were originally chosen by

the State legislatures. The 17th amendment, which became part of the Constitution in 1913, made their election a

function of the people.


A Senator must be a resident of the State that he or she represents. A Senator also must be at least 30 years of

age and have been a U.S. citizen for at least 9 years.


Officers
The Vice President of the United States is the Presiding Officer of the Senate. In the Vice President's absence, the

duties are taken over by a President pro tempore, elected by that body, or someone designated by the

President pro tempore.


The positions of Senate Majority and Minority Leader have been in existence only since the early years of the

20th century. Leaders are elected at the beginning of each new Congress by a majority vote of the Senators in

their political party. In cooperation with their party organizations, Leaders are responsible for the design and

achievement of a legislative program. This involves managing the flow of legislation, expediting noncontroversial

measures, and keeping Members informed regarding proposed action on pending business. Each Leader serves

as an ex officio member of his party's policymaking and organizational bodies and is aided by an assistant floor

leader (whip) and a party secretary.


The Secretary of the Senate, elected by vote of the Senate, performs the duties of the Presiding Officer of the

Senate in the absence of the Vice President and pending the election of a President pro tempore. The Secretary

is the custodian of the seal of the Senate, draws requisitions on the Secretary of the Treasury for moneys

appropriated for the compensation of Senators, officers, and employees, and for the contingent expenses of the

Senate, and is empowered to administer oaths to any officer of the Senate and to any witness produced before

it. The Secretary's executive duties include certification of extracts from the Journal of the Senate; the attestation

of bills and joint, concurrent, and Senate resolutions; in impeachment trials, issuance, under the authority of the

Presiding Officer, of all orders, mandates, writs, and precepts authorized by the Senate; and certification to the

President of the United States of the advice and consent of the Senate to ratification of treaties and the names

of persons confirmed or rejected upon the nomination of the President.


The Sergeant at Arms, elected by vote of the Senate, serves as the executive, chief law enforcement, and

protocol officer and is the principal administrative manager for most support services in the Senate. As executive
officer, the Sergeant at Arms has custody of the Senate gavel; enforces Senate rules and regulations as they

pertain to the Senate Chamber, the Senate wing of the Capitol, and the Senate office buildings; and subject to

the Presiding Officer, maintains order on the Senate floor, Chamber, and galleries. As chief law enforcement

officer of the Senate, the Sergeant at Arms is authorized to maintain security in the Capitol and all Senate

buildings, as well as to protect Senators; to arrest and detain any person violating Senate rules; and to locate

absentee Senators for a quorum. The Sergeant at Arms serves as a member of the Capitol Police Board and as

its chairman each odd year. As protocol officer, the Sergeant at Arms escorts the President and other heads of

state or official guests of the Senate who are attending official functions in the Capitol; makes arrangements for

funerals of Senators who die in office; and assists in planning the inauguration of the President and organizing

the swearing-in and orientation programs for newly elected Senators.


Committees
The work of preparing and considering legislation is done largely by committees of both Houses of Congress.

There are 16 standing committees in the Senate. The standing committees of the Senate are shown in the list

below. In addition, there are two select committees in each House and various congressional commissions and

joint committees composed of Members of both Houses. Each House may also appoint special investigating

committees. The membership of the standing committees of each House is chosen by a vote of the entire body;

members of other committees are appointed under the provisions of the measure establishing them.


Each bill and resolution is usually referred to the appropriate committee, which may report a bill out in its

original form, favorably or unfavorably, recommend amendments, report original measures, or allow the

proposed legislation to die in committee without action.

http://www.senate.gov/general/common/generic/about_committees.htm
                                         STANDING COMMITTEES OF THE
                                         SENATE


https://www.senate.gov/committees/membership_assignments.htm
Committee                              Chair                             Website

  Agriculture,     Nutrition,    and
                                        Deborah A. Stabenow                http://www.agriculture.senate.gov
  Forestry


  Appropriations                        Patrick J. Leahy                   http://www.appropriations.senate.gov


                                                                           http://www.armed-
  Armed Services                        John F. Reed
                                                                           services.senate.gov


  Banking, Housing, and Urban
                              Sherrod C. Brown                             http://www.banking.senate.gov
  Affairs


  Budget                                Bernard Sanders                    http://www.budget.senate.gov


  Commerce,        Science,      and
                                        Maria E. Cantwell                  http://www.commerce.senate.gov
  Transportation


  Energy and Natural Resources          Joseph A. Manchin III              https://www.energy.senate.gov
  Environment and Public Works        Thomas R. Carper                  https://www.epw.senate.gov


  Finance                             Ronald L. Wyden                   https://www.finance.senate.gov


  Foreign Relations                   Robert Menendez                   http://www.foreign.senate.gov


  Health, Education, Labor, and
                                Patricia L. Murray                      http://www.help.senate.gov
  Pensions


  Homeland      Security        and
                                      Gary C. Peters                    https://www.hsgac.senate.gov
  Governmental Affairs


  Indian Affairs                      Brian E. Schatz                   https://www.indian.senate.gov


  Judiciary                           Richard J. Durbin                 https://www.judiciary.senate.gov


  Rules and Administration            Amy J. Klobuchar                  http://www.rules.senate.gov


  Small        Business         and
                                      Benjamin L. Cardin                http://www.sbc.senate.gov
  Entrepreneurship


  Veterans' Affairs                   R. Jon Tester                     https://www.veterans.senate.gov

https://www.senate.gov/committees/committees_home.htm

  The above list of committee chairs was updated 2–2021.




Special Powers
Under the Constitution, the Senate is granted certain powers not accorded to the House of Representatives. The

Senate approves or disapproves certain Presidential appointments by majority vote, and treaties must be

concurred in by a two-thirds vote.


List of U.S. Senators
Information on Senate.gov web pages may be more accurate and current.

https://www.senate.gov/senators/index.htmhttps://www.senate.gov/general/contact_information/senators_cfm.cf
m?OrderBy=state&Sort=ASC
                                       EXPIRATION OF TERM—PARTY
STATE                                                                        CONTACT INFORMATION
                                       AFFILIATION


Alabama

  Katie Britt                          2029—Republican                       https://www.britt.senate.gov/


  Thomas H. Tuberville                 2027—Republican                       https://www.tuberville.senate.gov

Alaska

  Lisa A. Murkowski                    2029—Republican                     https://www.murkowski.senate.gov
 Daniel S. Sullivan      2027—Republican       http://www.sullivan.senate.gov

Arizona

 Mark E. Kelly             2029—Democrat          https://www.kelly.senate.gov


 Ruben Gallego             2031—Democrat          https://www.gallego.senate.gov

Arkansas

 John N. Boozman          2029—Republican       https://www.boozman.senate.gov


 Thomas B. Cotton         2027—Republican       https://www.cotton.senate.gov

California

 Dianne Feinstein          2025—Democrat          http://www.feinstein.senate.gov


 Alejandro Padilla         2029—Democrat          https://www.padilla.senate.gov

Colorado

 Michael F. Bennet       2029—Democrat       https://www.bennet.senate.gov


 John W. Hickenlooper    2027—Democrat       https://www.hickenlooper.senate.gov

Connecticut

 Richard L. Blumenthal   2029—Democrat        https://www.blumenthal.senate.gov


 Christopher S. Murphy   2025—Democrat        https://www.murphy.senate.gov

Delaware

 Lisa Blunt Rochester     2031—Democrat         https://www.rochester.senate.gov


 Christopher A. Coons     2027—Democrat         https://www.coons.senate.gov

Florida

 TBD                      2029—                  http://www..senate.gov


 Richard L. Scott         2025—Republican        https://www.rickscott.senate.gov

Georgia

 T. Jonathan Ossoff       2027—Democrat          https://www.ossoff.senate.gov


 Raphael G. Warnock       2029—Democrat          https://www.warnock.senate.gov

Hawaii

 Mazie K. Hirono           2025—Democrat          https://www.hirono.senate.gov


 Brian E. Schatz           2029—Democrat          http://www.schatz.senate.gov

Idaho

 Michael D. Crapo          2029—Republican        http://www.crapo.senate.gov
  James E. Risch                 2027—Republican       http://www.risch.senate.gov

Illinois

  L. Tammy Duckworth            2029—Democrat       https://www.duckworth.senate.gov


  Richard J. Durbin             2027—Democrat       http://www.durbin.senate.gov

Indiana

  Jim Banks                      2031—Republican       https://www.banks.senate.gov


  Todd C. Young                  2029—Republican       https://www.young.senate.gov

Iowa

  Joni K. Ernst                  2027—Republican       http://www.ernst.senate.gov


  Charles E. Grassley            2029—Republican       http://www.grassley.senate.gov

Kansas

  Roger W. Marshall             2027—Republican       https://www.marshall.senate.gov


  Gerald W. Moran               2029—Republican       http://www.moran.senate.gov

Kentucky

  A. Mitchell McConnell         2027—Republican      http://www.mcconnell.senate.gov


  Randal H. Paul                2029—Republican      https://www.paul.senate.gov

Louisiana

  William M. Cassidy            2027—Republican       http://www.cassidy.senate.gov


  John N. Kennedy               2029—Republican       https://www.kennedy.senate.gov

Maine

  Susan M. Collins               2027—Republican       https://www.collins.senate.gov


  Angus S. King, Jr.             2025—Independent      http://www.king.senate.gov

Maryland

  Angela Alsobrooks             2031—Democrat       https://www.alsobrooks.senate.gov


  Christopher Van Hollen, Jr.   2029—Democrat       https://www.vanhollen.senate.gov

Massachusetts

  Edward J. Markey               2027—Democrat         http://www.markey.senate.gov


  Elizabeth A. Warren            2025—Democrat         https://www.warren.senate.gov

Michigan

  Gary C. Peters                 2027—Democrat         https://www.peters.senate.gov
 Elissa Slotkin             2031—Democrat         http://www.slotkin.senate.gov

Minnesota

 Amy J. Klobuchar          2025—Democrat        https://www.klobuchar.senate.gov


 Tina F. Smith             2027—Democrat        https://www.smith.senate.gov

Mississippi

 Cindy Hyde-Smith         2027—Republican       https://www.hydesmith.senate.gov


 Roger F. Wicker          2025—Republican       https://www.wicker.senate.gov

Missouri

 Joshua D. Hawley          2025—Republican        https://www.hawley.senate.gov/


 Eric Schmitt              2029—Republican        https://www.schmitt.senate.gov

Montana

 Steven D. Daines           2027—Republican       https://www.daines.senate.gov


 Tim Sheehy                 2031—Republican       http://www.sheehy.senate.gov

Nebraska

 Debra S. Fischer           2025—Republican       http://www.fischer.senate.gov


 Benjamin E. Sasse          2027—Republican       http://www.sasse.senate.gov

Nevada

 Catherine Cortez Masto   2029—Democrat       https://www.cortezmasto.senate.gov


 Jacklyn S. Rosen         2025—Democrat       http://www.rosen.senate.gov

New Hampshire

 Margaret Wood Hassan      2029—Democrat         https://www.hassan.senate.gov


 C. Jeanne Shaheen         2027—Democrat         https://www.shaheen.senate.gov

New Jersey

 Cory A. Booker           2027—Democrat        http://www.booker.senate.gov


 Robert Menendez          2025—Democrat        https://www.menendez.senate.gov

New Mexico

 Martin T. Heinrich         2025—Democrat         http://www.heinrich.senate.gov


 Benjamin R. Luján          2027—Democrat         https://www.lujan.senate.gov

New York

 Kirsten E. Gillibrand     2025—Democrat         https://www.gillibrand.senate.gov
 Charles E. Schumer    2029—Democrat        https://www.schumer.senate.gov

North Carolina

 Ted Budd               2029—Republican      https://www.budd.senate.gov


 Thomas R. Tillis       2027—Republican      https://www.tillis.senate.gov

North Dakota

 Kevin Cramer           2025—Republican      http://www.cramer.senate.gov


 John H. Hoeven III     2029—Republican      https://www.hoeven.senate.gov

Ohio

 Bernie Moreno          2031—Republican      https://www.moreno.senate.gov


 TBD                    2029—                https://www..senate.gov

Oklahoma

 James M. Inhofe        2027—Republican      http://www.inhofe.senate.gov


 James Lankford         2029—Republican      https://www.lankford.senate.gov

Oregon

 Jeffrey A. Merkley     2027—Democrat        https://www.merkley.senate.gov


 Ronald L. Wyden        2029—Democrat        https://www.wyden.senate.gov

Pennsylvania

 David McCormick       2031—Republican    https://www.mccormick.senate.gov


 John Fetterman        2029—Democrat      http://www.fetterman.senate.gov

Rhode Island

 John F. Reed          2027—Democrat      https://www.reed.senate.gov


 Sheldon Whitehouse    2025—Democrat      https://www.whitehouse.senate.gov

South Carolina

 Lindsey O. Graham      2027—Republican      https://www.lgraham.senate.gov


 Timothy E. Scott       2029—Republican      https://www.scott.senate.gov

South Dakota

 M. Michael Rounds      2027—Republican      https://www.rounds.senate.gov


 John R. Thune          2029—Republican      https://www.thune.senate.gov

Tennessee

 Marsha W. Blackburn   2025—Republican     https://www.blackburn.senate.gov
 William F. Hagerty IV              2027—Republican             https://www.hagerty.senate.gov

Texas

 John Cornyn III                     2027—Republican              https://www.cornyn.senate.gov


 R. Edward Cruz                      2025—Republican              https://www.cruz.senate.gov

Utah

 Michael S. Lee                      2029—Republican              https://www.lee.senate.gov


 John Curtis                         2031—Republican              http://www.curtis.senate.gov

Vermont

 Bernard Sanders                     2025—Independent             https://www.sanders.senate.gov


 Peter Welch                         2029—Democrat                https://www.welch.senate.gov

Virginia

 Timothy M. Kaine                    2025—Democrat                http://www.kaine.senate.gov


 Mark R. Warner                      2027—Democrat                http://www.warner.senate.gov

Washington

 Maria E. Cantwell                   2025—Democrat                https://www.cantwell.senate.gov


 Patricia L. Murray                  2029—Democrat                http://www.murray.senate.gov

West Virginia

 Shelley Moore Capito                2027—Republican              https://www.capito.senate.gov


 Jim Justice                         2031—Republican              http://www.justice.senate.gov

Wisconsin

 Tammy S. Baldwin                  2025—Democrat               https://www.baldwin.senate.gov


 Ronald H. Johnson                 209—Republican              https://www.ronjohnson.senate.gov

Wyoming

 John A. Barrasso III               2025—Republican              https://www.barrasso.senate.gov


 Cynthia M. Lummis                  2027—Republican              https://www.lummis.senate.gov


 Information on Senate.gov may be more accurate and current.



 THE ABOVE LIST OF 100 SENATORS WAS UPDATED
 2–2021.


 Republicans are 50; Democrats are 48; Independents
  are 2; and there are no vacancies.

https://www.senate.gov/senators/index.htm
https://www.senate.gov/general/contact_information/senators_cfm.cfm?OrderBy=state&Sort=ASC



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Art
The Senate's collections of ephemera, decorative art, graphic art, paintings, and sculpture can be viewed online.

https://www.senate.gov/art/art_hist_home.htm | Email: curator@sec.senate.gov

Biographical Directory
The online "Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, 1774–Present," allows visitors to search for

Members of Congress—past and present—by first or last name, political affiliation, position, State, or year or

Congress.

http://bioguide.congress.gov/biosearch/biosearch.asp

Books by Senators
A bibliography of books that Senators who are currently serving in the U.S. Congress have written is available

online.

https://www.senate.gov/senators/BooksWrittenbySittingSenators.htm

Campaign Finance
The Federal Election Commission maintains a campaign finance database that contains information on

candidates, including senatorial candidates, who file reports with the Commission. Users of the online "Candidate

and Committee Viewer" can sort data and download them. The data presentations consist of biennial

summaries, report summaries, and report images and downloads.

http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/candcmte_info.shtml?tabIndex=1

Campaign Websites
The Library of Congress maintains a database of "Archived Web Sites" that includes thousands of official

campaign websites. Former senatorial candidates' websites are part of this collection.

https://www.loc.gov/websites

Career Opportunities
Information on fellowships, internships, and job openings is available online.

http://www.senate.gov/visiting/employment.htm

Chaplains of the Senate
Nine of the first ten Senate Chaplains were Episcopalian; one was Presbyterian. Based on a simple

denominational count, the history of the Senate chaplaincy has been dominated by Episcopalians (19),

Methodists (17), and Presbyterians (14). The total number of chaplains who have filled the office of Senate

Chaplain to date is 62.
https://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/common/briefing/Senate_Chaplain.htm

Children's Books
Links to educational resources are available on the Senate's website.

https://www.senate.gov/reference/bibliography/kids/kids.shtml

Committees
Information on Senate committees is available online.

http://www.senate.gov/committees/committees_home.htm

Congressional Directory
Prepared by the Joint Committee on Printing, the "Congressional Directory" is the official directory of the U.S.

Congress. The Directory contains a short biography of each Member of the Senate; committee memberships,

terms of service, administrative assistants and secretaries, and room and telephone numbers for Senators; lists of

court officials, military establishments, and other Federal departments and agencies, including District of

Columbia government officials, governors of States and territories, foreign diplomats, and members of the press,

radio, and television galleries.

https://www.govinfo.gov/app/collection/CDIR

Congressional Record
Starting with the year 1995, the official record of the proceedings and debates of the U.S. Congress is available

on Congress.gov.

https://www.congress.gov/congressional-record
Starting with the year 1994, the official record of the proceedings and debates of the U.S. Congress is available

on the Government Publishing Office's govinfo website.

https://www.govinfo.gov/app/collection/crec

Contact Information
The address for sending postal correspondence to a Senator or Senate committee is available online. Secretary

of the Senate: Phone, 202-224-2115. U.S. Capitol switchboard: Phone, 202-224-3121.

https://www.senate.gov/general/contacting.htm
Phone numbers, postal addresses, and online forms are available for contacting a Senator.

http://www.senate.gov/senators/contact
An online list of States also provides web forms for contacting a Senator via email.

http://www.senate.gov/senators/states.htm

Glossary
A Senate glossary is available online.

http://www.senate.gov/reference/glossary.htm

History
The Senate Historical Office has told the history of the Senate, from the First Federal Congress of 1789 through

the early 21st century; explained its traditions; described the individuals who served in its Chamber, and

examined the major issues that confronted these national leaders.

http://www.senate.gov/pagelayout/history/a_three_section_with_teasers/Explore_Senate_History.htm            |   Email:
historian@sec.senate.gov

How To . . .
Many congressional and other Government documents are available online. The Senate's website has resources

that explain how to find materials related to the Senate and the general legislative process.

https://www.senate.gov/reference/howto.htm

Legislation / Records
Research guides and resources are available online.

http://www.senate.gov/legislative/legislative_home.htm

Member Profiles
The "Members of the U.S. Congress" database contains profiles for Senators who have held office since 1973 or

were still serving in the 93d Congress. Users of the database can filter profiles by chamber, Congress, political

affiliation, and State or U.S. Territory. A Member profile includes the following: dates of service, State

represented, party affiliation, and a picture when available, as well as a link to the Member's entry in the

"Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, 1774–Present" and a link to remarks made in the

"Congressional Record." A profile also includes the list of legislation that the Member sponsored and

cosponsored.

https://www.congress.gov/members

Publications
The "Congressional Directory," the "Senate Manual," and telephone directory for the U.S. Senate are available

from the Government Publishing Office's bookstore. Phone, 202-512-0132.

https://bookstore.gpo.gov/agency/congress-legislative-branch | Email: mainbks@gpo.gov

States Represented by Senators
The "States in the Senate" web page provides a short description of each State's history in the U.S. Senate.

http://www.senate.gov/states/statesmap.htm

Statistics / Lists
Statistics on and lists regarding a variety of topics—including cloture, nominations, roll call votes, Senate history,

senators, and much more—are available online.

https://www.senate.gov/reference/stats_and_lists.htm

Websites
More information on legislation and the U.S. Senate is available on Congress.gov.

https://www.congress.gov
More information also is available on the Government Publishing Office's govinfo website.

https://www.govinfo.gov

 The above Sources of Information for the Senate were updated 2–2021.




The House of Representatives
The Capitol, Washington, DC 20515


202-225-3121

http://www.house.gov




CONSTITUTIONALLY MANDATED OFFICER


 Speaker of the House                                    Mike Johnson

https://www.speaker.gov



POLITICAL PARTY LEADERS


 Majority Leader                                         Steve Scalise


 Minority Leader                                         Hakeem Jeffries

https://www.house.gov/leadership



Appointed Officials


 General Counsel                                         Matthew Berry


 Historian                                               Matthew A. Wasniewski


 Inspector General                                       Michael Ptasienski


 Parliamentarian                                         Jason A. Smith

https://history.house.gov/People/Appointed-Officials/Appointed-Officials/



Elected Officers


 Chaplain                                                Margaret G. Kibben
  Chief Administrative Officer                              Catherine L. Szpindor


  Clerk                                                     Kevin F. McCumber


  Sergeant at Arms                                          William McFarland

https://www.house.gov/the-house-explained/officers-and-organizations



  The above list of key personnel was updated 3–2021.



Overview
The House of Representatives comprises 435 Representatives. The number representing each State is

determined by population, but every State is entitled to at least one Representative. Members are elected by the

people for 2-year terms, all terms running for the same period. Representatives must be residents of the State

from which they are chosen. In addition, a Representative must be at least 25 years of age and must have been

a citizen for at least 7 years.


A Resident Commissioner from Puerto Rico (elected for a 4-year term) and Delegates from American Samoa,

the District of Columbia, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Virgin Islands complete the composition

of the Congress of the United States. Delegates are elected for a term of 2 years. The Resident Commissioner

and Delegates may take part in the floor discussions, but have no vote in the full House. They do, however, vote

in the committees to which they are assigned.


Officers
The Presiding Officer of the House of Representatives, the Speaker, is elected by the House. The Speaker may

designate any Member of the House to act in the Speaker's absence.


The House leadership is structured essentially the same as the Senate, with the Members in the political parties

responsible for the election of their respective leader and whips.


The elected officers of the House of Representatives include the Clerk, the Sergeant at Arms, the Chief

Administrative Officer, and the Chaplain.


The Clerk is custodian of the seal of the House and administers the primary legislative activities of the House.

These duties include accepting the credentials of the Members-elect and calling the Members to order at the

commencement of the first session of each Congress; keeping the Journal; taking all votes and certifying the

passage of bills; and processing all legislation. Through various departments, the Clerk is also responsible for

floor and committee reporting services; legislative information and reference services; the administration of

House reports pursuant to House rules and certain legislation including the Ethics in Government Act and the

Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995; and the distribution of House documents. The Clerk is also charged with

supervision of the offices vacated by Members due to death, resignation, or expulsion.


The Sergeant at Arms maintains the order of the House under the direction of the Speaker and is the keeper of
the Mace. As a member of the U.S. Capitol Police Board, the Sergeant at Arms is the chief law enforcement

officer for the House and serves as Board Chairman each even year. The ceremonial and protocol duties parallel

those of the Senate Sergeant at Arms and include arranging the inauguration of the President of the United

States, Joint Sessions of Congress, visits to the House of heads of state, and funerals of Members of Congress.

The Sergeant at Arms enforces the rules relating to the privileges of the Hall of the House, including admission

to the galleries, oversees garage and parking security of the House, and distributes all House staff identification

cards.


Committees
The work of preparing and considering legislation is done largely by committees of both Houses of Congress.

There are 19 standing committees in the House of Representatives. The standing committees of the House of

Representatives are shown in the list below. In addition, there are two select committees in the House and

various congressional commissions and joint committees composed of Members of both Houses. Each House

may also appoint special investigating committees. The membership of the standing committees of each House

is chosen by a vote of the entire body; members of other committees are appointed under the provisions of the

measure establishing them.


Each bill and resolution is usually referred to the appropriate committee, which may report a bill out in its

original form, favorably or unfavorably, recommend amendments, report original measures, or allow the

proposed legislation to die in committee without action.

STANDING COMMITTEES OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
https://clerk.house.gov/committees
Committee                             Chair                                 Website

  Agriculture                           David A. Scott                        http://agriculture.house.gov


  Appropriations                        Rosa L. DeLauro                       http://appropriations.house.gov


  Armed Services                        D. Adam Smith                         https://armedservices.house.gov


  Budget                                John A. Yarmuth                       http://budget.house.gov


  Education and Labor                   Robert C. Scott                       https://edlabor.house.gov


  Energy and Commerce                   Frank J. Pallone, Jr.                 https://energycommerce.house.gov


  Ethics                                Theodore E. Deutch                    http://ethics.house.gov


  Financial Services                    Maxine M. Waters                      http://financialservices.house.gov


  Foreign Affairs                       Gregory W. Meeks                      https://foreignaffairs.house.gov


  Homeland Security                     Bennie G. Thompson                    https://homeland.house.gov


  House Administration                  Zoe Lofgren                           https://cha.house.gov
  Judiciary                             Jerrold L. Nadler                      https://judiciary.house.gov


  Natural Resources                     Raúl M. Grijalva                       http://naturalresources.house.gov


  Oversight and Reform                  Carolyn B. Maloney                     https://oversight.house.gov


  Rules                                 James P. McGovern                      https://rules.house.gov


  Science, Space, and Technology        Eddie B. Johnson                       https://science.house.gov


  Small Business                        Nydia M. Velázquez                     http://smallbusiness.house.gov


  Transportation and Infrastructure     Peter A. DeFazio                       http://transportation.house.gov


  Veterans' Affairs                     Mark A. Takano                         https://veterans.house.gov


  Ways and Means                        Richard E. Neal                        https://waysandmeans.house.gov

https://www.house.gov/committees

  The above list of committee chairs was updated 2–2021.




Special Powers
The House of Representatives is granted the power of originating all bills for the raising of revenue. Both Houses

of Congress act in impeachment proceedings, which, according to the Constitution, may be instituted against

the President, Vice President, and all civil officers of the United States. The House of Representatives has the sole

power of impeachment, and the Senate has the sole power to try impeachments.


List of U.S. Representatives
Information on House.gov may be more accurate and current.

https://www.house.gov/representatives
Information on the Office of the Clerk's website may be more accurate and current.

https://clerkpreview.house.gov/Members#MemberProfiles
STATE / DISTRICT                         DISTRICT—PARTY AFFILIATION               CONTACT INFORMATION


Alabama

  F. Barry Moore                           01—Republican                            https://barrymoore.house.gov


  Shomari Figures                          02—Republican                            https://figures.house.gov


  Michael D. Rogers                        03—Republican                            https://mikerogers.house.gov


  Robert B. Aderholt                       04—Republican                            https://aderholt.house.gov


  Dale W. Strong                           05—Republican                            https://strong.house.gov
 Gary J. Palmer            06—Republican          https://palmer.house.gov


 Terrycina A. Sewell       07—Democrat            https://sewell.house.gov

Alaska

 Nick Begich               At Large—Republican    https://begich.house.gov

American Samoa

 Amata Coleman Radewagen   Delegate—Republican    https://radewagen.house.gov

Arizona

 David Schweikert          01—Republican          https://schweikert.house.gov/


 Elijah Crane              02—Republican          https://crane.house.gov


 Yassamin Ansari           03—Democrat            https://ansari.house.gov


 Gregory J. Stanton        04—Democrat            https://stanton.house.gov


 Andrew S. Biggs           05—Republican          https://biggs.house.gov


 Juan Ciscomani            06—Republican          https://ciscomani.house.gov/


 Raúl M. Grijalva          07—Democrat            https://grijalva.house.gov


 Abe Hamadeh               08—Republican          https://lesko.house.gov


 Paul A. Gosar             09—Republican          http://gosar.house.gov

Arkansas

 Eric A. Crawford          01—Republican          https://crawford.house.gov


 J. French Hill            02—Republican          https://hill.house.gov


 Stephen A. Womack         03—Republican          https://womack.house.gov


 Bruce E. Westerman        04—Republican          https://westerman.house.gov

California

 Douglas L. LaMalfa        01—Republican         https://lamalfa.house.gov


 Jared W. Huffman          02—Democrat           https://huffman.house.gov


 Kevin Kiley               03—Republican         https://kiley.house.gov


 Michael C. Thompson       04—Democrat           https://mikethompson.house.gov


 Thomas M. McClintock      05—Republican         https://mcclintock.house.gov
Amerish B. Bera        06-Democrat     https://bera.house.gov


Doris O. Matsui        07—Democrat     https://matsui.house.gov


John Garamendi         08—Democrat     https://garamendi.house.gov


Joshua K. Harder       09—Democrat     https://harder.house.gov


Mark J. DeSaulnier     10—Democrat     https://desaulnier.house.gov


Nancy P. Pelosi        11—Democrat     https://pelosi.house.gov


Lateefah Simon         12—Democrat     https://simon.house.gov


Adam Gray              13—Republican   https://gray.house.gov


Eric M. Swalwell       14—Democrat     https://swalwell.house.gov


Kevin Mullin           15—Democrat     https://mullin.house.gov


Sam Liccardo           16—Democrat     https://liccardo.house.gov


Ro Khanna              17—Democrat     https://khanna.house.gov


Zoe Lofgren            18—Democrat     https://lofgren.house.gov


James V. Panetta       19—Democrat     https://panetta.house.gov


Vince Fong             20—Republican   https://fong.house.gov


Jim Costa              21—Democrat     https://costa.house.gov


David Valadao          22—Republican   https://valadao.house.gov


Jay Obernolte          23—Republican   https://obernolte.house.gov


Salud Carbajal         24—Democrat     https://carbajal.house.gov


Raul Ruiz              25—Democrat     https://ruiz.house.gov


Julia Brownley         26—Democrat     https://brownley.house.gov


George T. Whitesides   27—Democrat     https://whitesides.house.gov


Judy Chu               28—Democrat     https://chu.house.gov


Luz Rivas              29—Democrat     https://rivas.house.gov


Laura Friedman         30—Democrat     https://friedman.house.gov
 Gilbert Ray Cisneros Jr.   31—Democrat     https://cisneros.house.gov


 Brad Sherman               32—Democrat     https://sherman.house.gov


 Pete Aguilar               33—Democrat     https://aguilar.house.gov


 Jimmy Gomez                34—Democrat     https://gomez.house.gov


 Norma Torres               35—Democrat     https://torres.house.gov


 Ted Lieu                   36—Democrat     https://lieu.house.gov


                                            https://kamlager-
 Sydney Kamlager-Dove       37—Democrat
                                            dove.house.gov/


 Linda T. Sanchez           38—Democrat     https://sanchez.house.gov


 Mark A. Takano             39—Democrat     https://takano.house.gov


 Young Kim                  40—Republican   https://youngkim.house.gov


 Kenneth S. Calvert         41—Republican   https://calvert.house.gov


 Robert Garcia              42—Democrat     https://robertgarcia.house.gov


 Maxine M. Waters           43—Democrat     https://waters.house.gov


 Nanette Barragan           44—Democrat     https://barragan.house.gov


 Derek Tran                 45—Democrat     https://tran.house.gov


 Lou Correa                 46—Democrat     https://correa.house.gov


 Dave Min                   47—Democrat     https://min.house.gov


 Darrell Issa               48—Republican   https://issa.house.gov


 Michael T. Levin           49—Democrat     https://mikelevin.house.gov


 Scott H. Peters            50—Democrat     https://scottpeters.house.gov


 Sara Jacobs                51—Democrat     https://sarajacobs.house.gov


 Juan Carlos Vargas         52—Democrat     https://vargas.house.gov

Colorado

 Diana L. DeGette           01—Democrat      https://degette.house.gov


 Joseph D. Neguse           02—Democrat      https://neguse.house.gov
 Jeff Hurd                 03—Republican           https://hurd.house.gov


 Lauren Boebert            04—Republican           https://boebert.house.gov


 Jeff Crank                05—Republican           https://crank.house.gov


 Jason A. Crow             06—Democrat             https://crow.house.gov


 Brittany Pettersen        07—Democrat             https://pettersen.house.gov


 Gabe Evans                08—Republican           https://evans.house.gov/

Connecticut

 John B. Larson            01—Democrat             https://larson.house.gov


 Joseph D. Courtney        02—Democrat             https://courtney.house.gov


 Rosa L. DeLauro           03—Democrat             https://delauro.house.gov


 James A. Himes            04—Democrat             https://himes.house.gov


 Jahana F. Hayes           05—Democrat             https://hayes.house.gov

Delaware

 Sarah McBride             At Large—Democrat       https://mcbride.house.gov

District of Columbia

 Eleanor Holmes Norton     Delegate—Democrat       https://norton.house.gov

Florida

 Matthew L. Gaetz II     01—Republican         https://gaetz.house.gov


 Neal P. Dunn            02—Republican         https://dunn.house.gov


 Kathryn Cammack         03—Republican         https://cammack.house.gov


 Aaron Bean              04—Republican         https://bean.house.gov


 John H. Rutherford      05—Republican         https://rutherford.house.gov


 Michael G. Waltz        06—Republican         https://waltz.house.gov


 Cory Mills              07—Republican         https://mills.house.gov


 Mike Haridopolos        08—Republican         https://haridopolos.house.gov


 Darren M. Soto          09—Democrat           https://soto.house.gov


 Maxwell Frost           10—Democrat           https://frost.house.gov
 Daniel A. Webster            11—Republican    https://webster.house.gov


 Gus M. Bilirakis             12—Republican    https://bilirakis.house.gov


 Anna Paulina Luna            13—Republican    https://luna.house.gov


 Katherine A. Castor          14—Democrat      https://castor.house.gov


 Laurel Lee                   15—Republican    https://laurellee.house.gov


 Vernon G. Buchanan           16—Republican    https://buchanan.house.gov


 W. Gregory Steube            17—Republican    https://steube.house.gov


 C. Scott Franklin            18—Republican    https://franklin.house.gov


 Byron Donalds                19—Republican    https://donalds.house.gov


                                               https://cherfilus-
 Sheila Cherfilus-McCormick   20—Democrat
                                               mccormick.house.gov


 Brian J. Mast                21—Republican    https://mast.house.gov


 Lois J. Frankel              22—Democrat      https://frankel.house.gov


 Jared Moskowitz              23—Democrat      https://moskowitz.house.gov


 Frederica S. Wilson          24—Democrat      https://wilson.house.gov


 Deborah Wasserman Schultz    25—Democrat      https://wassermanschultz.house.gov


 Mario R. Diaz-Balart         26—Republican    https://mariodiazbalart.house.gov


 Maria E. Salazar             27—Republican    https://salazar.house.gov


 Carlos A. Gimenez            28-Republican    https://gimenez.house.gov

Georgia

 Earl L. Carter                01—Republican      https://buddycarter.house.gov


 Sanford D. Bishop, Jr.        02—Democrat        http://bishop.house.gov


 Brian Jack                    03—Republican      https://jack.house.gov


 Henry C. Johnson, Jr.         04—Democrat        https://hankjohnson.house.gov


 Nikema Williams               05—Democrat        https://nikemawilliams.house.gov


 Lucia "Lucy" K. McBath        06—Democrat        https://mcbath.house.gov
  Rich McCormick           07—Republican         https://mccormick.house.gov


  J. Austin Scott          08—Republican         https://austinscott.house.gov


  Andrew S. Clyde          09—Republican         https://clyde.house.gov


  Mike Collins, Jr.        10—Republican         https://collins.house.gov


  Barry D. Loudermilk      11—Republican         https://loudermilk.house.gov


  Richard W. Allen         12—Republican         https://allen.house.gov


  David A. Scott           13—Democrat           https://davidscott.house.gov


  Marjorie T. Greene       14—Republican         https://greene.house.gov

Guam

  James Moylan             Delegate—Republican    https://moylan.house.gov

Hawaii

  Edward E. Case           01—Democrat            https://case.house.gov


  Jill Tokuda              02—Democrat            https://tokuda.house.gov

Idaho

  Russell M. Fulcher       01—Republican          https://fulcher.house.gov


  Michael K. Simpson       02—Republican          http://simpson.house.gov

Illinois

  Jonathan Jackson         01—Democrat           http://jonathanjackson.house.gov


  Robin L. Kelly           02—Democrat           https://robinkelly.house.gov


  Delia Ramirez            03—Democrat           https://ramirez.house.gov/


  Jesús G. García          04—Democrat           https://chuygarcia.house.gov


  Michael B. Quigley       05—Democrat           https://quigley.house.gov


  Sean T. Casten           06—Democrat           https://casten.house.gov


  Danny K. Davis           07—Democrat           https://davis.house.gov


  S. Raja Krishnamoorthi   08—Democrat           https://krishnamoorthi.house.gov


  Janice D. Schakowsky     09—Democrat           https://schakowsky.house.gov


  Bradley S. Schneider     10—Democrat           https://schneider.house.gov
 William G. Foster             11—Democrat     http://foster.house.gov


 Michael J. Bost               12—Republican   https://bost.house.gov


 Nikki Budzinski               13—Democrat     http://budzinski.house.gov


 Lauren Underwood              14—Democrat     https://underwood.house.gov


 Mary E. Miller                15—Republican   https://marymiller.house.gov


 Darin M. LaHood               16—Republican   http://lahood.house.gov


 Eric Sorensen                 17—Democrat     https://sorensen.house.gov

Indiana

 Frank J. Mrvan                01—Democrat      https://mrvan.house.gov


 Rudy Yakym, III               02—Republican    http://yakym.house.gov


 Marlin A. Stutzman            03—Republican    https://stutzman.house.gov


 James R. Baird                04—Republican    https://baird.house.gov


 Victoria Spartz               05—Republican    https://spartz.house.gov


 Jefferson Shreve              06—Republican    https://shreve.house.gov


 André D. Carson               07—Democrat      http://carson.house.gov


 Mark Messmer                  08—Republican    https://messmer.house.gov


 Erin Houchin                  09—Republican    https://houchin.house.gov

Iowa

 Mariannette J. Miller-Meeks   01—Republican    https://millermeeks.house.gov


 Ashley E. Hinson              02—Republican    https://hinson.house.gov


 Zachary Nunn                  03—Republican    https://nunn.house.gov


 Randall L. Feenstra           04—Republican    https://feenstra.house.gov

Kansas

 Tracey R. Mann                01—Republican    https://mann.house.gov


 Derek Schmidt                 02—Republican    https://schmidt.house.gov


 Sharice L. Davids             03—Democrat      https://davids.house.gov


 Ronald G. Estes               04—Republican    https://estes.house.gov
Kentucky

 James R. Comer               01—Republican    https://comer.house.gov


 S. Brett Guthrie             02—Republican    https://guthrie.house.gov


 Morgan McGarvey              03—Democrat      https://mcgarvey.house.gov


 Thomas H. Massie             04—Republican    https://massie.house.gov


 Harold D. Rogers             05—Republican    https://halrogers.house.gov


 Garland H. Barr IV           06—Republican    https://barr.house.gov

Louisiana

 Stephen J. Scalise           01—Republican    http://scalise.house.gov


 Troy Carter                  02—Democrat      https://troycarter.house.gov/


 G. Clay Higgins              03—Republican    https://clayhiggins.house.gov


 J. Michael Johnson           04—Republican    https://mikejohnson.house.gov


 Julia Letlow                 05—Republican    https://letlow.house.gov/


 Cleo Fields                  06—Democrat      https://fields.house.gov

Maine

 Chellie M. Pingree           01—Democrat      https://pingree.house.gov


 Jared F. Golden              02—Democrat      https://golden.house.gov

Maryland

 Andrew P. Harris             01—Republican   http://harris.house.gov


 Johnny Olszewski             02—Democrat     http://olszewski.house.gov


 Sarah Kelly Elfreth          03—Democrat     https://elfreth.house.gov


 Glenn Ivey                   04—Democrat     https://ivey.house.gov


 Steny H. Hoyer               05—Democrat     https://hoyer.house.gov


 April Lynn McClain-Delaney   06—Democrat     https://mclaindelaney.house.gov


 Kweisi Mfume                 07—Democrat     https://mfume.house.gov


 Jamin B. Raskin              08—Democrat     https://raskin.house.gov

Massachusetts
 Richard E. Neal          01—Democrat     https://neal.house.gov


 James P. McGovern        02—Democrat     http://mcgovern.house.gov


 Lori L. Trahan           03—Democrat     https://trahan.house.gov


 Jacob D. Auchincloss     04—Democrat     https://auchincloss.house.gov


 Katherine M. Clark       05—Democrat     https://katherineclark.house.gov


 Seth W. Moulton          06—Democrat     http://moulton.house.gov


 Ayanna S. Pressley       07—Democrat     https://pressley.house.gov


 Stephen F. Lynch         08—Democrat     http://lynch.house.gov


 William R. Keating       09—Democrat     https://keating.house.gov

Michigan

 John W. Bergman          01—Republican   https://bergman.house.gov


 John R. Moolenaar        02—Republican   https://moolenaar.house.gov


 Hillary Scholten         03—Democrat     https://scholten.house.gov


 William P. Huizenga      04—Republican   https://huizenga.house.gov


 Timothy L. Walberg       05—Republican   http://walberg.house.gov


 Debbie Dingell           06—Democrat     http://debbiedingell.house.gov


 Tom Barrett              07—Republican   http://barrett.house.gov


 Kristen McDonald Rivet   08—Democrat     https://rivet.house.gov


 Lisa C. McClain          09—Republican   https://mcclain.house.gov


 John James               10—Republican   https://james.house.gov


 Haley M. Stevens         11—Democrat     https://stevens.house.gov


 Rashida H. Tlaib         12—Democrat     https://tlaib.house.gov


 Shri Thanedar            13—Democrat     https://thanedar.house.gov

Minnesota

 Brad Finstad             01—Republican   https://finstad.house.gov


 Angela D. Craig          02—Democrat     https://craig.house.gov
 Kelly Morrison           03—Democrat        https://morrison.house.gov


 Betty L. McCollum        04—Democrat        http://mccollum.house.gov


 Ilhan A. Omar            05—Democrat        https://omar.house.gov


 Thomas E. Emmer, Jr.     06—Republican      https://emmer.house.gov


 Michelle L. Fischbach    07—Republican      https://fischbach.house.gov


 Peter A. Stauber         08—Republican      https://stauber.house.gov

Mississippi

 J. Trent Kelly          01—Republican    https://trentkelly.house.gov


 Bennie G. Thompson      02—Democrat      https://benniethompson.house.gov


 Michael P. Guest        03—Republican    https://guest.house.gov


 Mike Ezell              04—Republican    http://ezell.house.gov

Missouri

 Wesley Bell              01—Democrat        https://bell.house.gov


 Ann L. Wagner            02—Republican      http://wagner.house.gov


 Bob Onder, Jr.           03—Republican      http://onder.house.gov


 Mark Alford              04—Republican      https://alford.house.gov


 Emanuel Cleaver II       05—Democrat        http://cleaver.house.gov


 Samuel B. Graves, Jr.    06—Republican      https://graves.house.gov


 Eric Burlison            07—Republican      https://burlison.house.gov


 Jason T. Smith           08—Republican      https://jasonsmith.house.gov

Montana

 Ryan Zinke               1—Republican       https://zinke.house.gov


 Troy Downing             2—Republican       https://downing.house.gov

Nebraska

 Mike Flood               01—Republican      https://flood.house.gov


 Donald J. Bacon          02—Republican      https://bacon.house.gov


 Adrian M. Smith          03—Republican      http://adriansmith.house.gov
Nevada

 A. Costandina Titus          01—Democrat       https://titus.house.gov


 Mark E. Amodei               02—Republican     https://amodei.house.gov


 Suzanne K. Lee               03—Democrat       https://susielee.house.gov


 Steven A. Horsford           04—Democrat       https://horsford.house.gov

New Hampshire

 Christopher C. Pappas        01—Democrat       https://pappas.house.gov


 Maggie Goodlander            02—Democrat       http://goodlander.house.gov

New Jersey

 Donald W. Norcross          01—Democrat      https://norcross.house.gov


 Jefferson H. Van Drew       02—Republican    https://vandrew.house.gov


 Herb Conaway                03—Democrat      https://conaway.house.gov


 Christopher H. Smith        04—Republican    http://chrissmith.house.gov


 Joshua S. Gottheimer        05—Democrat      https://gottheimer.house.gov


 Frank J. Pallone, Jr.       06—Democrat      https://pallone.house.gov


 Thomas Kean, Jr.            07—Republican    https://kean.house.gov


 Robert Menendez             08—Democrat      https://menendez.house.gov


 Nellie Pou                  09—Democrat      http://pou.house.gov


 LaMonica McIver             10—Democrat      http://mciver.house.gov


 R. Michelle Sherrill        11—Democrat      https://sherrill.house.gov


 Bonnie Watson Coleman       12—Democrat      https://watsoncoleman.house.gov

New Mexico

 Melanie Stansbury            01—Democrat       https://stansbury.house.gov


 Gabe Vasquez                 02—Democrat       https://vasquez.house.gov


 Teresa I. Leger Fernandez    03—Democrat       https://fernandez.house.gov

New York

 Nick LaLota                  01—Republican     https://lalota.house.gov
Andrew R. Garbarino        02—Republican   https://garbarino.house.gov


Tom Suozzi                 03—Democrat     https://suozzi.house.gov


Laura Gillen               04—Democrat     http://gillen.house.gov


Gregory W. Meeks           05—Democrat     http://meeks.house.gov


Grace Meng                 06—Democrat     http://meng.house.gov


Nydia M. Velázquez         07—Democrat     https://velazquez.house.gov


Hakeem S. Jeffries         08—Democrat     http://jeffries.house.gov


Yvette D. Clarke           09—Democrat     https://clarke.house.gov


Daniel Goldman             10—Democrat     http://goldman.house.gov


Nicole Malliotakis         11—Republican   https://malliotakis.house.gov


Jerrold L. Nadler          12—Democrat     http://nadler.house.gov


Adriano D. Espaillat       13—Democrat     https://espaillat.house.gov


                                           https://ocasio-
Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez   14—Democrat
                                           cortez.house.gov


Ritchie J. Torres          15—Democrat     https://ritchietorres.house.gov


George Latimer             16—Democrat     https://latimer.house.gov


Michael Lawler             17—Republican   https://lawler.house.gov


Patrick Ryan               18—Democrat     http://patryan.house.gov


Josh Riley                 19—Democrat     https://riley.house.gov


Paul D. Tonko              20—Democrat     https://tonko.house.gov


Elise M. Stefanik          21—Republican   https://stefanik.house.gov


John Mannion               22—Democrat     https://mannion.house.gov


Nicholas Langworthy        23—Republican   https://langworthy.house.gov


Claudia Tenney             24—Republican   https://tenney.house.gov


Joseph D. Morelle          25—Democrat     https://morelle.house.gov


Tim Kennedy                26—Democrat     http://kennedy.house.gov
North Carolina

 Donald Davis              01—Democrat           http://dondavis.house.gov


 Deborah K. Ross           02—Democrat           https://ross.house.gov


 Gregory F. Murphy         03—Republican         https://gregmurphy.house.gov


 Valerie Foushee           04—Democrat           https://foushee.house.gov


 Virginia A. Foxx          05—Republican         http://foxx.house.gov


 Addison McDowell          06—Republican         https://mcdowell.house.gov


 David C. Rouzer           07—Republican         https://rouzer.house.gov


 Mark Harris               08—Republican         https://harris.house.gov


 Richard L. Hudson, Jr.    09—Republican         https://hudson.house.gov


 Pat Harrigan              10—Republican         http://harrigan.house.gov


 Chuck Edwards             11—Republican         https://edwards.house.gov


 Alma S. Adams             12—Democrat           http://adams.house.gov


 Brad Knott                13—Republican         https://knott.house.gov


 Tim Moore                 14—Republican         http://moore.house.gov

North Dakota

 Kelly Armstrong           At Large—Republican   https://armstrong.house.gov

Northern Mariana Islands

 Kimberlyn King-Hinds      Delegate—Republican   http://kinghinds.house.gov

Ohio

 Greg Landsman             01—Democrat           http://landsman.house.gov


 David Taylor              02—Republican         http://taylor.house.gov


 Joyce B. Beatty           03—Democrat           http://beatty.house.gov


 James D. Jordan           04—Republican         http://jordan.house.gov


 Robert E. Latta           05—Republican         http://latta.house.gov


 Michael Rulli             06—Republican         http://rulli.house.gov


 Max Miller                07—Republican         https://maxmiller.house.gov
 Warren E. Davidson     08—Republican   https://davidson.house.gov


 Marcia C. Kaptur       09—Democrat     https://kaptur.house.gov


 Michael R. Turner      10—Republican   https://turner.house.gov


 Shontel Brown          11—Democrat     https://shontelbrown.house.gov


 W. Troy Balderson      12—Republican   https://balderson.house.gov


 Emilia Sykes           13—Democrat     https://sykes.house.gov


 David P. Joyce         14—Republican   https://joyce.house.gov


 Mike Carey             15—Republican   https://carey.house.gov

Oklahoma

 Kevin R. Hern          01—Republican   https://hern.house.gov


 Josh Brecheen          02—Republican   https://brecheen.house.gov


 Frank D. Lucas         03—Republican   https://lucas.house.gov


 Thomas J. Cole         04—Republican   https://cole.house.gov


 Stephanie I. Bice      05—Republican   https://bice.house.gov

Oregon

 Suzanne M. Bonamici    01—Democrat     https://bonamici.house.gov


 Cliff S. Bentz         02—Republican   https://bentz.house.gov


 Maxine Dexter          03—Democrat     https://dexter.house.gov


 Val Hoyle              04—Democrat     https://hoyle.house.gov


 Janelle Bynum          05—Democrat     https://bynum.house.gov


 Andrea Salinas         06-Democrat     https://salinas.house.gov

Pennsylvania

 Brian K. Fitzpatrick   01—Republican   https://fitzpatrick.house.gov


 Brendan F. Boyle       02—Democrat     https://boyle.house.gov


 Dwight E. Evans        03—Democrat     https://evans.house.gov


 Madeleine C. Dean      04—Democrat     https://dean.house.gov
 Mary Gay Scanlon                   05—Democrat                        https://scanlon.house.gov


 Christina J. Houlahan              06—Democrat                        https://houlahan.house.gov


 Ryan Mackenzie                     07—Republican                      https://mackenzie.house.gov


 Rob Bresnahan                      08—Republican                      https://bresnahan.house.gov


 Daniel P. Meuser                   09—Republican                      https://meuser.house.gov


 Scott G. Perry                     10—Republican                      https://perry.house.gov


 Lloyd K. Smucker                   11—Republican                      https://smucker.house.gov


 Summer Lee                         12—Democrat                        https://summerlee.house.gov


 John P. Joyce                      13—Republican                      https://johnjoyce.house.gov


 Guy L. Reschenthaler               14—Republican                      https://reschenthaler.house.gov


 Glenn W. Thompson                  15—Republican                      https://thompson.house.gov


 George Joseph "Mike" Kelly, Jr.    16—Republican                      https://kelly.house.gov


 Christopher Deluzio                17—Democrat                        https://deluzio.house.gov

Puerto Rico

 Pablo Jose Hernandez Rivera        Resident Commissioner—Republican https://rivera.house.gov

Rhode Island

 Gabe Amo                           01—Democrat                        http://amo.house.gov


 Seth Magaziner                     02—Democrat                        http://magaziner.house.gov

South Carolina

 Nancy R. Mace                      01—Republican                      https://mace.house.gov


 Addison Graves "Joe" Wilson, Sr.   02—Republican                      http://joewilson.house.gov


 Sheri Biggs                        03—Republican                      http://biggs.house.gov


 William R. Timmons, IV             04—Republican                      https://timmons.house.gov


 Ralph W. Norman, Jr.               05—Republican                      https://norman.house.gov


 James E. Clyburn                   06—Democrat                        http://clyburn.house.gov


 Russell Fry                        07—Republican                      http://fry.house.gov

South Dakota
 Dustin M. Johnson        At Large—Republican   https://dustyjohnson.house.gov

Tennessee

 Diana L. Harshbarger     01—Republican         https://harshbarger.house.gov


 Timothy F. Burchett      02—Republican         https://burchett.house.gov


 Charles J. Fleischmann   03—Republican         http://fleischmann.house.gov


 Scott E. DesJarlais      04—Republican         https://desjarlais.house.gov


 Andrew Ogles             05—Republican         http://ogles.house.gov


 John W. Rose             06—Republican         https://johnrose.house.gov


 Mark E. Green            07—Republican         https://markgreen.house.gov


 David F. Kustoff         08—Republican         https://kustoff.house.gov


 Stephen I. Cohen         09—Democrat           https://cohen.house.gov

Texas

 Nathaniel Moran          01—Republican         https://moran.house.gov


 Daniel R. Crenshaw       02—Republican         https://crenshaw.house.gov


 Keith Alan Self          03—Republican         https://self.house.gov


 Patrick E. Fallon        04—Republican         https://fallon.house.gov


 Lance Gooden             05—Republican         https://gooden.house.gov


 Jake Ellzey              06—Republican         https://ellzey.house.gov


 Elizabeth P. Fletcher    07—Democrat           https://fletcher.house.gov


 Morgan Luttrell          08—Republican         http://luttrell.house.gov


 Alexander N. Green       09—Democrat           http://algreen.house.gov


 Michael T. McCaul        10—Republican         http://mccaul.house.gov


 August L. Pfluger        11—Republican         https://pfluger.house.gov


 Craig Goldman            12—Republican         http://goldman.house.gov


 Ronny L. Jackson         13—Republican         https://jackson.house.gov


 Randy K. Weber, Sr.      14—Republican         http://weber.house.gov
 Monica De La Cruz        15—Republican   https://delacruz.house.gov


 Veronica Escobar         16—Democrat     https://escobar.house.gov


 Peter A. Sessions        17—Republican   https://sessions.house.gov


 Sylvester Turner         18—Democrat     http://turner.house.gov


 Jodey Cook Arrington     19—Republican   https://arrington.house.gov


 Joaquin Castro           20—Democrat     https://castro.house.gov


 Charles E. Roy           21—Republican   https://roy.house.gov


 Troy E. Nehls            22—Republican   https://nehls.house.gov


 E. Anthony Gonzalez      23—Republican   https://gonzales.house.gov


 Elizabeth A. Van Duyne   24—Republican   https://vanduyne.house.gov


 J. Roger Williams        25—Republican   http://williams.house.gov


 Brandon Gill             26—Republican   http://gill.house.gov


 Michael J. Cloud         27—Republican   https://cloud.house.gov


 Enrique R. Cuellar       28—Democrat     http://cuellar.house.gov


 Sylvia R. Garcia         29—Democrat     https://sylviagarcia.house.gov


 Jasmine Crockett         30—Democrat     http://crockett.house.gov


 John R. Carter           31—Republican   https://carter.house.gov


 Julie Johnson            32—Democrat     https://johnson.house.gov


 Marc A. Veasey           33—Democrat     http://veasey.house.gov


 Vincente Gonzalez        34—Democrat     https://gonzalez.house.gov


 Greg Casar               35—Democrat     https://casar.house.gov


 Brian Babin              36—Republican   http://babin.house.gov


 Lloyd A. Doggett, II     37—Democrat     https://doggett.house.gov


 Wesley Hunt              38—Republican   https://hunt.house.gov

Utah

 Blake D. Moore           01—Republican   https://blakemoore.house.gov
 Celeste Maloy            02—Republican            http://maloy.house.gov


 Mike Kennedy             03—Republican            https://kennedy.house.gov


 C. Burgess Owens         04—Republican            https://owens.house.gov

Vermont

 Becca Balint             At Large—Democrat        https://balint.house.gov

Virgin Islands

 Stacey E. Plaskett       Delegate—Democrat        https://plaskett.house.gov

Virginia

 Robert J. Wittman       01—Republican            http://wittman.house.gov


 Jennifer Kiggans        02—Republican            https://kiggans.house.gov


 Robert C. Scott         03—Democrat              http://bobbyscott.house.gov


 Jennifer McClellan      04—Democrat              https://mcclellan.house.gov


 John McGuire            05—Republican            https://mcguire.house.gov


 Benjamin L. Cline       06—Republican            https://cline.house.gov


 Eugene Vindman          07—Democrat              https://vindman.house.gov


 Donald S. Beyer, Jr.    08—Democrat              http://beyer.house.gov


 H. Morgan Griffith      09—Republican            http://morgangriffith.house.gov


 Suhas Subramanyam       10—Democrat              https://subramanyam.house.gov


 Gerald E. Connolly      11—Democrat              https://connolly.house.gov

Washington

 Suzan K. DelBene       01—Democrat           https://delbene.house.gov


 Richard R. Larsen      02—Democrat           http://larsen.house.gov


 Marie Perez            03—Democrat           http://gluesenkampperez.house.gov/


 Daniel M. Newhouse     04—Republican         https://newhouse.house.gov


 Michael Baumgartner    05—Republican         http://baumgartner.house.gov


 Emily Randall          06—Democrat           https://randall.house.gov


 Pramila Jayapal        07—Democrat           https://jayapal.house.gov
 Kimberly M. Schrier                08—Democrat                    https://schrier.house.gov


 D. Adam Smith                      09—Democrat                    https://adamsmith.house.gov


 Marilyn Strickland                 10—Democrat                    https://strickland.house.gov

West Virginia

 Carol D. Miller                        01—Republican                   https://miller.house.gov


 Riley Moore                            02—Republican                   https://moore.house.gov

Wisconsin

 Bryan G. Steil                         01—Republican                   https://steil.house.gov


 Mark Pocan                             02—Democrat                     http://pocan.house.gov


 Van Orden, Derrick                     03—Republican                   https://vanorden.house.gov


 Gwendolynne S. Moore                   04—Democrat                     https://gwenmoore.house.gov


 Scott L. Fitzgerald                    05—Republican                   https://fitzgerald.house.gov


 Glenn S. Grothman                      06—Republican                   http://grothman.house.gov


 Thomas P. Tiffany                      07—Republican                   https://tiffany.house.gov


 Tony Wied                              08—Republican                   https://wied.house.gov

Wyoming

 Harriet Hageman                        At Large—Republican             https://hageman.house.gov


 Information on House.gov may be more accurate and current.



 THE ABOVE LIST OF 435 REPRESENTATIVES WAS
 UPDATED 3–2021.


 Democrats are 219; Republicans are 211; and 5
 districts do not have a Representative.


 The Resident Commissioner and Delegates are not
 counted as Members.

https://www.house.gov/representatives

 Information on the Office of the Clerk's website may be more accurate and current.



https://clerkpreview.house.gov/Members#MemberProfiles
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Additional Resources
The "House of Representatives Resources" web page contains links that allow easy access to calendars,

committee assignments, current House floor activities, directories, documents, profiles, statistics, texts of bills, the

Office of the Clerk and the House Library, and information on committee meetings, House history, precedents,

procedures, rules, salaries, Speakers of the House, vacancies, and information for those who are planning a visit

to the U.S. Capitol.

https://www.congress.gov/help/house-of-representatives

Art Competition
Each spring, the Congressional Institute sponsors a nationwide high school visual art competition to recognize

and encourage artistic talent. Students submit their entries to their Representative’s office, and panels of district

artists select the winning artwork, which is displayed at the U.S. Capitol for 1 year.

http://www.house.gov/content/educate/art_competition

Campaign Finance
The Federal Election Commission maintains a campaign finance database that contains information on

candidates, including congressional candidates, who file reports with the Commission. Users of the online

"Candidate and Committee Viewer" can sort data and download them. The data presentations consist of

biennial summaries, report summaries, and report images and downloads.

http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/candcmte_info.shtml?tabIndex=1

Campaign Websites
The Library of Congress maintains a "Web Archives" that includes thousands of official campaign websites.

Former congressional candidates' websites are part of this collection.

https://www.loc.gov/websites

Career Opportunities
The House Vacancy Announcement and Placement Service assists House Members, committees, and leadership

by posting job vacancies and maintaining a resume bank. The Service provides confidential referral of resumes

when House offices request them. Information on submitting a resume is available online.

http://www.house.gov/content/jobs/members_and_committees.php
To apply for positions with House organizations, read the individual vacancy announcements and follow the

instructions.

http://www.house.gov/content/jobs/vacancies.php

Committees
Information on House committees is available on House.gov.

http://www.house.gov/committees
Additional information is available on the Office of the Clerk's website.

http://clerk.house.gov/committee_info/index.aspx

Congressional Record
Starting with the year 1995, the official record of the proceedings and debates of the U.S. Congress is available

on Congress.gov.

https://www.congress.gov/congressional-record
Starting with the year 1994, the official record of the proceedings and debates of the U.S. Congress is available

on the Government Publishing Office's govinfo website.

https://www.govinfo.gov/app/collection/crec

Contact the Clerk
Additional information on the House of Representatives is available from the Clerk, U.S. Capitol, Room H-154,

Washington, DC 20515-6601. Phone, 202-225-7000.

https://clerkpreview.house.gov/About#OverviewContact | Email: info.clerkweb@mail.house.gov

Directories
The website House.gov has a directory that contains the committee assignment, congressional district, name,

phone number, political affiliation, and room number of each Member of the U.S. House of Representatives, as

well as the Uniform Resources Locator (URL) that leads to his or her website.

http://www.house.gov/representatives
The online "Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, 1774–Present," allows visitors to search for

Members of Congress—past and present—by first or last name, political affiliation, position, State, or year or

Congress.

http://bioguide.congress.gov/biosearch/biosearch.asp
Present and former Members of Congress have control numbers associated with their records in the

"Biographical Directory of the United States Congress." Member IDs or "BioGuide IDs" serve as metadata within

Congress.gov and legislative documents that the Government Publishing Office publishes.

https://www.congress.gov/help/field-values/member-bioguide-ids

Find a Representative
A Zip code-based search tool is available on House.gov for locating a representative.

http://www.house.gov/representatives/find

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Office of the Clerk has posted answers to general legislative questions and to more specific questions

related to members and committees.

https://clerkpreview.house.gov/Help#MemberFAQs

Glossaries
The Office of the Clerk's website has a short glossary for children.
https://kids-clerk.house.gov/high-school/glossary.html
House.gov has a glossary of terms for readers of congressional records.

http://history.house.gov/Records-and-Research/FAQs/Congressional-Glossary/
House.gov features a glossary of records management terms.

http://history.house.gov/Records-and-Research/FAQs/Records-Glossary/
The "Statement of Disbursements" is a quarterly public report of all receipts and expenditures for U.S. House of

Representatives committees, leadership, Members, and officers and offices. To help the general public read this

report, House.gov maintains an online glossary.

https://www.house.gov/the-house-explained/open-government/statement-of-disbursements/glossary-of-terms

History
The House of Representative's "History, Art and Archives" website features resources and a trove of information,

including online collections, exhibitions, publications, and records.

http://history.house.gov | Email: history@mail.house.gov
In 2015, the "History, Art & Archives" team presented 10 favorite historical highlights and blog posts. Its selection

had an eclectic character and includes highlights on a lavaliere of diamonds, the protective power of a thrice-

folded newspaper, the House gym, an amendment to abolish the U.S. Senate, national weather forecasts,

possums, dueling in the House, hunting dogs on the floor, a titanic story of love and courage, and a very

kissable man.

https://history.house.gov/Blog/2015/May/5-20-Top-Ten/

Learning About the House
The Office of the Clerk's website features educational and entertaining information on the legislative branch of

the Government for students of all ages. Its "Kids in the House" site explains the role of the House of

Representatives, describes the legislative process, and covers House history.

https://kids-clerk.house.gov
Adults seeking to learn about commissions, committees, House history, House leadership, Representatives, rules,

or a Representative's schedule may benefit from "The House Explained" section on House.gov.

http://www.house.gov/content/learn

Member Profiles
The "Members of the U.S. Congress" database contains profiles for Representatives who have held office since

1973 or were still serving in the 93d Congress. Users of the database can filter profiles by chamber, Congress,

political affiliation, and State or U.S. Territory. A Member profile includes the following: dates of service, district

number and State, party affiliation, and a picture when available, as well as a link to the Member's entry in the

"Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, 1774–Present" and a link to remarks made in the

"Congressional Record." A profile also includes the list of legislation that the Member sponsored and

cosponsored.

https://www.congress.gov/members
The Office of the Clerk's website also maintains a database of Member profiles.
https://clerkpreview.house.gov/Members#MemberProfiles

Most-Viewed Bills
The top ten most-viewed bills list is compiled each Monday and posted on the Congress.gov website.

https://www.congress.gov/resources/display/content/Most-Viewed+Bills

Oath of Office
The constitutional oath of office requires each Member of Congress to swear or affirm that he or she will support

and defend the U.S. Constitution against foreign and domestic enemies; bear faith and allegiance to the

Constitution; take this obligation freely, with neither mental reservation nor purpose of evasion; and discharge

the duties of the office well and faithfully.

https://clerkpreview.house.gov/Members#MemberOaths

Party Seats / Vacancies
The Office of the Clerk's "House at a Glance" page keeps a tally of the number of Democratic, Independent,

Libertarian, Republican, and vacant seats in the House of Representatives.

https://clerk.house.gov/#view-at-a-glance

People Search
The "History, Art, and Archives" section on the House.gov website has a versatile tool that allows users to search

a comprehensive database containing biographical information on Members of the House of Representatives

and on nonmember officers like chaplains, clerks, parliamentarians, sergeants at arms, and others.

https://history.house.gov/People/Search

Publications
The Congressional Directory, Rules and Manual of the House of Representatives, and telephone directory for the

House of Representatives are available from the Government Publishing Office's bookstore. Phone, 202-512-

0132.

https://bookstore.gpo.gov/agency/congress-legislative-branch | Email: mainbks@gpo.gov

Schedule
The House's schedule and related resources are available in the "Legislative Activity" section on House.gov.

http://www.house.gov/legislative

Site Map
House.gov features a site map that allows visitors to look for a specific topic or to browse content that aligns

with their interests.

http://www.house.gov/content/site_tools/sitemap.php

Vacancies
The Office of the Clerk posts recent resignations, deaths, and other separations from the House of

Representatives on its "Current Vacancies" web page. Vacancies are grouped according to congressional

session, and the page includes the results of recent special elections that have been held to fill vacancies.
     http://clerk.house.gov/member_info/vacancies.aspx?pr=house&%3Bvid=130

        The above Sources of Information for the House of Representatives were updated 2–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                   Architect of the Capitol




The United States Government Manual




     ARCHITECT OF THE CAPITOL
    U.S. Capitol Building, Washington, DC 20515


    202-228-1793

    http://www.aoc.gov


      ARCHITECT OF THE CAPITOL                                                              Thomas J. Carroll III, Acting


      Deputy Architect of the Capitol                                                       (vacancy)
  DIRECTORS


  Communications and Congressional Relations              Erin Courtney, Acting


  Safety, Fire and Environmental Programs                 Patricia Williams




  General Counsel                                         Jason Baltimore


https://www.aoc.gov/organization/acting-architect



Jurisdictions Reporting to the Architect


  CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER FOR VISITOR SERVICES


  U.S. Capitol Visitor Center                             Beth Plemmons

https://www.aoc.gov/jurisdiction/capitol-visitor-center

  EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR


  U.S. Botanic Garden                                     Saharah Moon Chapotin


https://www.aoc.gov/jurisdiction/botanic-garden



OPERATIONS


  CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER                                 (vacancy)




  CHIEF OFFICERS


  Administrative                                          William R. O'Donnell


  Financial                                               Jonathan Kraft, Acting




  DIRECTOR


  Planning and Project Management                         Peter W. Mueller
Jurisdictions Reporting to the Chief Operating Officer


  DIRECTORS


  Capitol Grounds and Arboretum                                                             James Kaufmann


  Capitol Police Buildings, Grounds and Security                                            Val Hasberry, Acting


  Capitol Power Plant                                                                       Christopher Potter




  FACILITY MANAGER


  Supreme Court Building and Grounds                                                        Joseph A. Campbell




  SUPERINTENDENTS


  Capitol Building                                                                          Mark Reed


  House Office Buildings                                                                    Michelle Kayon, Acting


  Library Buildings and Grounds                                                             Antonio M. Edmonds


  Senate Office Buildings                                                                   Lawrence Barr, Acting

https://www.aoc.gov/organizational-directory



Office of Inspector General


  Inspector General                                                                         Christopher P. Failla

https://www.aoc.gov/oig/inspector-general



The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2019.

The Architect of the Capitol maintains the U.S. Capitol and the buildings and grounds of the Capitol campus.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The origins of the office of the Architect of the Capitol (AOC) may be traced to the act of July 16, 1790, that established
"the temporary and permanent seat of the Government of the United States" (1 Stat. 130).

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/1st-congress/session-2/c1s2ch28.pdf
The title Architect of the Capitol is the official title of both the agency and the person who heads it. The act of August

15, 1876, that made "appropriations for the legislative, executive, and judicial expenses of the Government . . . and for

other purposes" established permanent authority for the care and maintenance of the U.S. Capitol (19 Stat. 147).

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/44th-congress/session-1/c44s1ch287.pdf
Prior to 1989, the President selected the Architect for an unlimited term and without any formal action by Congress.

An act of November 21, 1989, that made "appropriations for the Legislative Branch . . . and for other purposes"

changed the procedure. This statute, which is also cited as the "Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1990," stipulates

that the President appoints the Architect of the Capitol for a term of 10 years, by the advice and with the consent of

the Senate, from a list of at least three candidates whom a congressional commission recommends (103 Stat. 1068).

Upon confirmation by the Senate, the Architect becomes an official of the legislative branch as an officer of Congress.

The Architect is eligible for reappointment at the end of his or her 10-year term. While overseeing the agency, the

Architect also serves as the Acting Director of the U.S. Botanic Garden.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-103/pdf/STATUTE-103-Pg1041.pdf
The Congressional Research Service prepared the report "Architect of the Capitol: Appointment, Duties, and Current

Issues," which includes a section on the statutory evolution of the Architect's office. Mildred Amer, a specialist on the

Congress, of the Government and Finance Division, prepared the report in October of 2008.

https://www.everycrsreport.com/reports/RL32820.html
An organizational directory is available online.

https://www.aoc.gov/organizational-directory



ACTIVITIES
The Architect of the Capitol serves the Congress and Supreme Court in its capacity as the builder and steward of the

landmark buildings and grounds of Capitol Hill. AOC employees preserve and maintain the art, historic buildings,

monuments, and gardens on the Capitol campus. Comprising more than 2,000 employees and providing around-the-

clock service, the AOC team creates a safe environment and inspiring experiences for those who visit or work on

Capitol Hill.


The agency oversees the operations and care of more than 17.4 million square feet of facilities, 580 acres of grounds,

and thousands of works of art. The Capitol campus accommodates 30,000 daily occupants and hosts more than 3

million visitors annually.

https://www.aoc.gov/defining-aoc



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Architecture
A trove of information on columns, materials, styles, and more is available on the "Buildings and Grounds" web page.
https://www.aoc.gov/explore-capitol-campus/buildings-grounds

Art
The AOC website includes pages on AOC art stories, artists, art by State, decorative arts, paintings and murals, and

sculptures, as well as on African Americans, Native Americans, and women in art.

https://www.aoc.gov/explore-capitol-campus/art

Blog
AOC experts write on the architecture, art, and work on the Capitol Hill.

https://www.aoc.gov/explore-capitol-campus/blog

Business Opportunities
Information for contractors and small businesses—delivery instructions, procedures, procurement opportunities, and

programs—is accessible online.

https://www.aoc.gov/about-us/work-with-us/procurement-contracting
Opportunities are available for small businesses.

https://www.aoc.gov/about-us/work-with-us/small-business-opportunities

Career Opportunities
The AOC relies heavily on architects, carpenters, electricians, engineers, gardeners, masons, mechanics, painters and

plasterers, plumbers, and sheet metal workers to maintain the U.S. Capitol and the buildings and grounds of the

surrounding campus.

https://www.aoc.gov/about-us/work-with-us

Events
The AOC website contains pages of events associated with the U.S. Capitol and Botanic Garden. Events include

Christmas tree displays, concerts, lying in state, Presidential Inaugurations, and State of the Union addresses.

https://www.aoc.gov/what-we-do/programs-ceremonies

Facts
Capitol Hill facts are posted on the AOC website.

https://www.aoc.gov/explore-capitol-campus/capitol-hill-facts

Grounds
Frederick L. Olmsted planned the late 19th-century expansion and landscaping of the Capitol Grounds. Olmsted, who

also designed Central Park in New York City, was regarded as the most talented American landscape architect of his

day. The "About the Grounds" web page features an informative 4-minute video on his plan for the U.S. Capitol.

https://www.aoc.gov/explore-capitol-campus/buildings-grounds/capitol-building/capitol-grounds

History
President George Washington appointed commissioners to provide buildings and accommodations for Congress. The

commissioners hired the French artist and engineer Major Pierre Charles L'Enfant, a Revolutionary War veteran, to lay
out the new city. They also staged a competition for the design of the Capitol. Dr. William Thornton's entry won the

competition. To learn more about the first "architect of the capitol" and the Architects that followed, visit the AOC's

history web pages.

https://www.aoc.gov/about-us/history

Map
A map of Capitol Hill is available online.

https://www.aoc.gov/map

News
The AOC posts news and notices on its website.

https://www.aoc.gov/about-us/news-notices

Oversight
The Office of the Inspector General from the AOC posts reports and data on Oversight.gov, a text-searchable

repository of reports that Federal Inspectors General publish. The Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and

Efficiency operates and maintains the website to increase public access to independent and authoritative information

on the Federal Government.

https://oversight.gov

Planning a Visit
Information on accessibility services, activities, tours, visiting hours, and where to shop and eat is available online.

https://www.visitthecapitol.gov/plan-visit

Projects
The AOC never lacks things to preserve or restore. Visit the "Projects" web page to learn about ongoing work.

https://www.aoc.gov/what-we-do/projects

Publications
The AOC publishes a variety of publications that are accessible online.

https://www.aoc.gov/what-we-do/publications

Social Media
The AOC has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/ArchitectoftheCapitol
The AOC tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/uscapitol
The AOC posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/AOCgov

Trees
Approximately 890 trees surround the Capitol Building on Capitol Square, and more than 4,300 trees grow throughout
     the 274-acre Capitol Grounds. A tree map is available on the "Trees on Capitol Grounds" web page.

     https://www.aoc.gov/explore-capitol-campus/buildings-grounds/capitol-building/capitol-grounds/trees

        The Sources of Information were updated 3–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                Congressional Budget Office




The United States Government Manual




     CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE
    Second and D Streets SW., Washington, DC 20515


    202-226-2600

    http://www.cbo.gov




    Office of the Director
 DIRECTOR                                             Phillip L. Swagel


 Deputy Director                                      Mark P. Hadley




 General Counsel                                      (vacancy)


 Senior Advisor                                       Robert A. Sunshine


 ASSOCIATE DIRECTORS


 Communications                                       Deborah Kilroe


 Economic Analysis                                    Wendy Edelberg


                                                      Jeffrey Kling


 Legislative Affairs                                  Leigh Angres




Other Divisions


 ASSISTANT DIRECTORS


 Budget Analysis                                      Theresa A. Gullo


 Financial Analysis                                   Sebastien Gay


 Health, Retirement, and Long-Term Analysis           David Weaver


 Macroeconomic Analysis                               Jeffrey F. Werling


 Assistant Director, Microeconomic Studies            Joseph Kile


 National Security                                    David E. Mosher


 Tax Analysis                                         John McClelland




 CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER


 Management, Business, and Information Services       Joseph E. Evans, Jr.

https://www.cbo.gov/about/organization-and-staffing
  The above list of key personnel was updated 7–2019.



The Congressional Budget Office independently analyzes budgetary and economic issues to support the congressional

budget process.


The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) was established by the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 U.S.C. 601), which

also created a procedure by which the Congress considers and acts on the annual Federal budget. This process

enables the Congress to have an overview of the Federal budget and to make overall decisions on spending and

taxation levels and on the deficit or surplus these levels generate.

https://www.cbo.gov/about/founding



ACTIVITIES
The CBO assists the congressional budget committees with drafting and enforcing the annual budget resolution, which

serves as a blueprint for total levels of Government spending and revenues in a fiscal year. Once completed, the

budget resolution guides the action of other congressional committees in drafting subsequent spending and revenue

legislation within their jurisdiction.


To support this process, the CBO makes budgetary and economic projections, analyzes the proposals set forth in the

President's budget request, and details alternative spending and revenue options for lawmakers to consider. The CBO

also provides cost estimates of bills approved by congressional committees and tracks the progress of spending and

revenue legislation in a scorekeeping system. CBO cost estimates and scorekeeping help the budget committees

determine whether the budgetary effects of individual proposals are consistent with the most recent spending and

revenue targets.


Upon congressional request, the CBO also produces reports analyzing specific policy and program issues that are

significant for the budget. In keeping with the Office's nonpartisan role, its analyses do not include policy

recommendations, and they routinely disclose their underlying assumptions and methods. This open and nonpartisan

stance has been instrumental in preserving the credibility of the Office's analyses.

https://www.cbo.gov/about/products/RecurringReports

Analysis of the President's Budget
The CBO estimates the budgetary impact of the proposals in the President's budget using its own economic forecast

and assumptions. The CBO's independent reestimate allows Congress to compare the administration's spending and

revenue proposals with the CBO's baseline projections and other proposals using a consistent set of economic and

technical assumptions.

https://www.cbo.gov/about/products#2

Baseline Budget Projections and Economic Forecasts
Each year, the CBO issues reports on the budget and economic outlook that cover the 10-year period used in the

congressional budget process. Those reports present and explain the CBO's baseline budget projections and

economic forecast, which are generally based on current law regarding Federal spending and revenues. The reports
also describe the differences between the current projections and previous ones, compare the CBO's economic

forecast with those of other forecasters, and show the budgetary impact of some alternative policy assumptions.

https://www.cbo.gov/about/products#1

Budgetary and Economic Policy Issues
The CBO also analyzes specific program and policy issues that affect the Federal budget and the economy. Generally,

requests for these analyses come from the chair or ranking minority member of a committee or subcommittee or from

the leadership of either party in the House or Senate.

https://www.cbo.gov/topics/reports-policy-options

Cost Estimates for Bills
The CBO provides cost estimates of every bill to show how it would affect spending or revenues over the next 5 or 10

years, depending on the type of spending involved. The CBO also provides informal estimates at the committee level

and other stages in the legislative process.

https://www.cbo.gov/publication/54437

Federal Mandates
As required by the Unfunded Mandates Reform Act of 1995, the CBO analyzes the costs that proposed legislation

would impose on State, local, and tribal governments and on the private sector. The CBO produces mandate

statements with its cost estimates for each committee-approved bill.

https://www.cbo.gov/about/products#7

Scorekeeping
The CBO provides the budget and appropriations committees with frequent tabulations of congressional action

affecting spending and revenues. Those scorekeeping reports provide information on whether legislative actions are

consistent with the spending and revenue levels set by the budget resolution.

https://www.cbo.gov/about/products#9



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Blog
The CBO maintains an active blog.

https://www.cbo.gov/blog

Business Opportunities
The CBO posts answers to questions that vendors frequently ask.

https://www.cbo.gov/about/business-opportunities | Email: procurementservices@cbo.gov

Career Opportunities
CBO employees and interns analyze public policies and their budgetary and economic effects, work with policy

analysis experts, support the Congress, and provide nonpartisan and objective analysis. To carry out these activities,
the agency relies on professionals with superior academic backgrounds and experience in defense, environmental and

resource, financial, health, and labor economics; industrial organization; macroeconomics; public finance; and public-

policy analysis.

https://www.cbo.gov/about/careers | Email: careers@cbo.gov
According to the Partnership for Public Service, the CBO is an outstanding place to work in the Federal Government.

Among 29 small agencies, it placed 3d in the 2018 Best Places To Work rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/CB00

Climate
In "Expected Costs of Damage From Hurricane Winds and Storm-Related Flooding" (April 2019), the CBO reports:

"Without limits on emissions, the rise in sea levels is predicted to accelerate in the second half of this century . . . .

Those increases, along with other changes caused by warming (such as increases in droughts and the spread of

certain invasive species), will adversely affect economic output in the future and have other negative effects that are

not captured by change in GDP (such as decreases in biodiversity)."

https://www.cbo.gov/topics/climate-and-environment/climate-change

Contact Information
The nature of the inquiry determines the best way to contact the agency. The "Contact Information" page has specific

contact information for Members of Congress and congressional staff, members of the public, representatives of the

media, job candidates, vendors and contractors, and for those wanting to leave a comment about the CBO website.

https://www.cbo.gov/about/contact

Cost Estimates
The Congress relies on CBO cost estimates for implementing budget enforcement rules and procedures.

https://www.cbo.gov/cost-estimates

Defense Budget
The CBO analyzes the possible consequences of planned reductions in funding for the military's force structure and

acquisitions. It also studies the budgetary implications of Department of Defense plans, including military personnel,

weapon systems, and operations plans.

https://www.cbo.gov/topics/defense-and-national-security/defense-budget

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The CBO posts answers to the most common questions that people ask.

https://www.cbo.gov/faqs

Glossary
The glossary is available online in Portable Document Format (PDF). It defines terms that are commonly used in CBO

reports. Many of the entries conform to those published in "A Glossary of Terms Used in the Federal Budget Process"

(Government Accountability Office, 2005).

https://www.cbo.gov/publication/42904
History
The CBO was birthed in the crucible of conflict: President Richard M. Nixon had threatened to withhold congressional

appropriations for programs whose activities diverged from his policies. Members of Congress responded by enacting

the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974. This law reasserted Congress's constitutional control

over the budget and created new legislative institutions for implementing the new budget process. One of these

institutions was a new legislative-branch agency. To learn more, visit the CBO "History" web page.

https://www.cbo.gov/about/history

Information Products
CBO informational, nonpartisan products include baseline projections for selected programs, budget and economic

data, and major recurring reports.

https://www.cbo.gov/about/products

Interactive Tools / Workbooks
The "Interactives" web page allows visitors to simulate a variety of budget-relevant scenarios and explore their

potential costs. For example, the "Force Structure Tool" determines the costs and capabilities of customized plans for

the Armed Forces.

https://www.cbo.gov/interactives

Nuclear Forces Costs
The CBO projects the 10-year costs of nuclear forces every 2 years. The report of January 2019 contains projections for

the period from 2019 to 2028.

https://www.cbo.gov/publication/54914

Organizational Chart
The CBO posts its organizational chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.cbo.gov/system/files/2019-07/CBO-Organization-Chart-2019-07.pdf

Press Center
The most recent CBO news is available online. Each Thursday, the agency posts a list of key publications that are likely

to be released during the coming week or soon thereafter.

https://www.cbo.gov/about/press-center

Social Media
The CBO has a SlideShare account.

https://www.slideshare.net/cbo
The CBO tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/uscbo
The CBO posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/uscbo

Ten Things To Know
     The CBO has posted the 10 most important things that it wants people to know about the agency.

     https://www.cbo.gov/about/10-things-to-know

     Topics
     The Topics web page allows visitors to browse subjects ranging from agriculture to veterans' issues.

     https://www.cbo.gov/topics

     Transparency
     By prioritizing its commitment to transparency, the CBO seeks to promote better understanding of its work, to help

     people gauge the potential change in estimates when policies or circumstances differ, and to enhance the credibility of

     its analyses and processes.

     https://www.cbo.gov/about/transparency

     Visiting Scholars
     The CBO welcomes applications from analysts and scholars in all fields; however, it has a special interest in

     collaborating with experts in macroeconomics and financial, health, and public economics.

     https://www.cbo.gov/about/careers/visitingscholars | Email: careers@cbo.gov

        The Sources of Information were updated 7–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                             Government Accountability Office




The United States Government Manual




     GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE
    441 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20548


    202-512-3000

    http://www.gao.gov


      COMPTROLLER GENERAL OF THE UNITED STATES                                              Gene L. Dodaro




      STAFF OFFICES—Managing Directors
 Congressional Relations                                          Orice Williams Brown


 Opportunity and Inclusiveness                                    Edda Emmanuelli-Perez


 Public Affairs                                                   Charles Young


 Strategic Planning and External Liaison                          James-Christian Blockwood


http://www.gao.gov/cghome/gdbiog.html

 CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER                                          Katherine A. Siggerud




 Chief Quality Officer                                            Timothy P. Bowling


 Managing Director of the Continuous Process Improvement Office   Patricia McClure




 MISSION TEAMS—Managing Directors


 Applied Research and Methods                                     Nancy Kingsbury


 Contracting and National Security Acquisitions                   Michele Mackin


 Defense Capabilities and Management                              Cathleen A. Berrick


 Education, Workforce, and Income Security                        Barbara D. Bovbjerg


 Financial Management and Assurance                               J. Lawrence Malenich


 Financial Markets and Community Investment                       Lawrance Evans, Jr.


 Forensic Audits and Investigative Service                        Johana R. Ayers


 Health Care                                                      A. Nicole Clowers


 Homeland Security and Justice                                    Charles M. Johnson, Jr.


 Information Technology and Cybersecurity                         Valerie Melvin


 International Affairs and Trade                                  Thomas Melito


 Natural Resources and Environment                                Mark E. Gaffigan


 Physical Infrastructure                                          Daniel Bertoni


 Strategic Issues                                                 J. Christopher Mihm
  CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER / CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER                                     Karl J. Maschino




  Deputy Chief Administrative Officer                                                        Paul R. Johnson



  GENERAL COUNSEL                                                                            Thomas H. Armstrong




  Deputy General Counsel / Ethics Counselor                                                  (vacancy)



  Inspector General                                                                          Adam Trzeciak


http://www.gao.gov/about/workforce/igbio.html



The key personnel table was updated 2–2019.

https://www.gao.gov/about/careers/our-teams/
The Government Accountability Office helps the Congress fulfill its constitutional responsibilities and heightens the

Federal Government's accountability and performance.


The Government Accountability Office (GAO) is an independent, nonpartisan agency that works for the Congress. The

agency is known as the "congressional watchdog" because it investigates how the Federal Government spends

taxpayer dollars. The Budget and Accounting Act of 1921 (31 U.S.C. 702) established the General Accounting Office.

Eighty three years later, it was renamed the Government Accountability Office pursuant to the GAO Capital Reform

Act of 2004 (31 U.S.C. 702 note).




ACTIVITIES
The GAO gathers information that the Congress uses to determine how effective executive branch agencies are at

carrying out their missions. Its efforts routinely center on answering basic questions: Are Government programs

meeting their objectives? Are they providing services of value to the public? Ultimately, the GAO ensures that the

Government is accountable to the American people.


To help Senators and Representatives make informed policy decisions, the GAO provides them with accurate,

balanced, and timely information. The Office supports congressional oversight by evaluating Government policies and

programs; auditing agency operations to ensure effective, efficient, and appropriate spending of Federal funds;

investigating allegations of illegal and improper activities; and issuing legal decisions and opinions.
With virtually the entire Federal Government subject to its review, the GAO issues a steady stream of products,

including hundreds of reports and testimonies by GAO officials each year. Its reports, which are often called "blue

books," meet short-term, immediate needs for information on a wide range of Government operations. These reports

help Members of Congress better understand emerging, long-term issues whose effects are far-reaching. The GAO

saves billions of American tax dollars by supporting improvements in Government operations and thoughtfulness in

legislative actions.

http://www.gao.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

At a Glance
The "GAO at a Glance" web page offers a profile of the agency, including information on the scope and nature of its

activities.

http://www.gao.gov/about/gglance.html

Bid Protests
Bidders or other interested parties may protest Federal Government procurement contracts. The GAO provides an

inexpensive and expeditious forum for the resolution of these protests. Two search tools are available on the "Bid

Protests" web page. One allows users to search and access all published bid protest decisions; the other allows users

to search the bid protest docket to find status information on cases filed within the past 12 months.

http://www.gao.gov/legal/bid-protests/search | Email: ProtestFinder@gao.gov

Blog
The GAO's website features "WatchBlog: Following the Federal Dollar." To receive electronic notifications of new posts,

sign up by entering an email address in the appropriate text box on the "WatchBlog" web page.

https://blog.gao.gov

Career Opportunities
The GAO relies on attorneys, communications analysts, criminal investigators, economists, financial auditors,

information technology analysts, and other professionals to carry out its mission.

http://www.gao.gov/careers/index.html
The GAO offers an intern program for students. Appointments for intern positions are 10–16 weeks in length and

normally held during summer months. A student must be enrolled on at least a half-time basis, as determined by his

or her college or university. A GAO student intern receives an appointment on a nonpermanent basis; however, after

completing 400 hours of service and meeting degree requirements, he or she may be eligible for a permanent

position. Internships are open to undergraduate and graduate students.

http://www.gao.gov/careers/student.html
According to the Partnership for Public Service, the GAO is an outstanding place to work in the Federal Government.

Among 27 midsize agencies, it placed fourth in the 2018 Best Places To Work rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/GA00
Find an Expert
The "Find an Expert" web page is useful for identifying a subject matter expert as a potential speaker for an

organizational event. The list of experts includes names, as well as areas of expertise, email addresses, and telephone

numbers.

https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us/find-an-expert

FraudNet
FraudNet helps people report suspicion of abuse, fraud, waste, or mismanagement of Federal funds to the appropriate

authorities. It refers allegations to Federal, State, and local law enforcement, and to Offices of Inspector General, when

appropriate; it supports congressional investigation and audit requests; it provides audit and investigative leads to

GAO staff; and it offers support to government at all levels for establishing and operating hotlines. Phone, 800-424-

5454. Fax, 202-512-3086.

http://www.gao.gov/fraudnet | Email: fraudnet@gao.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The GAO is not subject to the FOIA; however, it discloses information in accordance with the spirit of the Act, while

remaining true to its duties and functions as an agency whose primary responsibility is to the Congress. Fax, 202-512-

5806.

http://www.gao.gov/about/freedom_of_information_act | Email: RecordsRequest@gao.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The GAO posts answers to general questions about its legal decisions.

http://www.gao.gov/legal/more/about

Good Governance
The Center for Audit Excellence promotes good governance and builds the capacity of domestic and international

accountability organizations. It provides high-quality training, technical assistance, and related products and services.

http://www.gao.gov/resources/centerforauditexcellence/overview

History
After the signing of the armistice agreement of November 11, 1918, the hostilities of the First World War ended.

Although the United States had entered the war late as a combatant, it transported millions of troops and their

equipment to the Western Front to support the Allies. Wartime spending inflated the national debt, and Congress

needed reliable information and enhanced expenditure control. In 1921, to improve managing the Nation's affairs,

Congress passed the Budget and Accounting Act. To learn more about this piece of legislation and the role that a new

agency was playing in Federal financial management, visit "The History of GAO" web pages.

http://www.gao.gov/about/history

Key Issues
The "Key Issues" web pages allow visitors to explore the GAO's work on a range of national issues by agency or topic.

The agency's most relevant reports are highlighted on these web pages.
http://www.gao.gov/key_issues/overview#t=0

Organizational Chart
The GAO's organizational chart is available on its website.

http://www.gao.gov/about/workforce/orgchart.html

Podcast Gallery
Recorded, hosted, and produced by GAO staff, the "Watchdog Report" features interviews with agency officials on

significant issues and new reports.

http://www.gao.gov/multimedia/podcast

Press Releases
The GAO posts press releases online.

https://www.gao.gov/about/press-center/press-releases/

Publications
Most GAO products and publications are available online, free of charge. Charges for printed copies cover the

printing, shipping, and handling costs. Phone, 202-512-6000 or 866-801-7077. TDD, 202-512-2537.

http://www.gao.gov/ordering.htm
The GAO's website allows visitors to browse reports and testimonies by date and topic and by agency alphabetically or

hierarchically.

http://www.gao.gov/browse/date/week
The "Principles of Federal Appropriations Law," also known as the "Red Book," is a multivolume treatise on Federal

fiscal law. It provides text discussions with references to specific legal authorities to illustrate legal principles, their

applications, and exceptions. These references include GAO decisions and judicial decisions, opinions, statutory

provisions, and other relevant sources.

http://www.gao.gov/legal/red-book/overview

Recommendations Database
The recommendations database contains report recommendations that still need to be addressed. GAO's

recommendations help congressional and agency leaders prepare for appropriations and oversight activities, as well

as improve Government operations. Recommendations remain open until designated as "closed-implemented" or

"closed-not implemented." The general public may browse or search open recommendations online.

http://www.gao.gov/recommendations

Reports / Testimonies
The GAO posts an alphabetical listing of significant reports and testimonies each month.

https://www.gao.gov/reports-testimonies/month-in-review/top-ten/

Resources
The GAO website features resources that auditors and others promoting accountability may find useful.

http://www.gao.gov/resources/auditors/overview
The GAO website features resources that Members of Congress and and their staff may find useful.

http://www.gao.gov/resources/congress/overview
The GAO website features resources that Federal agency managers may find useful.

http://www.gao.gov/resources/federal_managers/overview
The GAO website features resources that journalists may find useful.

http://www.gao.gov/resources/journalists/overview
The GAO website features resources—search tips for locating GAO products on its website, information on using the

data and images contained in them, suggestions for additional informational sources—that researchers may find

useful.

http://www.gao.gov/resources/researchers/overview

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

http://www.gao.gov/sitemap.html

Social Media
The GAO uses social media tools—Facebook, Flickr, LinkedIn, Twitter, YouTube—to make its work more accessible to

both Congress and the general public.

https://www.gao.gov/about/contact-us/stay-connected/

Telephone Directory
The "Organizational Telephone Directory" (January 2019), a resource that the agency updates often, contains GAO

personnel contact information. It is available online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

http://www.gao.gov/about.gao/phonebook/orgphonebook.pdf

Updates
A subscription form is available on the GAO's website to sign up for email updates on the latest reports. Daily or

monthly electronic updates are options, too, as well as notifications about correspondence, reports, and testimony that

fall within a specific topic area.

http://www.gao.gov/subscribe/index.php

Video Gallery
The GAO website features a video collection that is diverse and extensive, educational and informative.

http://www.gao.gov/multimedia/video/#video_id=679942

Widgets
Snippets of HTML code for embedding small news widgets that refresh automatically are available on the GAO

website. Pasting the code into the desired location on a website makes the most recent reports and testimonies and

legal decisions from GAO locally accessible.

http://www.gao.gov/widgets_reports_and_legal.html
http://www.gao.gov/about/contact.html | Email: contact@gao.gov
        For further information, contact the Office of Public Affairs, Government Accountability Office, 441 G
        Street NW., Washington, DC 20548. Phone, 202-512-4800.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Government Publishing Office




The United States Government Manual




     GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE
    732 North Capitol Street NW., Washington, DC 20401


    202-512-1800

    http://www.gpo.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Hugh N. Halpern


      Deputy Director                                                                       Patricia Collins
 Equal Employment Opportunity Managing Director        S. Denise Hendricks


https://www.gpo.gov/who-we-are/our-agency/leadership



Administration


 CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER                          (vacancy)




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Acquisition                                           Timothy J. Matthews


 Human Capital                                         Dan M. Mielke


 Information                                           Wesam Musa




Finance


 CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER                               William L. Boesch, Jr.




Legal


 GENERAL COUNSEL                                       Kerry L. Miller




 Associate General Counsel—Labor Relations             Melissa Hatfield




Operations


 DEPUTY DIRECTOR                                       Patricia Collins




 MANAGING DIRECTORS
 Official Journals of Government                             Gregory Estep, Acting


 Plant Operations                                            John W. Crawford


 Security and Intelligent Documents                          Stephen G. LeBlanc


 Customer Services                                           Sandra K. MacAfee




Public Access


 SUPERINTENDENT OF DOCUMENTS                                 Laurie Hall




 Library Services and Content Management Managing Director   Laurie Hall




 Publications and Information Sales Chief                    Lisa L. Williams




Security Services


 CHIEF SECURITY OFFICER                                      LaMont R. Vernon




Strategy


 CHIEF OF STAFF                                              (vacancy)




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Technology                                                  Richard G. Davis


 Public Relations                                            Gary Somerset




 SPECIALISTS


 Congressional Relations                                     James McCarthy
  Employee Communications                                                                 Gary Somerset


  Inspector General                                                                       Michael P. Leary


https://www.gpo.gov/who-we-are/our-agency/inspector-general/overview-and-hotline



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Government Publishing Office produces, procures, and disseminates printed and electronic publications of the

Congress, executive departments, and Federal agencies and establishments




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 23, 1860, the U.S. Congress passed Joint Resolution 25 in "Relation to the Public Printing" (12 Stat. 117). It

empowered the Superintendent of Public Printing to execute the printing and binding that the Senate and House of

Representatives, the executive and judicial departments, and the Court of Claims authorized. It also directed the

Superintendent "to contract for the erection or purchase of the necessary buildings, machinery, and materials for that

purpose." The Government Printing Office opened for business on March 4, 1861, the same day that President

Abraham Lincoln was sworn into office and a few weeks after the first salvo of the American Civil War.

https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/llsl//llsl-c36/llsl-c36.pdf
On December 17, 2014, President Barack Obama approved Public Law 113–235, which is commonly cited as the

"Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015." Section 1301 of that law (128 Stat. 2537) redesignated

the Government Printing Office as the Government Publishing Office (GPO). Congress changed the name to reflect

the prominent role that the GPO plays in providing access to Government information in digital formats.

https://www.congress.gov/113/plaws/publ235/PLAW-113publ235.pdf
By the advice of the Senate, the President nominates "a suitable person" as the Director; with its consent, the President

appoints him or her "to take charge of and manage" the agency (44 U.S.C. 301).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title44-section301&num=0&edition=prelim
The agency's organizational chart is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading on the

"Leadership" web page.

https://www.gpo.gov/docs/default-source/leadership-pdf-file/gpo-organizational-chart-2022-01-25.pdf



STATUTORY AUTHORITIES
Duties of the GPO are defined in 44 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title44&edition=prelim



ACTIVITIES
Headquartered in Washington, DC, with a total employment of approximately 1,580, the Office is responsible for the

production and distribution of information products and services for the three branches of the Federal Government. It

is the Federal Government's primary centralized resource for producing, procuring, cataloging, indexing,

authenticating, disseminating, and preserving the official information products of the U.S. Government in digital and

tangible forms.


While many of the informational products, such as the "Congressional Record" and "Federal Register," are produced at

the main GPO plant, most of the Government's printing is done in partnership with America's printing industry. The

Office procures 75 percent of all printing orders through private sector vendors across the country, competitively

buying products and services from thousands of businesses in all 50 States. The contracts cover the entire spectrum of

printing and publishing services and are suitable for companies of all sizes.


The agency disseminates Federal information products through a sales program, a nationwide distribution network of

Federal depository libraries, the Federal Digital System (FDsys), and the free U.S. Government information service

known as govinfo, which is replacing FDsys. The public can already access hundreds of thousands of Federal

Government document titles by visiting the govinfo website.

https://www.gpo.gov/who-we-are/our-agency/mission-vision-and-goals



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Annual Reports / Budget Submissions
An annual report archives and budget submission archives are available on the "Congressional Relations" web page.

https://www.gpo.gov/who-we-are/our-agency/congressional-relations

Archived Records
The records of the GPO are referenced in the "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States."

The Guide is accessible online, and GPO records have been assigned to Record Group 149.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/149.html

Ben's Guide
An educational website for children and young adults, Ben's Guide has learning adventures for the apprentice level

(ages 4–8), journeyperson level (ages 9–13), and master level (ages 14 and older).

https://bensguide.gpo.gov

Blog
"Government Book Talk" offers reviews of new and popular publications, talking about forthcoming and out-of-print

books. The blog spotlights the variety of Government publications that are available and the scope of their influence.

https://govbooktalk.gpo.gov

Bookstore
Printed copies of many documents, ranging from Supreme Court opinions to reports from the Bureau of Labor

Statistics, may be purchased. To order in person, visit the GPO Main Bookstore at 710 North Capitol Street NW.,
Washington, DC (corner of North Capitol Street NW. and G Street), 8 a.m.–4 p.m. To order online, use the link below.

To order by phone or inquire about an order, call 866-512-1800 or 202-512-1800 (Washington, DC–metropolitan area),

8 a.m.–5:30 p.m., eastern standard time. All orders require prepayment by an American Express, Discover/NOVUS,

MasterCard, or VISA credit card; check or money order; or Superintendent of Documents (SOD) deposit account,

which customers who purchase Government products on a recurring basis can open with the GPO. Fax, 202-512-2104.

https://bookstore.gpo.gov | Email: contactcenter@gpo.gov

Business Opportunities
GPO procurement services teams post open term contract and one-time bid solicitations online.

https://www.gpo.gov/how-to-work-with-us/vendors/contract-opportunities
Small purchase solicitations are posted on the "Quick Quote" website.

https://contractorconnection.gpo.gov/OpenJobs.aspx

Career Opportunities
The GPO provides other Government agencies with services for the printing, publishing, distribution, and storage of

digital content. To deliver these services successfully, it relies on creative, energetic, and talented professionals

representing diverse trades and administrative fields.

https://www.gpo.gov/who-we-are/careers/how-to-apply

Catalog of U.S. Government Publications (CGP)
The CGP is a searchable Federal publications catalog that contains descriptive information on recent and historical

publications, as well as links to some complete documents. Users may search the catalog by agency, keywords,

subject, and title.

https://catalog.gpo.gov/F?RN=785806650

Congressional Record
The "Congressional Record" (CR) is the official record of the proceedings and debates of the U.S. Congress. When the

U.S. Congress is in session, it is published daily. The CR's publication history started in 1873 and continues to the

present. The first link leads to CR bound editions from 1873 to 2016.

https://www.govinfo.gov/app/collection/crecb
CR electronic editions 1994–2022

https://www.govinfo.gov/app/collection/CREC

Congressional Relations
The Office of Congressional Relations responds to congressional inquiries and requests. Phone, 202-512-1991. Fax,

202-512-1293.

https://www.gpo.gov/who-we-are/our-agency/congressional-relations

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page is laden with hyperlinked resources. An electronic form allows various categories of online

visitors to submit an inquiry to GPO staff.
https://ask.gpo.gov/s/
Contact information for nationwide offices and the Laurel, MD, and Pueblo, CO, distribution centers is available on the

GPO website.

https://www.gpo.gov/who-we-are/our-agency/office-locations

Federal Depository Library Program (FDLP)
Libraries that participate in the FDLP maintain a basic collection of key sources of information for supporting the

general public's right to know about the essential activities and workings of the Federal Government.

https://ask.gpo.gov/s/FDLD

Federal Lawmaking
An outline of the Federal lawmaking process—starting with the introduction of a bill by a Member of the Congress,

continuing through its passage by both Chambers, and culminating in the President's approval—is available online in

Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.gpo.gov/docs/default-source/media-kit-files/how-a-bill-becomes-a-Law.pdf

Federal Register
Documents that the GPO recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/government-publishing-office

Govinfo
Free public access to the full text of official publications from the three branches of the Federal Government is

available at govinfo. The website also serves as a standards-compliant preservation repository, offers advanced search

engine capabilities, and functions as a content management system to control digital content throughout its lifecycle.

https://www.govinfo.gov

History
The GPO opened for business several weeks before Confederate artillery opened fire on a Federal fort in Charleston

Harbor. Within 18 months of the first salvo, the GPO had readied one of the most significant documents in American

history for President Abraham Lincoln's signature. To learn more about the 1862 war order that acted as a precursor to

the Emancipation Proclamation of 1863, watch the video "Lincoln and His Printers: GPO in the Civil War."

https://www.gpo.gov/who-we-are/our-agency/history
A GPO timeline and short history of making electronic Government information accessible to the public is available

online.

https://www.govinfo.gov/about/history

Media Kit
The GPO media kit contains links to access resources and to download information that may be useful for reporters

and Federal agency customers. It also has a list of links providing easy access to the agency's social media sites. For

additional information, contact the Public Relations team. Phone, 202-512-1957.

https://www.gpo.gov/who-we-are/news-media/media-kit
     News / Press Releases
     The GPO posts the latest news and maintains a news archive, from 1997 to the present, on its website. Phone, 202-

     512-1957. Fax, 202-512-1998.

     https://www.gpo.gov/who-we-are/news-media/news-and-press-releases

     Oversight
     The Office of the Inspector General from the GPO posts reports and data on Oversight.gov, a text-searchable

     repository of reports that Federal Inspectors General publish. The Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and

     Efficiency operates and maintains the website to increase public access to independent and authoritative information

     on the Federal Government.

     https://oversight.gov

     Social Media
     The GPO maintains a presence on six social media sites: Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, LinkedIn, Instagram, and

     Pinterest. Links to these sites are listed together in one location on the "Media Kit" web page.

     https://www.gpo.gov/who-we-are/news-media/media-kit

     Style Manual
     An official guide to the form and style of Federal Government publishing is available online.

     https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/GPO-STYLEMANUAL-2016/pdf/GPO-STYLEMANUAL-2016.pdf

        The Sources of Information were updated 5–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                   Library of Congress
                                              Congressional Research Service




The United States Government Manual




     LIBRARY OF CONGRESS
    101 Independence Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20540


    202-707-5000

    http://www.loc.gov


      LIBRARIAN OF CONGRESS                                                                 Carla D. Hayden


      Deputy Librarian for Institutional Advancement                                        Robert R. Newlen
 Chief of Staff                                  Elizabeth C. Morrison


 Chief Operating Officer                         Edward R. Jablonski


 General Counsel                                 Elizabeth Pugh


 Inspector General                               Kurt W. Hyde




 Chief Communications Officer                    Roswell M. Encina


 Director of Human Resources Services            Rachel Bouman


 Director of Congressional Research Service      Mary B. Mazanec


 Associate Librarian for Library Services        J. Mark Sweeney


 Director of National International Outreach     Jane McAuliffe


 Law Librarian of Congress                       Jane F. Sánchez


 Acting Register of Copyrights                   Karyn A. Temple Claggett




Library of Congress Trust Fund Board


 CHAIR (Librarian of Congress)                   Carla D. Hayden




 (Fiscal Assistant Secretary of the Treasury)    David A. Lebryk


 (Chair, Joint Committee on the Library)         Gregg Harper


 ( Vice Chair, Joint Committee on the Library)   Richard Shelby




 Member                                          Kathleen L. Casey


 Member                                          J. Richard Fredericks


 Member                                          Thomas Girardi
  Member                                                                                    Christopher G. Long


  Member                                                                                    Sheila Marcelo


  Member                                                                                    George Marcus


  Member                                                                                    John Miller


  Member                                                                                    (vacancy)


  Member                                                                                    (vacancy)


  Member                                                                                    (vacancy)

The Library of Congress is the national library of the United States, offering diverse materials for research, including the

world's most extensive collections in areas such as American history, music, and law.

Organizational Chart
The Library of Congress was established by Act of April 24, 1800 (2 Stat. 56), appropriating $5,000 "for the purchase of

such books as may be necessary for the use of Congress . . . ." The Library's scope of responsibility has been widened

by subsequent legislation (2 U.S.C. 131-168d). The Librarian, appointed by the President with the advice and consent of

the Senate, directs the Library.


The Library's first responsibility is service to Congress. Its Congressional Research Service provides Congress with

legislative research and analysis that is authoritative, confidential, objective, and timely during all stages of the

legislative process. The Library's Congress.gov Web site serves as a source of legislative information for both Congress

and the general public.

https://www.congress.gov
As the Library has developed, its range of service has expanded to include the entire governmental establishment and

the public at large. The Library serves as a national library for the United States, and its online presence makes it a

global resource.

https://www.loc.gov/about



ACTIVITIES

Collections
The Library's extensive collections are universal in scope. They include books, serials, and pamphlets on every subject

and in more than 470 languages, and research materials in many formats, including maps, photographs, manuscripts,

motion pictures, and sound recordings. Among them are the most comprehensive collections of books outside Asia

and the former Soviet Union; the largest collection of published aeronautical literature; and the most extensive

collection of books in the Western Hemisphere.


The manuscript collections relate to various aspects of American history and civilization and include the personal

papers of most of the Presidents from George Washington to Calvin Coolidge. The music collections contain volumes
and pieces—manuscript and published—from classic works to the newest popular compositions. Other materials

available for research include maps and views; photographic records; recordings, prints, drawings, and posters;

government documents, newspapers, and periodicals; and motion pictures, microforms, audio and video tapes, and

digital and online materials.

https://www.loc.gov/discover

Reference Resources
Admission to the various research facilities of the Library is free. The Library's reading rooms are open to persons age

16 and older. Readers must register by presenting valid photo identification with a current address. For some

collections, there are additional requirements. While priority is given to inquiries about special materials or to unique

resources, the Library provides helpful responses to all inquirers. Online reference service is also available through the

“Ask a Librarian" Web page.

http://www.loc.gov/rr

Copyrights
With the enactment of the second general revision of the U.S. copyright law by Act of July 8, 1870 (16 Stat. 212–217), all

activities relating to copyright, including deposit and registration, were centralized in the Library of Congress. The

Copyright Act of 1976 (90 Stat. 2541) brought all forms of copyrightable authorship, both published and unpublished,

under a single statutory system which gives authors protection upon creation of their works. Exclusive rights granted to

authors under the statute include the right to reproduce and prepare derivative works, distribute copies or

phonorecords, perform and display the work publicly, and in the case of sound recordings, to perform the work

publicly by means of a digital audio transmission. Works eligible for copyright include literary works (books and

periodicals), musical works, dramatic works, pantomimes and choreographic works, pictorial, graphic, and sculptural

works, motion pictures, sound recordings, vessel hull designs, mask works, and architectural works.


The Copyright Office serves as a National registry for creative works, registering more than 500,000 claims annually. It

is also a major source of acquisitions for the Library's collections. Most paper information is also accessible on its Web

site.

http://www.copyright.gov

Extension of Service
The Library offers duplication services; the sale of sound recordings, cataloging data and tools; the exchange of

duplicates with other institutions; development of classification schemes; preparation of bibliographic lists for

Government and research; maintenance and publication of cooperative publications; and publication of catalogs,

bibliographic guides, and lists, and texts of original manuscripts and rare books. It has items for circulation in traveling

exhibitions; books in Braille, as well as “talking books on the Internet, and books on tape. The Library distributes

electronic materials and provides research and analytical services for a fee. The Library also manages the following

programs: centralized and cooperative cataloging; cataloging-in-publication for unpublished books; interlibrary loan

system; and the U.S. International Standard Serial Number (ISSN) Center.


Furthermore, the Library provides for the following: the preparation of bibliographical lists responsive to the needs of

Government and research; the maintenance and the publication of cooperative publications; the publication of
catalogs, bibliographical guides, and lists, and of texts of original manuscripts and rare books in the Library of

Congress; the circulation in traveling exhibitions of items from the Library's collections; the provision of books in Braille,

electronic access to Braille books on the Internet, "talking books," and books on tape for the blind and the physically

handicapped through more than 100 cooperating libraries throughout the Nation; the distribution of its electronic

materials via the Internet; and the provision of research and analytical services on a fee-for-service basis to agencies in

the executive and judicial branches.

https://www.loc.gov/services

American Folklife Center
The American Folklife Center was established in the Library of Congress by Act of January 2, 1976 (20 U.S.C. 2102 et

seq.). It supports, preserves, and presents American folklife by receiving and maintaining folklife collections, scholarly

research, field projects, performances, exhibitions, festivals, workshops, publications, and audiovisual presentations.

The Center administers the Veterans History Project, which records and preserves the first-person accounts of war

veterans. It collaborates with the Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of African American History and Culture to

maintain the Civil Rights History Project and its resulting collection of interviews with leaders and participants in the

Civil Rights movement. The Center also maintains and administers the American Folklife Center Archive, which is an

extensive multi-format collection of ethnographic materials from this country and around the world, and serves as the

national repository for folk-related field recordings, manuscripts, and other unpublished materials. The Archive also

contains the collections of StoryCorps, a program to record and collect oral histories from people from all walks of life.


The Center's reading room contains over 4,000 books and periodicals; a sizable collection of magazines, newsletters,

unpublished theses, and dissertations; field notes; and many textual and some musical transcriptions and recordings.

Information on the Center's blog, social media, publications, and collections is available online.

https://www.loc.gov/folklife

  For further information, call 202-707-5510.



Center for the Book
The Center was established in the Library of Congress by an Act of October 13, 1977 (2 U.S.C. 171 et seq.), to stimulate

public interest in books, reading, and libraries, and to encourage the study of books and print culture. The Center

promotes and explores the vital role of books, reading, and libraries, nationally and internationally. As a partnership

between the Government and the private sector, the Center for the Book depends on tax-deductible contributions

from individuals and corporations to support its programs.


The Center's activities are directed toward the general public and scholars. The overall program includes reading

promotion projects with television and radio networks, symposia, lectures, exhibitions, special events, and publications.

More than 80 national education and civic organizations participate in the Center's annual reading promotion

campaign.


The Center provides leadership for 52 affiliated State—including the District of Columbia and the Virgin Islands—

centers for the book and nonprofit reading-promotion partners. It oversees the Library’s read.gov Web site,

administers the Library's Young Readers Center and its Poetry and Literature Center, and plays a key role in the
Library’s annual National Book Festival. The Center also administers the position of Poet Laureate Consultant in Poetry,

as well as, in collaboration with the Children's Book Council, the position of the National Ambassador for Young

People's Literature.

http://www.read.gov/cfb | Email: cfbook@loc.gov

  For further information, contact the Center for the Book. Phone, 202-707-5221. Fax, 202-707-0269.



National Film Preservation Board
The National Film Preservation Board, established by the National Film Preservation Act of 1988 (102 Stat. 1785) and

reauthorized by the National Film Preservation Act of 2005 (2 U.S.C. 179l note), serves as a public advisory group to

the Librarian of Congress. The Board works to ensure the survival, conservation, and increased public availability of

America's film heritage, including advising the Librarian on the annual selection of films to the National Film Registry

and counseling the Librarian on development and implementation of the national film preservation plan.

https://www.loc.gov/programs/national-film-preservation-board/about-this-program

  For further information, call 202-707-5912.



National Sound Recording Preservation Board
The National Recording Preservation Board, established by the National Recording Preservation Act of 2000 (2 U.S.C.

1701 note) reviews nominated sound recordings for inclusion in the National Recording Registry and advises the

Librarian on the inclusion of such recordings in the Registry to preserve sound recordings that are culturally,

historically, or aesthetically significant. The Board comprises three major components: a National Recording

Preservation Advisory Board, which brings together experts in the field; a National Recording Registry; and a

fundraising foundation, all of which are conducted under the auspices of the Library of Congress. The Board

implements a national plan for the long-term preservation and accessibility of the Nation's audio heritage. The

national recording preservation program sets standards for future private and public preservation efforts in

conjunction with the Library's National Audio-Visual Conservation Center in Culpeper, VA.

https://www.loc.gov/programs/national-recording-preservation-board/about-this-program

  For further information, call 202-707-5856.



Preservation
The Library provides technical information related to the preservation of library and archival material. The Library’s

Preservation Directorate includes three preservation science laboratories, a Center for the Library’s Analytical Science

Samples, and a Collections Recovery Room. Information on publications and various preservation and conservation

topics is available online.

http://www.loc.gov/rr/askalib/ask-preserv.html

  For further information, call 202-707-1840.
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Books for the Blind and Physically Handicapped
Braille and talking books and magazines, including music materials, are distributed through more than 100 regional

and subregional libraries to residents of the United States and its territories who are blind or have a physical disability.

Eligible Americans living abroad are also able to participate. Users may also register for the Braille and Audio Reading

Download (BARD) online service, enabling them to use the BARD mobile app to read on smart devices. Information is

available from the National Library Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped, Library of Congress, 1291 Taylor

Street NW., Washington, DC 20542-4960. Phone, 202-707-5100 or 1-888-NLS-READ (1-888-657-7323).

http://www.loc.gov/ThatAllMayRead | Email: nls@loc.gov

Business Opportunities
To learn about business opportunities, visit the "Doing Business With the Library" Web page.

http://www.loc.gov/about/doing-business-with-the-library

Cataloging Distribution Services
Cataloging and bibliographic information in the form of microfiche catalogs, book catalogs, magnetic tapes, CD-ROM

cataloging tools, bibliographies, and other technical publications is distributed to libraries and other institutions.

Information about ordering materials is available from the Cataloging Distribution Service, Library of Congress,

Washington,     DC    20541-4910.     Phone,    202-707-6100.     TDD,    202-707-0012.     Fax,   202-707-1334.     Email,

cdsinfo@mail.loc.gov. Card numbers for new publications and Electronic Preassigned Control Numbers for publishers

are available from the Cataloging in Publication Division, Library of Congress, Washington, DC 20541-4910. Phone,

202-707-6345.


Copyright Services
Information about the copyright law (title 17 of the U.S. Code), the method of securing copyright, and copyright

registration procedures may be obtained by writing to the Copyright Office, Library of Congress, 101 Independence

Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20559-6000. Phone, 202-707-3000. Registration application forms may be ordered by

calling the forms hotline at 202-707-9100. Copyright records may be researched and reported by the Copyright Office

for a fee; for an estimate, call 202-707-6850. Members of the public may use the copyright card catalog in the

Copyright Office without charge. The database of Copyright Office records cataloged from January 1, 1978, to the

present is available online at http://cocatalog.loc.gov/. The Copyright Information Office is located in Room LM-401,

James Madison Memorial Building, 101 Independence Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20559-6000. It is open to the

public Monday through Friday, 8:30 a.m. to 5 p.m., except for Federal holidays.

http://www.loc.gov/copyright

Employment
The Library offers many opportunities for those seeking employment, fellowships or internships, or volunteer positions.

Job vacancy announcements and application information are posted online and also available from the Employment
Office, Room LM-107, 101 Independence Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20540. Phone, 202-707-4315.

http://www.loc.gov/hr/employment

Duplication Services
Copies of manuscripts, prints, photographs, maps, and book material not subject to copyright and other restrictions

are available for a fee. Order forms for photo reproduction and price schedules are available from Duplication

Services, Library of Congress, 101 Independence Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20540-4570. Phone, 202-707-5640.

http://www.loc.gov/duplicationservices

Exhibitions
Throughout the year, the Library offers free exhibitions featuring items from its collections. Library exhibitions may be

viewed Monday through Saturday, 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., in the Thomas Jefferson Building. For more information, call

202-707-4604. To view current and past exhibitions online, use the link below.

http://www.loc.gov/exhibits

Federal Agency Research Services
Federal agencies can procure research and analytical products on foreign and domestic topics using the collections of

the Library of Congress through the Federal Research Division. Science, technology, humanities, and social science

research are conducted by staff specialists exclusively on behalf of Federal agencies on a fee-for-service basis.

Research requests should be directed to the Federal Research Division, Marketing Office, Library of Congress,

Washington, DC 20540-4840. Phone, 202-707-9133. Fax, 202-707-3920.

https://www.loc.gov/rr/frd

Publications
Library of Congress publications are available online. The Library of Congress Magazine (LCM) is published 6 times a

year and may be viewed online at http://www.loc.gov/lcm/. The calendar of public events is also available online at

www.loc.gov/loc/events and is available by mail to persons within 100 miles of Washington, DC. To be added to the

calendar mailing list, send a request to Office Systems Services, Mail and Distribution Management Section, Library of

Congress, 101 Independence Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20540-9441 or send an email to pao@loc.gov.

http://www.loc.gov/visit/shopping

Reference and Bibliographic Services
Guidance is offered to readers in identifying and using the material in the Library's collections, and reference service is

provided to those with inquiries who have exhausted local, State, and regional resources. Persons requiring services

that cannot be performed by the Library staff can be supplied with names of private researchers who work on a fee-

for-service basis. Requests for information should be directed to the Reference Referral Service, Library of Congress,

101 Independence Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20540-4720. Phone, 202-707-5522. Fax, 202-707-1389. Questions may

also be submitted online at the "Ask a Librarian" Web site.

http://www.loc.gov/rr/askalib

Research and Reference Services in Science and Technology
Requests for reference services should be directed to the Science, Technology, and Business Division, Library of
Congress, Science Reference Section, 101 Independence Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20540-4750. Phone, 202-707-

5639.

http://www.loc.gov/rr/scitech

Tours
Guided tours of the Library are available on weekdays, 10:30 a.m.–3:30 p.m., and on Saturdays at 10:30 and 11:30 a.m.

and at 1:30 and 2:30 p.m. For more information on scheduling a tour for a group of 10 or more, contact the Visitor

Services Office. Phone, 202-707-0919.

https://www.loc.gov/visit/tours
http://www.loc.gov | Email: pao@loc.gov
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Library of Congress, 101 Independence Avenue SE.,

Washington, DC 20540-8610. Phone, 202-707-2905. Fax, 202-707-2905. Fax, 202-707-9199.



Congressional Research Service
101 Independence Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20540


202-707-5000


  DIRECTOR                                                   Mary B. Mazanec


  Deputy Director                                            T.J. Halstead


https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about/ofc-dir.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Congressional Research Service provides high quality research, analysis, information, and confidential

consultation to help the U.S. Congress carry out its legislative, representational and oversight duties.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
In 1914, President Woodrow Wilson approved a law to to establish a separate department within the Library of

Congress. That department was named the Legislative Reference Service, and its purpose was to serve the

legislative needs of the U.S. Congress.

https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about/history.html
With the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1970, the U.S. Congress changed the name of the Legislative

Reference Service to the Congressional Research Service (CRS) and expanded its statutory obligations.

https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about/history.html
The CRS is organized into five research divisions: American Law; Domestic Social Policy; Foreign Affairs, Defense

and Trade; Government and Finance; and Resources, Science and Industry. Research support services are given

to the policy experts in each of the five divisions by the Knowledge Services Group.
https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/research/
The Office of the Director and other infrastructure offices oversee long-term goals and provide management

and administrative support.


The CRS has about 600 employees who are based in Washington, DC. More than 400 of them are attorneys,

information professionals, and policy analysts working in one of the five research divisions.

https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about/structure.html

ACTIVITIES
The CRS provides comprehensive research and analysis on all legislative and oversight issues of interest to the

U.S. Congress. The CRS assists Congress by responding to specific questions and by preparing reports on

legislative topics in anticipation of questions and emerging issues. The CRS works with Members, committees,

and congressional staff to identify and clarify policy problems and assess the implications of proposed policy

alternatives. CRS experts play a role in every stage of the legislative process.

http://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Annual Reports
The CRS posts its annual reports on the "About CRS" webs page.

https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about/

Career Opportunities
The CRS hires motivated and talented individuals who can contribute to its unique role in supporting the U.S.

Congress. To carry out the CRS's mission, the research divisions rely on attorneys, information professionals, and

policy analysts, whose expertise falls within a variety of disciplines. Those disciplines include defense, economics,

education, energy, environmental protection, foreign affairs, healthcare, homeland security, immigration, law,

public administration, science, and technology.

https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/opportunities/

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page contains an electronic comment and question form. CRS staff responds to questions

about employment and specific job listings. CRS staff works exclusively for the U.S. Congress; therefore, they do

not respond to inquiries pertaining to other subjects.

https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/contact/

History
To mark the centennial of the CRS, communications specialist Cory V. Langley complied the article "CRS at 100—

Informing the Legislative Debate Since 1914." The article was published in the May and June 2014 issue of

"Library of Congress Magazine," pages 14–18. Accompanying the article is a CRS timeline that runs from 1914

though 2014.
     https://www.loc.gov/lcm/pdf/LCM_2014_0506.pdf

     Reports
     CRS reports are accessible on the website Congress.gov. A search tool is available on the "Search CRS Reports"

     web page.

     https://crsreports.congress.gov/

     Values
     All queries from Members of Congress and exchanges between them and CRS staff are confidential; all CRS

     services and products are authoritative; and to the maximum extent that human nature allows, CRS analyses are

     objective and nonpartisan.

     https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about/values.html
     The Sources of Information were updated 12–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               United States Botanic Garden




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES BOTANIC GARDEN
    Office of Executive Director, 245 First Street SW., Washington, DC 20024


    202-226-8333

    http://www.usbg.gov | Email: usbg@aoc.gov


    Conservatory, 100 Maryland Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20001


    Production Facility, 4700 Shepherd Parkway SW., Washington, DC 20032


    202-226-4780
ACTING DIRECTOR


  (vacancy)

https://www.aoc.gov/organization/acting-architect



EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR


  Saharah Moon Chapotin

https://www.usbg.gov/staff/saharah-moon-chapotin-phd



The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2019.

The United States Botanic Garden demonstrates the essential contribution that plants make aesthetically, culturally,

ecologically, economically, and therapeutically, to the well-being of humankind, and it supports partnerships, nationally

and internationally, by fostering exchanges of information and ideas.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The U.S. Botanic Garden (USBG) has a long root that runs deep in the soil of the Nation's history. On October 21, 1796,

while addressing some gentlemen in a letter from Mount Vernon, President George Washington conceived that "a

Botanical Garden would be a good appendage to the Institution of a University" in the "Federal City." Twenty-four

years later, that conception blossomed, when President James Madison helped establish a botanic garden in the U.S.

Capital under the auspices of the Columbian Institute, a society dedicated to promoting the arts and sciences. This

early botanic collection served as the core of what would grow to become the Nation's future botanic garden.

https://founders.archives.gov/?q=%20Author%3A%22Washington%2C%20George%22&s=1211311113&r=2118
The U.S. Congress also supported establishing a national botanic garden. By an act of August 26, 1842, it made

provision for the safekeeping and arrangement of dried and living specimens that Lieutenant Charles Wilkes's

expedition had collected while exploring the Pacific Rim. Congress enacted that the enlarged collection should be

placed under the stewardship of its Joint Committee on the Library and that it should be kept in the upper room of the

Patent Office (5 Stat. 534).

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/27th-congress/session-2/c27s2ch205.pdf
When the old Patent Office was expanded in 1849, a new location for the plants and greenhouse had to be found.

Congress again intervened and, by an act of May 15, 1850, funded the construction of a new greenhouse and the

collection's removal and relocation to a "suitable site on the public grounds" of the Capitol. The Joint Committee on

the Library, with supervision from the Commissioner of Public Buildings, managed the project (9 Stat. 427). A new

national botanic garden opened on the National Mall, at the west end of the Capitol Grounds, later that year.
http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/31st-congress/session-1/c31s1ch10.pdf
By 1856—the collection had been named officially the United States Botanic Garden, Congress was providing an

annual appropriation for its upkeep, and the Joint Committee on the Library had assumed responsibility for both its

direction and maintenance. To satisfy the McMillan Commission's plan for a large, open mall, the USBG relocated one

block south, to its present site, in 1933. The Joint Committee on the Library maintains oversight of the USBG through

the Architect of the Capitol, who holds the title of Acting Director.

https://www.usbg.gov/brief-history-us-botanic-garden

ACTIVITIES
The USBG highlights botanical diversity worldwide and informs people about plants' aesthetic, cultural, ecological,

economic, and therapeutic significance. The agency promotes appreciation of plants and stimulates interest in botany

through artistic plant displays, education programs, exhibits, and curation of a large plant collection. It supports

conservation by serving as a repository for endangered plant species. It also encourages the exchange of ideas and

disseminates mission-relevant information to national and international visitors and policymakers.

https://www.usbg.gov/about-us
Three USBG sites are open year-round to the public: the Conservatory, the National Garden, and Bartholdi Park. The

production facility is periodically open for public programs and tours.

https://www.usbg.gov/hours-and-location-0



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

America's Agricultural Experience
Based on a meeting that the U.S. Botanic Garden helped to organize of the Nation's leading agricultural and botanical

educators, "Agriculture and the Future of Food: The Role of Botanic Gardens" presents a series of educational

narratives that promote the reconnection of people and plants through the American agricultural experience. The

document is available online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.usbg.gov/sites/default/files/attachments/agriculture_and_the_future_of_food_-
_the_role_of_botanic_gardens.pdf

Calendar of Events
The USBG offers children and family programs, lectures, special tours, and workshops, as well as free theater, concerts,

cooking demonstrations, and more. An events calendar is posted on the "Programs and Events" page, and a Portable

Document Format (PDF) version is available for downloading.

https://www.usbg.gov/programs-and-events

Carbon Footprint
A small step can lead to a big change. A carbon, or ecological, footprint helps demonstrate the effect that lifestyle has

on Earth systems. Most people can reduce their carbon footprint (i.e., the amount of emitted greenhouse gases that

lifestyle governs) by shifting to sustainable practices and products. The USBG posted a list of suggestions for

developing a more sustainable lifestyle, a lifestyle that leaves behind a smaller carbon footprint. The list includes

suggestions for bottled water, coffee grounds, driving less, eating locally, junk mail, planting trees, plastic bags, and
washing clothes.

https://www.usbg.gov/know-your-impact

Career Opportunities
Information on career and volunteer opportunities is available online.

https://www.usbg.gov/opportunities-us-botanic-garden

Contact Information
The USBG welcomes feedback: comments, concerns, and questions. Got a growing plant question? Select the "Plant

Hotline" option in the "Inquiry Type" field of the electronic comment form.

https://www.usbg.gov/contact-us-botanic-garden

Exhibits
The USBG creates exhibits that not only delight and educate visitors, but that inspire them to become more active and

better stewards of the plants supporting life on Earth. It posts Information on current and upcoming exhibits online.

https://www.usbg.gov/exhibits

Factsheets
Gardening factsheets are available online.

https://www.usbg.gov/gardening-fact-sheets-0

Kids
The USBG is a child-friendly living plant museum.

https://www.usbg.gov/kids-are-welcome-us-botanic-garden

Land Development and Management
An interdisciplinary partnership led by the USBG, American Society of Landscape Architects, and the Lady Bird Johnson

Wildflower Center, the Sustainable Sites Initiative™ improves land development and management practices with a

voluntary rating system for sustainable land design, construction, and maintenance practices. Architects, designers,

developers, engineers, landscape architects, policymakers, and others use SITES to align land development and

management with sustainable design. SITES supports the creation of ecologically resilient communities, and it benefits

property owners, local and regional communities and their economies, as well as the environment. Certification covers

development projects on land where buildings are absent or present.

http://www.sustainablesites.org

Landscaping
A collaboration between the USBG and the Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center, Landscape For Life™ promotes an

approach to landscaping that respects nature. Irrespective of location—downtown, suburbia, or the farm—every

landscape or garden can protect and even restore the environment, without sacrificing visual appeal. The Landscape

for Life website contains a trove of information—getting started, materials, human health, plants, soil, and water—for

transforming an environmentally ambivalent landscape into a healthy, sustainable one.

http://landscapeforlife.org
Living Collections Database
An online tool is available to search the USBG's living collections database.

https://www.usbg.gov/search-collection

Native Plant Recommendations
The USBG posts lists of selected plants to grow in the garden. The lists are available in Portable Document Format

(PDF) for downloading.

https://www.usbg.gov/national-garden-native-plant-recommendations

Plant Hotline
Questions about a garden plant? Call the Plant Hotline. Phone, 202-226-4785.


Pollinators
Learn about the role birds and bees, as well as other creatures like bats, beetles, butterflies, flies, moths, and even

wasps, play in the life cycle of plants.

https://www.usbg.gov/pollinator-information

Production Facility
The production facility opens periodically for public programs and tours. An annual open house allows visitors to meet

the gardeners, ask questions, and explore the facility.

https://www.usbg.gov/us-botanic-garden-production-facility

Rare and Endangered Plants
USBG experts bank seeds of rare plants, introduce rare plants to the horticultural trade, maintain live specimens, and

study wild plants at risk of endangerment or extinction. The website maintains a gallery of plants whose threat levels

are vulnerable, threatened, and endangered.

https://www.usbg.gov/gardens/rare-and-endangered-plants-gallery

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.usbg.gov/sitemap

Social Media
The USBG has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/usbotanicgarden

Staff Directory
Approximately 65 employees work at the USBG in four divisions: Administration, Horticulture, Operations, and Public

Programs.

https://www.usbg.gov/staff-directory

Visitor Guide
     More than a million visitors come to see the USBG each year. A visitor guide is available in Arabic, Chinese, English,

     French, German, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Russian, and Spanish.

     https://www.usbg.gov/visit

        The Sources of Information were updated 10–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




     Legislative Branch

         Congress

             The Senate

             The House of Representatives

         Architect of the Capitol

         Congressional Budget Office

         Government Accountability Office

         Government Publishing Office

         Library of Congress

             Congressional Research Service

         United States Botanic Garden




     Judicial Branch
  The Supreme Court of the United States

  Lower Courts

      United States Courts of Appeals

      United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit

      United States District Courts

      Territorial Courts

      United States Court of International Trade

      Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation

  Special Courts

      United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces

      United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims

      United States Court of Federal Claims

      United States Tax Court

  Administrative Office of the United States Courts

  Federal Judicial Center

  United States Sentencing Commission




Executive Branch: The President

  The President

  The Vice President




Executive Branch: Departments

  Department of Agriculture

  Department of Commerce

      Bureau of Industry and Security
   Economic Development Administration

   Economics and Statistics Administration

   International Trade Administration

   Minority Business Development Agency

   National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration

   National Telecommunications and Information Administration

   National Institute of Standards and Technology

   National Technical Information Service

   United States Patent and Trademark Office

Department of Defense

   Department of the Air Force

   Department of the Army

   Department of the Navy

       United States Marine Corps

       United States Naval Academy


   Defense Agencies

       Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency

       Defense Commissary Agency

       Defense Contract Audit Agency

       Defense Contract Management Agency

       Defense Finance and Accounting Service

       Defense Information Systems Agency

       Defense Intelligence Agency

       Defense Legal Services Agency

       Defense Logistics Agency

       Defense Security Cooperation Agency

       Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency

       Defense Threat Reduction Agency

       Missile Defense Agency

       National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
        National Security Agency / Central Security Service

        Pentagon Force Protection Agency

        Joint Service Schools


                Defense Acquisition University

                National Intelligence University

                National Defense University

                Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences

Department of Education

    Federally Aided Corporations

        American Printing House for the Blind

        Gallaudet University

        Howard University

        National Technical Institute for the Deaf / Rochester Institute of Technology


Department of Energy

    Federal Energy Regulatory Commission

Department of Health and Human Services

    Administration for Children and Families

    Administration for Community Living

    Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

    Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry

    Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

    Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services

    Food and Drug Administration

    Health Resources and Services Administration

    Indian Health Service

    National Institutes of Health

    Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration

Department of Homeland Security

Department of Housing and Urban Development

Department of Justice
    Bureaus

        Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives

        Bureau of Prisons

        Drug Enforcement Administration

        Federal Bureau of Investigation

        International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL)–Washington

        Office of Justice Programs

        United States Marshals Service


    Offices / Boards

        Executive Office for Immigration Review

        Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States

        Office of Community Oriented Policing Services

        Office on Violence Against Women

        United States Parole Commission


Department of Labor

    Bureau of International Labor Affairs

    Bureau of Labor Statistics

    Employee Benefits Security Administration

    Employment and Training Administration

    Mine Safety and Health Administration

    Occupational Safety and Health Administration

    Veterans' Employment and Training Service

    Wage and Hour Division

    Women's Bureau

Department of State

Department of Transportation

    Federal Aviation Administration

    Federal Highway Administration

    Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
      Federal Railroad Administration

      Federal Transit Administration

      Great Lakes Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation

      Maritime Administration

      National Highway Traffic Safety Administration

      Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration

  Department of Veterans Affairs

  Department of the Interior

      Bureau of Indian Affairs

      Bureau of Indian Education

      Bureau of Land Management

      Bureau of Ocean Energy Management

      Bureau of Reclamation

      Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement

      National Park Service

      Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement

      United States Fish and Wildlife Service

      United States Geological Survey

  Department of the Treasury

      Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau

      Bureau of Engraving and Printing

      Bureau of the Fiscal Service

      Internal Revenue Service

      Office of the Comptroller of the Currency

      United States Mint




Executive Branch: Independent Agencies and Government Corporations

  Administrative Conference of the United States
Central Intelligence Agency

Commodity Futures Trading Commission

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau

Consumer Product Safety Commission

Corporation for National and Community Service

Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board

Environmental Protection Agency

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission

Export-Import Bank of the United States

Farm Credit Administration

Federal Communications Commission

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation

Federal Election Commission

Federal Housing Finance Agency

Federal Labor Relations Authority

Federal Maritime Commission

Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission

Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service

Federal Reserve System

Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board

Federal Trade Commission

General Services Administration

Inter-American Foundation

Merit Systems Protection Board

National Aeronautics and Space Administration

National Archives and Records Administration

National Capital Planning Commission

National Credit Union Administration

National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities
    National Endowment for the Arts

    National Endowment for the Humanities

    Institute of Museum and Library Services

National Labor Relations Board

National Mediation Board

National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)

National Science Foundation

National Transportation Safety Board

Nuclear Regulatory Commission

Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission

Office of Government Ethics

Office of Personnel Management

Office of the Director of National Intelligence

Overseas Private Investment Corporation

Peace Corps

Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation

Postal Regulatory Commission

Railroad Retirement Board

Securities and Exchange Commission

Selective Service System

Small Business Administration

Social Security Administration

Surface Transportation Board

Tennessee Valley Authority

Trade and Development Agency

United States African Development Foundation

United States Agency for Global Media

United States Agency for International Development
  United States Commission on Civil Rights

  United States International Trade Commission

  United States Office of Special Counsel

  United States Postal Service




Quasi-Official Agencies

  Legal Services Corporation

  Smithsonian Institution

      John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts

      National Gallery of Art

      Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars

  State Justice Institute

  United States Holocaust Memorial Museum

  United States Institute of Peace




International Organizations

  African Development Bank

  Asian Development Bank

  European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

  Inter-American Defense Board

  Inter-American Development Bank

  Inter-American Investment Corporation

  International Monetary Fund

  International Organization for Migration

  Organization of American States

  United Nations
           World Bank Group

                 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

                 International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes

                 International Development Association

                 International Finance Corporation

                 Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                     Search
                                                                                           Search




About Us
The Office of the Federal Register (OFR), National Archives and Records Administration (NARA), and the U.S. Government

Publishing Office (GPO) publish The United States Government Manual. The U.S. Government Manual website is jointly

administered by the OFR–GPO partnership. Go to the OFR.gov website for more information and links to our publications

and services.

About the U.S. Government Manual
The United States Government Manual is the official handbook of the Federal Government. This current edition of the

Government Manual provides comprehensive information on the legislative, judicial, and executive branches. It also includes

information on quasi-official agencies, international organizations with U.S. membership, and Federal boards, commissions,

and committees.


A typical agency descriptions includes:

        A list of officials heading major operating units
        A summary of the agency's mission and role in the Federal Government
        A brief history of the agency, including its legislative or executive authority
        A description of agency programs and activities
        A set of Web sites, street addresses, and phone numbers for services, benefits, and other public information

This website offers three ways to find information on Government agencies and organizations.

     1. Enter a term in the keyword search box at the top left of the home page.
     2. Browse by category using the drop-down menu in the middle of the home page.
     3. Use "The Government of the United States" site map at the top right of the home page for an overview of the
        Government.
 Editorial and Update Process
 The current Government Manual database relies on information submitted to the OFR by Federal agencies and

 organizations, as required under 1 CFR part 20. OFR editors review and edit the submissions to produce organized and

 concise descriptions of Federal agency programs and activities. Agency liaison officers are consulted to verify the currency of

 the Government Manual's content at least once a year. The OFR exercises final editorial control over all editions of the

 Government Manual. To keep pace with changes in Government programs and leadership, OFR editors may amend the

 current edition throughout the year, using information verified by them or by the liaison officers.   

 Official Edition and Legal Status
 The United States Government Manual is a special edition of the Federal Register, issued under the authority of the

 Administrative Committee of the Federal Register (See 1 CFR part 9.). In addition to the current edition, previous editions of

 the Government Manual are accessible on the govinfo website, and some previous editions are available in hardcopy from

 the GPO Bookstore.

 Federal Register publications and services are provided to the public under the Federal Register Act (44 U.S.C. Ch. 15), the
 GPO Electronic Information Access Enhancement Act of 1993 (44 U.S.C. 4101), and related public information laws of the
 United States.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




   Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




FeedBack
Please fill out the details to contact us. If you have any suggestions or comments for how we can improve this website, please
submit your feedback by completing the form on the right.




 Contact Us



 Select Type
  Select
  Select Type
         Type

 From



 Subject



 Comments
     Submit
      Submit




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                     Search
                                                                                             Search




Privacy
The U.S. Government Manual Privacy Policy

The United States Government Manual website is an authorized service of the Office of the Federal Register (OFR), National
Archives and Records Administration (NARA), and the U.S. Government Publishing Office (GPO). NARA and GPO collect no
personal information about visitors to this website. We follow OMB recommendations and best practices for protecting
Internet privacy. We do not enable cookies to monitor usage or to gather users’ personal information. The only information
collected is the visitor's domain and internet protocol address, the type of browser and operating system used to access the
site, the files visited and the time spent in each file, and the time and date of the visit. We use this information for statistical
purposes, and to improve public access to this service.


Unauthorized Use and Security

This website is an official United States Government System. It is intended for use by the public to view and retrieve

Government Manual files and related information. For site security purposes and to ensure that this service remains

available to all users, this Government computer system employs software programs to monitor network traffic to identify

unauthorized attempts to upload or change information, or otherwise cause damage. Anyone using this system expressly

consents to such monitoring and is advised that if such monitoring reveals evidence of possible abuse or criminal activity,

such evidence may be provided to appropriate law enforcement officials. Unauthorized attempts to upload or change

information on this server are strictly prohibited and may be punishable by law, including the Computer Fraud and Abuse

Act of 1986 and the National Information Infrastructure Protection Act of 1996.




Home
The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




   Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




 Accessibility
 We believe that the U.S. Government Manual website is compliant with Section 508 and W3C accessibility design guidelines.
 This site uses text-based files and Adobe Portable Document Format (PDF) files, which are text-accessible through the use of
 Adobe PDF Tools. See more about Adobe Acrobat Reader and PDF Files below. The OFR and GPO are committed to
 assisting people with disabilities in any feasible manner, including voice description and other equivalent facilitation, in
 accordance with the electronic and information technology standards of 36 CFR part 1194.


 If you are a person with a disability and you encounter barriers to accessibility on this website, please contact Customer
 Service staff of the Federal Register for assistance at 202-741-6000, 8:45 a.m. to 5:15 p.m. EST, Monday through Friday
 (except Federal holidays). In addition, if you encounter barriers to accessibility on this site or any of our other govinfo web
 pages, you may also direct questions, comments, and/or recommendations to the Contact Center, 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.
 EST, Monday through Friday (except Federal holidays).


 More information about Section 508 can be found on: http://www.section508.gov.


 Adobe Acrobat Reader and PDF Files PDF files require the free Acrobat Reader. Adobe also provides free tools for the
 visually impaired: http://www.adobe.com/accessibility/index.html


 Download Adobe Reader Now



Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




   Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




 Freedom of Information Act
 The Freedom of Information Act, or FOIA (5 U.S.C. 552, as amended), generally provides any person with the statutory right,
 enforceable in court, to obtain access to Government information in executive branch agency records. This right to access is
 limited when information is protected from disclosure by one of FOIA's nine statutory exemptions.


 Federal Register publications, including The United States Government Manual, daily Federal Register, the Code of Federal
 Regulations (CFR), Federal Register/CFR indexes, and the Public Laws are not subject to the request for records provisions of
 the FOIA. Under the FOIA, our publications are made available to the public through numerous sources, including this
 website, GPO's govinfo website, the GPO book sales program, and most of the 1,300 Government depository libraries
 located throughout the Nation.


 For more information, see the National Archives and Records Administration Freedom of Information Act Reference Guide.
 This Guide provides instructions for obtaining information from us using the Freedom of Information Act, both operational
 and historical records.


 Learn more about our FOIA Regulations (36 CFR 1250).


 Read the text of the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552)


 See our Privacy Program Resources.


 Read NARA’s Annual FOIA Reports.



Home


The Government of the United States


About
Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




   Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




 No FEAR Act
 Equal Employment Opportunity


 Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) is the right of all persons to work and advance on the basis of merit, ability, and
 potential. Federal fair employment laws prohibit discrimination and require the Government to provide equal employment
 opportunity without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, disabling condition, or reprisal.


 EEO Complaint Data Posted Pursuant to the No Fear Act


 The National Archives posts summary statistical Equal Employment Opportunity (EEO) complaint data as required by the
 Notification Federal Employee Administration and Retaliation Act of 2002 (The No Fear Act). The NO FEAR Act requires
 Federal Agencies to post cumulative year-to-date summary statistical EEO complaint data on a quarterly basis during each
 Fiscal Year (FY) as follows: January 31; April 30; July 31; and October 31. View the most recent data at:
 http://www.archives.gov/eeo/policy/complaint-activity.html.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy
Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                         The Senate




The United States Government Manual




     THE SENATE
    The Capitol, Washington, DC 20510


    202-224-3121

    http://www.senate.gov




    Constitutionally Mandated Officers
 President of the Senate / Vice President of the United States                     J.D. Vance




 President pro tempore                                                             Charles Grassley

http://www.senate.gov/senators/leadership.htm



Political Party Leaders


 Majority Leader—Democrat                                                          Charles E. Schumer




 Minority Leader—Republican                                                        A. Mitchell McConnell

https://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/common/briefing/Majority_Minority_Leaders.htm#3



Senate-Elected Officers and Officials


 Chaplain                                                                          Barry C. Black


 Parliamentarian                                                                   Elizabeth C. MacDonough




 SECRETARIES


 for the Majority                                                                  Gary B. Myrick


 for the Minority                                                                  Robert M. Duncan


 for the Senate                                                                    Sonceria Berry




                                                                                   Jennifer A. Hemingway,
 Sergeant at Arms
                                                                                   Acting

https://www.senate.gov/history/officers.htm



 The above list of key personnel was updated 3–2021.


Organizational Chart

Overview
The Senate comprises 100 Members, 2 from each State. Senators are elected to serve for a term of 6 years. There are

three classes of Senators, and a new class is elected every 2 years. Senators were originally chosen by the State

legislatures. The 17th amendment, which became part of the Constitution in 1913, made their election a function of the

people.


A Senator must be a resident of the State that he or she represents. A Senator also must be at least 30 years of age

and have been a U.S. citizen for at least 9 years.


Officers
The Vice President of the United States is the Presiding Officer of the Senate. In the Vice President's absence, the

duties are taken over by a President pro tempore, elected by that body, or someone designated by the President pro

tempore.


The positions of Senate Majority and Minority Leader have been in existence only since the early years of the 20th

century. Leaders are elected at the beginning of each new Congress by a majority vote of the Senators in their political

party. In cooperation with their party organizations, Leaders are responsible for the design and achievement of a

legislative program. This involves managing the flow of legislation, expediting noncontroversial measures, and keeping

Members informed regarding proposed action on pending business. Each Leader serves as an ex officio member of

his party's policymaking and organizational bodies and is aided by an assistant floor leader (whip) and a party

secretary.


The Secretary of the Senate, elected by vote of the Senate, performs the duties of the Presiding Officer of the Senate

in the absence of the Vice President and pending the election of a President pro tempore. The Secretary is the

custodian of the seal of the Senate, draws requisitions on the Secretary of the Treasury for moneys appropriated for

the compensation of Senators, officers, and employees, and for the contingent expenses of the Senate, and is

empowered to administer oaths to any officer of the Senate and to any witness produced before it. The Secretary's

executive duties include certification of extracts from the Journal of the Senate; the attestation of bills and joint,

concurrent, and Senate resolutions; in impeachment trials, issuance, under the authority of the Presiding Officer, of all

orders, mandates, writs, and precepts authorized by the Senate; and certification to the President of the United States

of the advice and consent of the Senate to ratification of treaties and the names of persons confirmed or rejected

upon the nomination of the President.


The Sergeant at Arms, elected by vote of the Senate, serves as the executive, chief law enforcement, and protocol

officer and is the principal administrative manager for most support services in the Senate. As executive officer, the

Sergeant at Arms has custody of the Senate gavel; enforces Senate rules and regulations as they pertain to the Senate

Chamber, the Senate wing of the Capitol, and the Senate office buildings; and subject to the Presiding Officer,

maintains order on the Senate floor, Chamber, and galleries. As chief law enforcement officer of the Senate, the

Sergeant at Arms is authorized to maintain security in the Capitol and all Senate buildings, as well as to protect

Senators; to arrest and detain any person violating Senate rules; and to locate absentee Senators for a quorum. The

Sergeant at Arms serves as a member of the Capitol Police Board and as its chairman each odd year. As protocol

officer, the Sergeant at Arms escorts the President and other heads of state or official guests of the Senate who are

attending official functions in the Capitol; makes arrangements for funerals of Senators who die in office; and assists in
planning the inauguration of the President and organizing the swearing-in and orientation programs for newly elected

Senators.


Committees
The work of preparing and considering legislation is done largely by committees of both Houses of Congress. There

are 16 standing committees in the Senate. The standing committees of the Senate are shown in the list below. In

addition, there are two select committees in each House and various congressional commissions and joint committees

composed of Members of both Houses. Each House may also appoint special investigating committees. The

membership of the standing committees of each House is chosen by a vote of the entire body; members of other

committees are appointed under the provisions of the measure establishing them.


Each bill and resolution is usually referred to the appropriate committee, which may report a bill out in its original

form, favorably or unfavorably, recommend amendments, report original measures, or allow the proposed legislation

to die in committee without action.

http://www.senate.gov/general/common/generic/about_committees.htm
                                                                                    STANDING COMMITTEES OF
                                                                                    THE SENATE


https://www.senate.gov/committees/membership_assignments.htm
Committee                                              Chair                  Website

                                                         Deborah A.
  Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry                                          http://www.agriculture.senate.gov
                                                         Stabenow


  Appropriations                                         Patrick J. Leahy       http://www.appropriations.senate.gov


                                                                                http://www.armed-
  Armed Services                                         John F. Reed
                                                                                services.senate.gov


  Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs                    Sherrod C. Brown       http://www.banking.senate.gov


  Budget                                                 Bernard Sanders        http://www.budget.senate.gov


  Commerce, Science, and Transportation                  Maria E. Cantwell      http://www.commerce.senate.gov


  Energy and Natural Resources                           Joseph A. Manchin III https://www.energy.senate.gov


  Environment and Public Works                           Thomas R. Carper       https://www.epw.senate.gov


  Finance                                                Ronald L. Wyden        https://www.finance.senate.gov


  Foreign Relations                                      Robert Menendez        http://www.foreign.senate.gov


  Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions                 Patricia L. Murray     http://www.help.senate.gov


  Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs             Gary C. Peters         https://www.hsgac.senate.gov
  Indian Affairs                                        Brian E. Schatz        https://www.indian.senate.gov


  Judiciary                                             Richard J. Durbin      https://www.judiciary.senate.gov


  Rules and Administration                              Amy J. Klobuchar       http://www.rules.senate.gov


  Small Business and Entrepreneurship                   Benjamin L. Cardin     http://www.sbc.senate.gov


  Veterans' Affairs                                     R. Jon Tester          https://www.veterans.senate.gov

https://www.senate.gov/committees/committees_home.htm

  The above list of committee chairs was updated 2–2021.




Special Powers
Under the Constitution, the Senate is granted certain powers not accorded to the House of Representatives. The

Senate approves or disapproves certain Presidential appointments by majority vote, and treaties must be concurred in

by a two-thirds vote.


List of U.S. Senators
Information on Senate.gov web pages may be more accurate and current.

https://www.senate.gov/senators/index.htmhttps://www.senate.gov/general/contact_information/senators_cfm.cfm?
OrderBy=state&Sort=ASC
                                                                          EXPIRATION OF TERM— CONTACT
STATE
                                                                          PARTY AFFILIATION   INFORMATION


Alabama

  Katie Britt                                              2029—Republican         https://www.britt.senate.gov/


  Thomas H. Tuberville                                     2027—Republican         https://www.tuberville.senate.gov

Alaska

  Lisa A. Murkowski                                      2029—Republican         https://www.murkowski.senate.gov


  Daniel S. Sullivan                                     2027—Republican         http://www.sullivan.senate.gov

Arizona

  Mark E. Kelly                                             2029—Democrat            https://www.kelly.senate.gov


  Ruben Gallego                                             2031—Democrat            https://www.gallego.senate.gov

Arkansas

  John N. Boozman                                         2029—Republican         https://www.boozman.senate.gov


  Thomas B. Cotton                                        2027—Republican         https://www.cotton.senate.gov

California
  Dianne Feinstein           2025—Democrat          http://www.feinstein.senate.gov


  Alejandro Padilla          2029—Democrat          https://www.padilla.senate.gov

Colorado

  Michael F. Bennet       2029—Democrat        https://www.bennet.senate.gov


  John W. Hickenlooper    2027—Democrat        https://www.hickenlooper.senate.gov

Connecticut

  Richard L. Blumenthal    2029—Democrat        https://www.blumenthal.senate.gov


  Christopher S. Murphy    2025—Democrat        https://www.murphy.senate.gov

Delaware

  Lisa Blunt Rochester      2031—Democrat         https://www.rochester.senate.gov


  Christopher A. Coons      2027—Democrat         https://www.coons.senate.gov

Florida

  TBD                       2029—                  http://www..senate.gov


  Richard L. Scott          2025—Republican        https://www.rickscott.senate.gov

Georgia

  T. Jonathan Ossoff        2027—Democrat          https://www.ossoff.senate.gov


  Raphael G. Warnock        2029—Democrat          https://www.warnock.senate.gov

Hawaii

  Mazie K. Hirono            2025—Democrat           https://www.hirono.senate.gov


  Brian E. Schatz            2029—Democrat           http://www.schatz.senate.gov

Idaho

  Michael D. Crapo            2029—Republican         http://www.crapo.senate.gov


  James E. Risch              2027—Republican         http://www.risch.senate.gov

Illinois

  L. Tammy Duckworth       2029—Democrat         https://www.duckworth.senate.gov


  Richard J. Durbin        2027—Democrat         http://www.durbin.senate.gov

Indiana

  Jim Banks                  2031—Republican         https://www.banks.senate.gov


  Todd C. Young              2029—Republican         https://www.young.senate.gov

Iowa
 Joni K. Ernst                  2027—Republican        http://www.ernst.senate.gov


 Charles E. Grassley            2029—Republican        http://www.grassley.senate.gov

Kansas

 Roger W. Marshall              2027—Republican       https://www.marshall.senate.gov


 Gerald W. Moran                2029—Republican       http://www.moran.senate.gov

Kentucky

 A. Mitchell McConnell         2027—Republican       http://www.mcconnell.senate.gov


 Randal H. Paul                2029—Republican       https://www.paul.senate.gov

Louisiana

 William M. Cassidy             2027—Republican       http://www.cassidy.senate.gov


 John N. Kennedy                2029—Republican       https://www.kennedy.senate.gov

Maine

 Susan M. Collins                2027—Republican        https://www.collins.senate.gov


 Angus S. King, Jr.              2025—Independent       http://www.king.senate.gov

Maryland

 Angela Alsobrooks             2031—Democrat        https://www.alsobrooks.senate.gov


 Christopher Van Hollen, Jr.   2029—Democrat        https://www.vanhollen.senate.gov

Massachusetts

 Edward J. Markey                2027—Democrat         http://www.markey.senate.gov


 Elizabeth A. Warren             2025—Democrat         https://www.warren.senate.gov

Michigan

 Gary C. Peters                  2027—Democrat          https://www.peters.senate.gov


 Elissa Slotkin                  2031—Democrat          http://www.slotkin.senate.gov

Minnesota

 Amy J. Klobuchar              2025—Democrat        https://www.klobuchar.senate.gov


 Tina F. Smith                 2027—Democrat        https://www.smith.senate.gov

Mississippi

 Cindy Hyde-Smith              2027—Republican      https://www.hydesmith.senate.gov


 Roger F. Wicker               2025—Republican      https://www.wicker.senate.gov

Missouri
 Joshua D. Hawley           2025—Republican        https://www.hawley.senate.gov/


 Eric Schmitt               2029—Republican        https://www.schmitt.senate.gov

Montana

 Steven D. Daines            2027—Republican        https://www.daines.senate.gov


 Tim Sheehy                  2031—Republican        http://www.sheehy.senate.gov

Nebraska

 Debra S. Fischer            2025—Republican         http://www.fischer.senate.gov


 Benjamin E. Sasse           2027—Republican         http://www.sasse.senate.gov

Nevada

 Catherine Cortez Masto   2029—Democrat        https://www.cortezmasto.senate.gov


 Jacklyn S. Rosen         2025—Democrat        http://www.rosen.senate.gov

New Hampshire

 Margaret Wood Hassan       2029—Democrat         https://www.hassan.senate.gov


 C. Jeanne Shaheen          2027—Democrat         https://www.shaheen.senate.gov

New Jersey

 Cory A. Booker            2027—Democrat        http://www.booker.senate.gov


 Robert Menendez           2025—Democrat        https://www.menendez.senate.gov

New Mexico

 Martin T. Heinrich          2025—Democrat          http://www.heinrich.senate.gov


 Benjamin R. Luján           2027—Democrat          https://www.lujan.senate.gov

New York

 Kirsten E. Gillibrand     2025—Democrat          https://www.gillibrand.senate.gov


 Charles E. Schumer        2029—Democrat          https://www.schumer.senate.gov

North Carolina

 Ted Budd                    2029—Republican         https://www.budd.senate.gov


 Thomas R. Tillis            2027—Republican         https://www.tillis.senate.gov

North Dakota

 Kevin Cramer               2025—Republican        http://www.cramer.senate.gov


 John H. Hoeven III         2029—Republican        https://www.hoeven.senate.gov

Ohio
 Bernie Moreno            2031—Republican         https://www.moreno.senate.gov


 TBD                      2029—                   https://www..senate.gov

Oklahoma

 James M. Inhofe          2027—Republican         http://www.inhofe.senate.gov


 James Lankford           2029—Republican         https://www.lankford.senate.gov

Oregon

 Jeffrey A. Merkley        2027—Democrat          https://www.merkley.senate.gov


 Ronald L. Wyden           2029—Democrat          https://www.wyden.senate.gov

Pennsylvania

 David McCormick         2031—Republican       https://www.mccormick.senate.gov


 John Fetterman          2029—Democrat         http://www.fetterman.senate.gov

Rhode Island

 John F. Reed            2027—Democrat         https://www.reed.senate.gov


 Sheldon Whitehouse      2025—Democrat         https://www.whitehouse.senate.gov

South Carolina

 Lindsey O. Graham        2027—Republican         https://www.lgraham.senate.gov


 Timothy E. Scott         2029—Republican         https://www.scott.senate.gov

South Dakota

 M. Michael Rounds         2027—Republican         https://www.rounds.senate.gov


 John R. Thune             2029—Republican         https://www.thune.senate.gov

Tennessee

 Marsha W. Blackburn     2025—Republican        https://www.blackburn.senate.gov


 William F. Hagerty IV   2027—Republican        https://www.hagerty.senate.gov

Texas

 John Cornyn III           2027—Republican         https://www.cornyn.senate.gov


 R. Edward Cruz            2025—Republican         https://www.cruz.senate.gov

Utah

 Michael S. Lee              2029—Republican         https://www.lee.senate.gov


 John Curtis                 2031—Republican         http://www.curtis.senate.gov

Vermont
  Bernard Sanders                                            2025—Independent          https://www.sanders.senate.gov


  Peter Welch                                                2029—Democrat             https://www.welch.senate.gov

Virginia

  Timothy M. Kaine                                             2025—Democrat             http://www.kaine.senate.gov


  Mark R. Warner                                               2027—Democrat             http://www.warner.senate.gov

Washington

  Maria E. Cantwell                                           2025—Democrat            https://www.cantwell.senate.gov


  Patricia L. Murray                                          2029—Democrat            http://www.murray.senate.gov

West Virginia

  Shelley Moore Capito                                         2027—Republican           https://www.capito.senate.gov


  Jim Justice                                                  2031—Republican           http://www.justice.senate.gov

Wisconsin

  Tammy S. Baldwin                                         2025—Democrat           https://www.baldwin.senate.gov


  Ronald H. Johnson                                        209—Republican          https://www.ronjohnson.senate.gov

Wyoming

  John A. Barrasso III                                       2025—Republican           https://www.barrasso.senate.gov


  Cynthia M. Lummis                                          2027—Republican           https://www.lummis.senate.gov


  Information on Senate.gov may be more accurate and current.



  THE ABOVE LIST OF 100 SENATORS WAS UPDATED 2–2021.


  Republicans are 50; Democrats are 48; Independents are 2; and there are no
  vacancies.

https://www.senate.gov/senators/index.htm
https://www.senate.gov/general/contact_information/senators_cfm.cfm?OrderBy=state&Sort=ASC



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Art
The Senate's collections of ephemera, decorative art, graphic art, paintings, and sculpture can be viewed online.

https://www.senate.gov/art/art_hist_home.htm | Email: curator@sec.senate.gov

Biographical Directory
The online "Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, 1774–Present," allows visitors to search for Members
of Congress—past and present—by first or last name, political affiliation, position, State, or year or Congress.

http://bioguide.congress.gov/biosearch/biosearch.asp

Books by Senators
A bibliography of books that Senators who are currently serving in the U.S. Congress have written is available online.

https://www.senate.gov/senators/BooksWrittenbySittingSenators.htm

Campaign Finance
The Federal Election Commission maintains a campaign finance database that contains information on candidates,

including senatorial candidates, who file reports with the Commission. Users of the online "Candidate and Committee

Viewer" can sort data and download them. The data presentations consist of biennial summaries, report summaries,

and report images and downloads.

http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/candcmte_info.shtml?tabIndex=1

Campaign Websites
The Library of Congress maintains a database of "Archived Web Sites" that includes thousands of official campaign

websites. Former senatorial candidates' websites are part of this collection.

https://www.loc.gov/websites

Career Opportunities
Information on fellowships, internships, and job openings is available online.

http://www.senate.gov/visiting/employment.htm

Chaplains of the Senate
Nine of the first ten Senate Chaplains were Episcopalian; one was Presbyterian. Based on a simple denominational

count, the history of the Senate chaplaincy has been dominated by Episcopalians (19), Methodists (17), and

Presbyterians (14). The total number of chaplains who have filled the office of Senate Chaplain to date is 62.

https://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/common/briefing/Senate_Chaplain.htm

Children's Books
Links to educational resources are available on the Senate's website.

https://www.senate.gov/reference/bibliography/kids/kids.shtml

Committees
Information on Senate committees is available online.

http://www.senate.gov/committees/committees_home.htm

Congressional Directory
Prepared by the Joint Committee on Printing, the "Congressional Directory" is the official directory of the U.S.

Congress. The Directory contains a short biography of each Member of the Senate; committee memberships, terms of

service, administrative assistants and secretaries, and room and telephone numbers for Senators; lists of court officials,

military establishments, and other Federal departments and agencies, including District of Columbia government
officials, governors of States and territories, foreign diplomats, and members of the press, radio, and television

galleries.

https://www.govinfo.gov/app/collection/CDIR

Congressional Record
Starting with the year 1995, the official record of the proceedings and debates of the U.S. Congress is available on

Congress.gov.

https://www.congress.gov/congressional-record
Starting with the year 1994, the official record of the proceedings and debates of the U.S. Congress is available on the

Government Publishing Office's govinfo website.

https://www.govinfo.gov/app/collection/crec

Contact Information
The address for sending postal correspondence to a Senator or Senate committee is available online. Secretary of the

Senate: Phone, 202-224-2115. U.S. Capitol switchboard: Phone, 202-224-3121.

https://www.senate.gov/general/contacting.htm
Phone numbers, postal addresses, and online forms are available for contacting a Senator.

http://www.senate.gov/senators/contact
An online list of States also provides web forms for contacting a Senator via email.

http://www.senate.gov/senators/states.htm

Glossary
A Senate glossary is available online.

http://www.senate.gov/reference/glossary.htm

History
The Senate Historical Office has told the history of the Senate, from the First Federal Congress of 1789 through the

early 21st century; explained its traditions; described the individuals who served in its Chamber, and examined the

major issues that confronted these national leaders.

http://www.senate.gov/pagelayout/history/a_three_section_with_teasers/Explore_Senate_History.htm           |      Email:
historian@sec.senate.gov

How To . . .
Many congressional and other Government documents are available online. The Senate's website has resources that

explain how to find materials related to the Senate and the general legislative process.

https://www.senate.gov/reference/howto.htm

Legislation / Records
Research guides and resources are available online.

http://www.senate.gov/legislative/legislative_home.htm

Member Profiles
     The "Members of the U.S. Congress" database contains profiles for Senators who have held office since 1973 or were

     still serving in the 93d Congress. Users of the database can filter profiles by chamber, Congress, political affiliation, and

     State or U.S. Territory. A Member profile includes the following: dates of service, State represented, party affiliation,

     and a picture when available, as well as a link to the Member's entry in the "Biographical Directory of the United States

     Congress, 1774–Present" and a link to remarks made in the "Congressional Record." A profile also includes the list of

     legislation that the Member sponsored and cosponsored.

     https://www.congress.gov/members

     Publications
     The "Congressional Directory," the "Senate Manual," and telephone directory for the U.S. Senate are available from the

     Government Publishing Office's bookstore. Phone, 202-512-0132.

     https://bookstore.gpo.gov/agency/congress-legislative-branch | Email: mainbks@gpo.gov

     States Represented by Senators
     The "States in the Senate" web page provides a short description of each State's history in the U.S. Senate.

     http://www.senate.gov/states/statesmap.htm

     Statistics / Lists
     Statistics on and lists regarding a variety of topics—including cloture, nominations, roll call votes, Senate history,

     senators, and much more—are available online.

     https://www.senate.gov/reference/stats_and_lists.htm

     Websites
     More information on legislation and the U.S. Senate is available on Congress.gov.

     https://www.congress.gov
     More information also is available on the Government Publishing Office's govinfo website.

     https://www.govinfo.gov

        The above Sources of Information for the Senate were updated 2–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility
Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               The House of Representatives




The United States Government Manual




     THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
    The Capitol, Washington, DC 20515


    202-225-3121

    http://www.house.gov




    CONSTITUTIONALLY MANDATED OFFICER
 Speaker of the House                                                                 Mike Johnson

https://www.speaker.gov



POLITICAL PARTY LEADERS


 Majority Leader                                                                      Steve Scalise


 Minority Leader                                                                      Hakeem Jeffries

https://www.house.gov/leadership



Appointed Officials


 General Counsel                                                                      Matthew Berry


 Historian                                                                            Matthew A. Wasniewski


 Inspector General                                                                    Michael Ptasienski


 Parliamentarian                                                                      Jason A. Smith

https://history.house.gov/People/Appointed-Officials/Appointed-Officials/



Elected Officers


 Chaplain                                                                             Margaret G. Kibben


 Chief Administrative Officer                                                         Catherine L. Szpindor


 Clerk                                                                                Kevin F. McCumber


 Sergeant at Arms                                                                     William McFarland

https://www.house.gov/the-house-explained/officers-and-organizations



 The above list of key personnel was updated 3–2021.



Overview
The House of Representatives comprises 435 Representatives. The number representing each State is determined by

population, but every State is entitled to at least one Representative. Members are elected by the people for 2-year

terms, all terms running for the same period. Representatives must be residents of the State from which they are
chosen. In addition, a Representative must be at least 25 years of age and must have been a citizen for at least 7

years.


A Resident Commissioner from Puerto Rico (elected for a 4-year term) and Delegates from American Samoa, the

District of Columbia, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Virgin Islands complete the composition of the

Congress of the United States. Delegates are elected for a term of 2 years. The Resident Commissioner and Delegates

may take part in the floor discussions, but have no vote in the full House. They do, however, vote in the committees to

which they are assigned.


Officers
The Presiding Officer of the House of Representatives, the Speaker, is elected by the House. The Speaker may

designate any Member of the House to act in the Speaker's absence.


The House leadership is structured essentially the same as the Senate, with the Members in the political parties

responsible for the election of their respective leader and whips.


The elected officers of the House of Representatives include the Clerk, the Sergeant at Arms, the Chief Administrative

Officer, and the Chaplain.


The Clerk is custodian of the seal of the House and administers the primary legislative activities of the House. These

duties include accepting the credentials of the Members-elect and calling the Members to order at the

commencement of the first session of each Congress; keeping the Journal; taking all votes and certifying the passage

of bills; and processing all legislation. Through various departments, the Clerk is also responsible for floor and

committee reporting services; legislative information and reference services; the administration of House reports

pursuant to House rules and certain legislation including the Ethics in Government Act and the Lobbying Disclosure

Act of 1995; and the distribution of House documents. The Clerk is also charged with supervision of the offices vacated

by Members due to death, resignation, or expulsion.


The Sergeant at Arms maintains the order of the House under the direction of the Speaker and is the keeper of the

Mace. As a member of the U.S. Capitol Police Board, the Sergeant at Arms is the chief law enforcement officer for the

House and serves as Board Chairman each even year. The ceremonial and protocol duties parallel those of the Senate

Sergeant at Arms and include arranging the inauguration of the President of the United States, Joint Sessions of

Congress, visits to the House of heads of state, and funerals of Members of Congress. The Sergeant at Arms enforces

the rules relating to the privileges of the Hall of the House, including admission to the galleries, oversees garage and

parking security of the House, and distributes all House staff identification cards.


Committees
The work of preparing and considering legislation is done largely by committees of both Houses of Congress. There

are 19 standing committees in the House of Representatives. The standing committees of the House of Representatives

are shown in the list below. In addition, there are two select committees in the House and various congressional

commissions and joint committees composed of Members of both Houses. Each House may also appoint special

investigating committees. The membership of the standing committees of each House is chosen by a vote of the

entire body; members of other committees are appointed under the provisions of the measure establishing them.
Each bill and resolution is usually referred to the appropriate committee, which may report a bill out in its original

form, favorably or unfavorably, recommend amendments, report original measures, or allow the proposed legislation

to die in committee without action.

STANDING COMMITTEES OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
https://clerk.house.gov/committees
Committee                                               Chair                     Website

  Agriculture                                             David A. Scott           http://agriculture.house.gov


  Appropriations                                          Rosa L. DeLauro          http://appropriations.house.gov


  Armed Services                                          D. Adam Smith            https://armedservices.house.gov


  Budget                                                  John A. Yarmuth          http://budget.house.gov


  Education and Labor                                     Robert C. Scott          https://edlabor.house.gov


  Energy and Commerce                                     Frank J. Pallone, Jr.    https://energycommerce.house.gov


  Ethics                                                  Theodore E. Deutch       http://ethics.house.gov


  Financial Services                                      Maxine M. Waters         http://financialservices.house.gov


  Foreign Affairs                                         Gregory W. Meeks         https://foreignaffairs.house.gov


  Homeland Security                                       Bennie G. Thompson       https://homeland.house.gov


  House Administration                                    Zoe Lofgren              https://cha.house.gov


  Judiciary                                               Jerrold L. Nadler        https://judiciary.house.gov


  Natural Resources                                       Raúl M. Grijalva         http://naturalresources.house.gov


  Oversight and Reform                                    Carolyn B. Maloney       https://oversight.house.gov


  Rules                                                   James P. McGovern        https://rules.house.gov


  Science, Space, and Technology                          Eddie B. Johnson         https://science.house.gov


  Small Business                                          Nydia M. Velázquez       http://smallbusiness.house.gov


  Transportation and Infrastructure                       Peter A. DeFazio         http://transportation.house.gov


  Veterans' Affairs                                       Mark A. Takano           https://veterans.house.gov


  Ways and Means                                          Richard E. Neal          https://waysandmeans.house.gov

https://www.house.gov/committees
  The above list of committee chairs was updated 2–2021.




Special Powers
The House of Representatives is granted the power of originating all bills for the raising of revenue. Both Houses of

Congress act in impeachment proceedings, which, according to the Constitution, may be instituted against the

President, Vice President, and all civil officers of the United States. The House of Representatives has the sole power of

impeachment, and the Senate has the sole power to try impeachments.


List of U.S. Representatives
Information on House.gov may be more accurate and current.

https://www.house.gov/representatives
Information on the Office of the Clerk's website may be more accurate and current.

https://clerkpreview.house.gov/Members#MemberProfiles
                                                                           DISTRICT—PARTY               CONTACT
STATE / DISTRICT
                                                                           AFFILIATION                  INFORMATION


Alabama

  F. Barry Moore                                                01—Republican             https://barrymoore.house.gov


  Shomari Figures                                               02—Republican             https://figures.house.gov


  Michael D. Rogers                                             03—Republican             https://mikerogers.house.gov


  Robert B. Aderholt                                            04—Republican             https://aderholt.house.gov


  Dale W. Strong                                                05—Republican             https://strong.house.gov


  Gary J. Palmer                                                06—Republican             https://palmer.house.gov


  Terrycina A. Sewell                                           07—Democrat               https://sewell.house.gov

Alaska

  Nick Begich                                                       At Large—Republican         https://begich.house.gov

American Samoa

  Amata Coleman Radewagen                                        Delegate—Republican       https://radewagen.house.gov

Arizona

  David Schweikert                                              01—Republican              https://schweikert.house.gov/


  Elijah Crane                                                  02—Republican              https://crane.house.gov


  Yassamin Ansari                                               03—Democrat                https://ansari.house.gov


  Gregory J. Stanton                                            04—Democrat                https://stanton.house.gov
 Andrew S. Biggs          05—Republican      https://biggs.house.gov


 Juan Ciscomani           06—Republican      https://ciscomani.house.gov/


 Raúl M. Grijalva         07—Democrat        https://grijalva.house.gov


 Abe Hamadeh              08—Republican      https://lesko.house.gov


 Paul A. Gosar            09—Republican      http://gosar.house.gov

Arkansas

 Eric A. Crawford         01—Republican       https://crawford.house.gov


 J. French Hill           02—Republican       https://hill.house.gov


 Stephen A. Womack        03—Republican       https://womack.house.gov


 Bruce E. Westerman       04—Republican       https://westerman.house.gov

California

 Douglas L. LaMalfa     01—Republican     https://lamalfa.house.gov


 Jared W. Huffman       02—Democrat       https://huffman.house.gov


 Kevin Kiley            03—Republican     https://kiley.house.gov


 Michael C. Thompson    04—Democrat       https://mikethompson.house.gov


 Thomas M. McClintock   05—Republican     https://mcclintock.house.gov


 Amerish B. Bera        06-Democrat       https://bera.house.gov


 Doris O. Matsui        07—Democrat       https://matsui.house.gov


 John Garamendi         08—Democrat       https://garamendi.house.gov


 Joshua K. Harder       09—Democrat       https://harder.house.gov


 Mark J. DeSaulnier     10—Democrat       https://desaulnier.house.gov


 Nancy P. Pelosi        11—Democrat       https://pelosi.house.gov


 Lateefah Simon         12—Democrat       https://simon.house.gov


 Adam Gray              13—Republican     https://gray.house.gov


 Eric M. Swalwell       14—Democrat       https://swalwell.house.gov


 Kevin Mullin           15—Democrat       https://mullin.house.gov
Sam Liccardo               16—Democrat     https://liccardo.house.gov


Ro Khanna                  17—Democrat     https://khanna.house.gov


Zoe Lofgren                18—Democrat     https://lofgren.house.gov


James V. Panetta           19—Democrat     https://panetta.house.gov


Vince Fong                 20—Republican   https://fong.house.gov


Jim Costa                  21—Democrat     https://costa.house.gov


David Valadao              22—Republican   https://valadao.house.gov


Jay Obernolte              23—Republican   https://obernolte.house.gov


Salud Carbajal             24—Democrat     https://carbajal.house.gov


Raul Ruiz                  25—Democrat     https://ruiz.house.gov


Julia Brownley             26—Democrat     https://brownley.house.gov


George T. Whitesides       27—Democrat     https://whitesides.house.gov


Judy Chu                   28—Democrat     https://chu.house.gov


Luz Rivas                  29—Democrat     https://rivas.house.gov


Laura Friedman             30—Democrat     https://friedman.house.gov


Gilbert Ray Cisneros Jr.   31—Democrat     https://cisneros.house.gov


Brad Sherman               32—Democrat     https://sherman.house.gov


Pete Aguilar               33—Democrat     https://aguilar.house.gov


Jimmy Gomez                34—Democrat     https://gomez.house.gov


Norma Torres               35—Democrat     https://torres.house.gov


Ted Lieu                   36—Democrat     https://lieu.house.gov


                                           https://kamlager-
Sydney Kamlager-Dove       37—Democrat
                                           dove.house.gov/


Linda T. Sanchez           38—Democrat     https://sanchez.house.gov


Mark A. Takano             39—Democrat     https://takano.house.gov
 Young Kim            40—Republican      https://youngkim.house.gov


 Kenneth S. Calvert   41—Republican      https://calvert.house.gov


 Robert Garcia        42—Democrat        https://robertgarcia.house.gov


 Maxine M. Waters     43—Democrat        https://waters.house.gov


 Nanette Barragan     44—Democrat        https://barragan.house.gov


 Derek Tran           45—Democrat        https://tran.house.gov


 Lou Correa           46—Democrat        https://correa.house.gov


 Dave Min             47—Democrat        https://min.house.gov


 Darrell Issa         48—Republican      https://issa.house.gov


 Michael T. Levin     49—Democrat        https://mikelevin.house.gov


 Scott H. Peters      50—Democrat        https://scottpeters.house.gov


 Sara Jacobs          51—Democrat        https://sarajacobs.house.gov


 Juan Carlos Vargas   52—Democrat        https://vargas.house.gov

Colorado

 Diana L. DeGette        01—Democrat          https://degette.house.gov


 Joseph D. Neguse        02—Democrat          https://neguse.house.gov


 Jeff Hurd               03—Republican        https://hurd.house.gov


 Lauren Boebert          04—Republican        https://boebert.house.gov


 Jeff Crank              05—Republican        https://crank.house.gov


 Jason A. Crow           06—Democrat          https://crow.house.gov


 Brittany Pettersen      07—Democrat          https://pettersen.house.gov


 Gabe Evans              08—Republican        https://evans.house.gov/

Connecticut

 John B. Larson           01—Democrat          https://larson.house.gov


 Joseph D. Courtney       02—Democrat          https://courtney.house.gov


 Rosa L. DeLauro          03—Democrat          https://delauro.house.gov
 James A. Himes                04—Democrat             https://himes.house.gov


 Jahana F. Hayes               05—Democrat             https://hayes.house.gov

Delaware

 Sarah McBride                 At Large—Democrat       https://mcbride.house.gov

District of Columbia

 Eleanor Holmes Norton          Delegate—Democrat        https://norton.house.gov

Florida

 Matthew L. Gaetz II     01—Republican       https://gaetz.house.gov


 Neal P. Dunn            02—Republican       https://dunn.house.gov


 Kathryn Cammack         03—Republican       https://cammack.house.gov


 Aaron Bean              04—Republican       https://bean.house.gov


 John H. Rutherford      05—Republican       https://rutherford.house.gov


 Michael G. Waltz        06—Republican       https://waltz.house.gov


 Cory Mills              07—Republican       https://mills.house.gov


 Mike Haridopolos        08—Republican       https://haridopolos.house.gov


 Darren M. Soto          09—Democrat         https://soto.house.gov


 Maxwell Frost           10—Democrat         https://frost.house.gov


 Daniel A. Webster       11—Republican       https://webster.house.gov


 Gus M. Bilirakis        12—Republican       https://bilirakis.house.gov


 Anna Paulina Luna       13—Republican       https://luna.house.gov


 Katherine A. Castor     14—Democrat         https://castor.house.gov


 Laurel Lee              15—Republican       https://laurellee.house.gov


 Vernon G. Buchanan      16—Republican       https://buchanan.house.gov


 W. Gregory Steube       17—Republican       https://steube.house.gov


 C. Scott Franklin       18—Republican       https://franklin.house.gov


 Byron Donalds           19—Republican       https://donalds.house.gov


                                             https://cherfilus-
 Sheila Cherfilus-McCormick   20—Democrat
                                                  mccormick.house.gov


 Brian J. Mast                21—Republican       https://mast.house.gov


 Lois J. Frankel              22—Democrat         https://frankel.house.gov


 Jared Moskowitz              23—Democrat         https://moskowitz.house.gov


 Frederica S. Wilson          24—Democrat         https://wilson.house.gov


 Deborah Wasserman Schultz    25—Democrat         https://wassermanschultz.house.gov


 Mario R. Diaz-Balart         26—Republican       https://mariodiazbalart.house.gov


 Maria E. Salazar             27—Republican       https://salazar.house.gov


 Carlos A. Gimenez            28-Republican       https://gimenez.house.gov

Georgia

 Earl L. Carter                01—Republican         https://buddycarter.house.gov


 Sanford D. Bishop, Jr.        02—Democrat           http://bishop.house.gov


 Brian Jack                    03—Republican         https://jack.house.gov


 Henry C. Johnson, Jr.         04—Democrat           https://hankjohnson.house.gov


 Nikema Williams               05—Democrat           https://nikemawilliams.house.gov


 Lucia "Lucy" K. McBath        06—Democrat           https://mcbath.house.gov


 Rich McCormick                07—Republican         https://mccormick.house.gov


 J. Austin Scott               08—Republican         https://austinscott.house.gov


 Andrew S. Clyde               09—Republican         https://clyde.house.gov


 Mike Collins, Jr.             10—Republican         https://collins.house.gov


 Barry D. Loudermilk           11—Republican         https://loudermilk.house.gov


 Richard W. Allen              12—Republican         https://allen.house.gov


 David A. Scott                13—Democrat           https://davidscott.house.gov


 Marjorie T. Greene            14—Republican         https://greene.house.gov

Guam

 James Moylan                        Delegate—Republican    https://moylan.house.gov
Hawaii

  Edward E. Case                01—Democrat            https://case.house.gov


  Jill Tokuda                   02—Democrat            https://tokuda.house.gov

Idaho

  Russell M. Fulcher           01—Republican          https://fulcher.house.gov


  Michael K. Simpson           02—Republican          http://simpson.house.gov

Illinois

  Jonathan Jackson         01—Democrat         http://jonathanjackson.house.gov


  Robin L. Kelly           02—Democrat         https://robinkelly.house.gov


  Delia Ramirez            03—Democrat         https://ramirez.house.gov/


  Jesús G. García          04—Democrat         https://chuygarcia.house.gov


  Michael B. Quigley       05—Democrat         https://quigley.house.gov


  Sean T. Casten           06—Democrat         https://casten.house.gov


  Danny K. Davis           07—Democrat         https://davis.house.gov


  S. Raja Krishnamoorthi   08—Democrat         https://krishnamoorthi.house.gov


  Janice D. Schakowsky     09—Democrat         https://schakowsky.house.gov


  Bradley S. Schneider     10—Democrat         https://schneider.house.gov


  William G. Foster        11—Democrat         http://foster.house.gov


  Michael J. Bost          12—Republican       https://bost.house.gov


  Nikki Budzinski          13—Democrat         http://budzinski.house.gov


  Lauren Underwood         14—Democrat         https://underwood.house.gov


  Mary E. Miller           15—Republican       https://marymiller.house.gov


  Darin M. LaHood          16—Republican       http://lahood.house.gov


  Eric Sorensen            17—Democrat         https://sorensen.house.gov

Indiana

  Frank J. Mrvan              01—Democrat            https://mrvan.house.gov


  Rudy Yakym, III             02—Republican          http://yakym.house.gov
 Marlin A. Stutzman              03—Republican       https://stutzman.house.gov


 James R. Baird                  04—Republican       https://baird.house.gov


 Victoria Spartz                 05—Republican       https://spartz.house.gov


 Jefferson Shreve                06—Republican       https://shreve.house.gov


 André D. Carson                 07—Democrat         http://carson.house.gov


 Mark Messmer                    08—Republican       https://messmer.house.gov


 Erin Houchin                    09—Republican       https://houchin.house.gov

Iowa

 Mariannette J. Miller-Meeks   01—Republican      https://millermeeks.house.gov


 Ashley E. Hinson              02—Republican      https://hinson.house.gov


 Zachary Nunn                  03—Republican      https://nunn.house.gov


 Randall L. Feenstra           04—Republican      https://feenstra.house.gov

Kansas

 Tracey R. Mann                   01—Republican        https://mann.house.gov


 Derek Schmidt                    02—Republican        https://schmidt.house.gov


 Sharice L. Davids                03—Democrat          https://davids.house.gov


 Ronald G. Estes                  04—Republican        https://estes.house.gov

Kentucky

 James R. Comer                  01—Republican       https://comer.house.gov


 S. Brett Guthrie                02—Republican       https://guthrie.house.gov


 Morgan McGarvey                 03—Democrat         https://mcgarvey.house.gov


 Thomas H. Massie                04—Republican       https://massie.house.gov


 Harold D. Rogers                05—Republican       https://halrogers.house.gov


 Garland H. Barr IV              06—Republican       https://barr.house.gov

Louisiana

 Stephen J. Scalise            01—Republican      http://scalise.house.gov


 Troy Carter                   02—Democrat        https://troycarter.house.gov/
 G. Clay Higgins               03—Republican     https://clayhiggins.house.gov


 J. Michael Johnson            04—Republican     https://mikejohnson.house.gov


 Julia Letlow                  05—Republican     https://letlow.house.gov/


 Cleo Fields                   06—Democrat       https://fields.house.gov

Maine

 Chellie M. Pingree               01—Democrat         https://pingree.house.gov


 Jared F. Golden                  02—Democrat         https://golden.house.gov

Maryland

 Andrew P. Harris             01—Republican     http://harris.house.gov


 Johnny Olszewski             02—Democrat       http://olszewski.house.gov


 Sarah Kelly Elfreth          03—Democrat       https://elfreth.house.gov


 Glenn Ivey                   04—Democrat       https://ivey.house.gov


 Steny H. Hoyer               05—Democrat       https://hoyer.house.gov


 April Lynn McClain-Delaney   06—Democrat       https://mclaindelaney.house.gov


 Kweisi Mfume                 07—Democrat       https://mfume.house.gov


 Jamin B. Raskin              08—Democrat       https://raskin.house.gov

Massachusetts

 Richard E. Neal              01—Democrat       https://neal.house.gov


 James P. McGovern            02—Democrat       http://mcgovern.house.gov


 Lori L. Trahan               03—Democrat       https://trahan.house.gov


 Jacob D. Auchincloss         04—Democrat       https://auchincloss.house.gov


 Katherine M. Clark           05—Democrat       https://katherineclark.house.gov


 Seth W. Moulton              06—Democrat       http://moulton.house.gov


 Ayanna S. Pressley           07—Democrat       https://pressley.house.gov


 Stephen F. Lynch             08—Democrat       http://lynch.house.gov


 William R. Keating           09—Democrat       https://keating.house.gov

Michigan
 John W. Bergman             01—Republican         https://bergman.house.gov


 John R. Moolenaar           02—Republican         https://moolenaar.house.gov


 Hillary Scholten            03—Democrat           https://scholten.house.gov


 William P. Huizenga         04—Republican         https://huizenga.house.gov


 Timothy L. Walberg          05—Republican         http://walberg.house.gov


 Debbie Dingell              06—Democrat           http://debbiedingell.house.gov


 Tom Barrett                 07—Republican         http://barrett.house.gov


 Kristen McDonald Rivet      08—Democrat           https://rivet.house.gov


 Lisa C. McClain             09—Republican         https://mcclain.house.gov


 John James                  10—Republican         https://james.house.gov


 Haley M. Stevens            11—Democrat           https://stevens.house.gov


 Rashida H. Tlaib            12—Democrat           https://tlaib.house.gov


 Shri Thanedar               13—Democrat           https://thanedar.house.gov

Minnesota

 Brad Finstad                  01—Republican           https://finstad.house.gov


 Angela D. Craig               02—Democrat             https://craig.house.gov


 Kelly Morrison                03—Democrat             https://morrison.house.gov


 Betty L. McCollum             04—Democrat             http://mccollum.house.gov


 Ilhan A. Omar                 05—Democrat             https://omar.house.gov


 Thomas E. Emmer, Jr.          06—Republican           https://emmer.house.gov


 Michelle L. Fischbach         07—Republican           https://fischbach.house.gov


 Peter A. Stauber              08—Republican           https://stauber.house.gov

Mississippi

 J. Trent Kelly           01—Republican        https://trentkelly.house.gov


 Bennie G. Thompson       02—Democrat          https://benniethompson.house.gov


 Michael P. Guest         03—Republican        https://guest.house.gov
 Mike Ezell              04—Republican        http://ezell.house.gov

Missouri

 Wesley Bell                 01—Democrat            https://bell.house.gov


 Ann L. Wagner               02—Republican          http://wagner.house.gov


 Bob Onder, Jr.              03—Republican          http://onder.house.gov


 Mark Alford                 04—Republican          https://alford.house.gov


 Emanuel Cleaver II          05—Democrat            http://cleaver.house.gov


 Samuel B. Graves, Jr.       06—Republican          https://graves.house.gov


 Eric Burlison               07—Republican          https://burlison.house.gov


 Jason T. Smith              08—Republican          https://jasonsmith.house.gov

Montana

 Ryan Zinke                   1—Republican            https://zinke.house.gov


 Troy Downing                 2—Republican            https://downing.house.gov

Nebraska

 Mike Flood                  01—Republican          https://flood.house.gov


 Donald J. Bacon             02—Republican          https://bacon.house.gov


 Adrian M. Smith             03—Republican          http://adriansmith.house.gov

Nevada

 A. Costandina Titus          01—Democrat             https://titus.house.gov


 Mark E. Amodei               02—Republican           https://amodei.house.gov


 Suzanne K. Lee               03—Democrat             https://susielee.house.gov


 Steven A. Horsford           04—Democrat             https://horsford.house.gov

New Hampshire

 Christopher C. Pappas       01—Democrat            https://pappas.house.gov


 Maggie Goodlander           02—Democrat            http://goodlander.house.gov

New Jersey

 Donald W. Norcross      01—Democrat           https://norcross.house.gov


 Jefferson H. Van Drew   02—Republican         https://vandrew.house.gov
 Herb Conaway                03—Democrat       https://conaway.house.gov


 Christopher H. Smith        04—Republican     http://chrissmith.house.gov


 Joshua S. Gottheimer        05—Democrat       https://gottheimer.house.gov


 Frank J. Pallone, Jr.       06—Democrat       https://pallone.house.gov


 Thomas Kean, Jr.            07—Republican     https://kean.house.gov


 Robert Menendez             08—Democrat       https://menendez.house.gov


 Nellie Pou                  09—Democrat       http://pou.house.gov


 LaMonica McIver             10—Democrat       http://mciver.house.gov


 R. Michelle Sherrill        11—Democrat       https://sherrill.house.gov


 Bonnie Watson Coleman       12—Democrat       https://watsoncoleman.house.gov

New Mexico

 Melanie Stansbury              01—Democrat         https://stansbury.house.gov


 Gabe Vasquez                   02—Democrat         https://vasquez.house.gov


 Teresa I. Leger Fernandez      03—Democrat         https://fernandez.house.gov

New York

 Nick LaLota                   01—Republican       https://lalota.house.gov


 Andrew R. Garbarino           02—Republican       https://garbarino.house.gov


 Tom Suozzi                    03—Democrat         https://suozzi.house.gov


 Laura Gillen                  04—Democrat         http://gillen.house.gov


 Gregory W. Meeks              05—Democrat         http://meeks.house.gov


 Grace Meng                    06—Democrat         http://meng.house.gov


 Nydia M. Velázquez            07—Democrat         https://velazquez.house.gov


 Hakeem S. Jeffries            08—Democrat         http://jeffries.house.gov


 Yvette D. Clarke              09—Democrat         https://clarke.house.gov


 Daniel Goldman                10—Democrat         http://goldman.house.gov


 Nicole Malliotakis            11—Republican       https://malliotakis.house.gov
 Jerrold L. Nadler          12—Democrat     http://nadler.house.gov


 Adriano D. Espaillat       13—Democrat     https://espaillat.house.gov


                                            https://ocasio-
 Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez   14—Democrat
                                            cortez.house.gov


 Ritchie J. Torres          15—Democrat     https://ritchietorres.house.gov


 George Latimer             16—Democrat     https://latimer.house.gov


 Michael Lawler             17—Republican   https://lawler.house.gov


 Patrick Ryan               18—Democrat     http://patryan.house.gov


 Josh Riley                 19—Democrat     https://riley.house.gov


 Paul D. Tonko              20—Democrat     https://tonko.house.gov


 Elise M. Stefanik          21—Republican   https://stefanik.house.gov


 John Mannion               22—Democrat     https://mannion.house.gov


 Nicholas Langworthy        23—Republican   https://langworthy.house.gov


 Claudia Tenney             24—Republican   https://tenney.house.gov


 Joseph D. Morelle          25—Democrat     https://morelle.house.gov


 Tim Kennedy                26—Democrat     http://kennedy.house.gov

North Carolina

 Donald Davis               01—Democrat     http://dondavis.house.gov


 Deborah K. Ross            02—Democrat     https://ross.house.gov


 Gregory F. Murphy          03—Republican   https://gregmurphy.house.gov


 Valerie Foushee            04—Democrat     https://foushee.house.gov


 Virginia A. Foxx           05—Republican   http://foxx.house.gov


 Addison McDowell           06—Republican   https://mcdowell.house.gov


 David C. Rouzer            07—Republican   https://rouzer.house.gov


 Mark Harris                08—Republican   https://harris.house.gov


 Richard L. Hudson, Jr.     09—Republican   https://hudson.house.gov
 Pat Harrigan              10—Republican            http://harrigan.house.gov


 Chuck Edwards             11—Republican            https://edwards.house.gov


 Alma S. Adams             12—Democrat              http://adams.house.gov


 Brad Knott                13—Republican            https://knott.house.gov


 Tim Moore                 14—Republican            http://moore.house.gov

North Dakota

 Kelly Armstrong             At Large—Republican      https://armstrong.house.gov

Northern Mariana Islands

 Kimberlyn King-Hinds         Delegate—Republican       http://kinghinds.house.gov

Ohio

 Greg Landsman             01—Democrat             http://landsman.house.gov


 David Taylor              02—Republican           http://taylor.house.gov


 Joyce B. Beatty           03—Democrat             http://beatty.house.gov


 James D. Jordan           04—Republican           http://jordan.house.gov


 Robert E. Latta           05—Republican           http://latta.house.gov


 Michael Rulli             06—Republican           http://rulli.house.gov


 Max Miller                07—Republican           https://maxmiller.house.gov


 Warren E. Davidson        08—Republican           https://davidson.house.gov


 Marcia C. Kaptur          09—Democrat             https://kaptur.house.gov


 Michael R. Turner         10—Republican           https://turner.house.gov


 Shontel Brown             11—Democrat             https://shontelbrown.house.gov


 W. Troy Balderson         12—Republican           https://balderson.house.gov


 Emilia Sykes              13—Democrat             https://sykes.house.gov


 David P. Joyce            14—Republican           https://joyce.house.gov


 Mike Carey                15—Republican           https://carey.house.gov

Oklahoma

 Kevin R. Hern               01—Republican             https://hern.house.gov
 Josh Brecheen             02—Republican       https://brecheen.house.gov


 Frank D. Lucas            03—Republican       https://lucas.house.gov


 Thomas J. Cole            04—Republican       https://cole.house.gov


 Stephanie I. Bice         05—Republican       https://bice.house.gov

Oregon

 Suzanne M. Bonamici       01—Democrat         https://bonamici.house.gov


 Cliff S. Bentz            02—Republican       https://bentz.house.gov


 Maxine Dexter             03—Democrat         https://dexter.house.gov


 Val Hoyle                 04—Democrat         https://hoyle.house.gov


 Janelle Bynum             05—Democrat         https://bynum.house.gov


 Andrea Salinas            06-Democrat         https://salinas.house.gov

Pennsylvania

 Brian K. Fitzpatrick    01—Republican     https://fitzpatrick.house.gov


 Brendan F. Boyle        02—Democrat       https://boyle.house.gov


 Dwight E. Evans         03—Democrat       https://evans.house.gov


 Madeleine C. Dean       04—Democrat       https://dean.house.gov


 Mary Gay Scanlon        05—Democrat       https://scanlon.house.gov


 Christina J. Houlahan   06—Democrat       https://houlahan.house.gov


 Ryan Mackenzie          07—Republican     https://mackenzie.house.gov


 Rob Bresnahan           08—Republican     https://bresnahan.house.gov


 Daniel P. Meuser        09—Republican     https://meuser.house.gov


 Scott G. Perry          10—Republican     https://perry.house.gov


 Lloyd K. Smucker        11—Republican     https://smucker.house.gov


 Summer Lee              12—Democrat       https://summerlee.house.gov


 John P. Joyce           13—Republican     https://johnjoyce.house.gov


 Guy L. Reschenthaler    14—Republican     https://reschenthaler.house.gov
 Glenn W. Thompson                  15—Republican         https://thompson.house.gov


 George Joseph "Mike" Kelly, Jr.    16—Republican         https://kelly.house.gov


 Christopher Deluzio                17—Democrat           https://deluzio.house.gov

Puerto Rico

                                        Resident Commissioner
 Pablo Jose Hernandez Rivera                                       https://rivera.house.gov
                                        —Republican

Rhode Island

 Gabe Amo                             01—Democrat            http://amo.house.gov


 Seth Magaziner                       02—Democrat            http://magaziner.house.gov

South Carolina

 Nancy R. Mace                         01—Republican            https://mace.house.gov


 Addison Graves "Joe" Wilson, Sr.      02—Republican            http://joewilson.house.gov


 Sheri Biggs                           03—Republican            http://biggs.house.gov


 William R. Timmons, IV                04—Republican            https://timmons.house.gov


 Ralph W. Norman, Jr.                  05—Republican            https://norman.house.gov


 James E. Clyburn                      06—Democrat              http://clyburn.house.gov


 Russell Fry                           07—Republican            http://fry.house.gov

South Dakota

 Dustin M. Johnson                  At Large—Republican   https://dustyjohnson.house.gov

Tennessee

 Diana L. Harshbarger                01—Republican         https://harshbarger.house.gov


 Timothy F. Burchett                 02—Republican         https://burchett.house.gov


 Charles J. Fleischmann              03—Republican         http://fleischmann.house.gov


 Scott E. DesJarlais                 04—Republican         https://desjarlais.house.gov


 Andrew Ogles                        05—Republican         http://ogles.house.gov


 John W. Rose                        06—Republican         https://johnrose.house.gov


 Mark E. Green                       07—Republican         https://markgreen.house.gov


 David F. Kustoff                    08—Republican         https://kustoff.house.gov
 Stephen I. Cohen        09—Democrat     https://cohen.house.gov

Texas

 Nathaniel Moran         01—Republican   https://moran.house.gov


 Daniel R. Crenshaw      02—Republican   https://crenshaw.house.gov


 Keith Alan Self         03—Republican   https://self.house.gov


 Patrick E. Fallon       04—Republican   https://fallon.house.gov


 Lance Gooden            05—Republican   https://gooden.house.gov


 Jake Ellzey             06—Republican   https://ellzey.house.gov


 Elizabeth P. Fletcher   07—Democrat     https://fletcher.house.gov


 Morgan Luttrell         08—Republican   http://luttrell.house.gov


 Alexander N. Green      09—Democrat     http://algreen.house.gov


 Michael T. McCaul       10—Republican   http://mccaul.house.gov


 August L. Pfluger       11—Republican   https://pfluger.house.gov


 Craig Goldman           12—Republican   http://goldman.house.gov


 Ronny L. Jackson        13—Republican   https://jackson.house.gov


 Randy K. Weber, Sr.     14—Republican   http://weber.house.gov


 Monica De La Cruz       15—Republican   https://delacruz.house.gov


 Veronica Escobar        16—Democrat     https://escobar.house.gov


 Peter A. Sessions       17—Republican   https://sessions.house.gov


 Sylvester Turner        18—Democrat     http://turner.house.gov


 Jodey Cook Arrington    19—Republican   https://arrington.house.gov


 Joaquin Castro          20—Democrat     https://castro.house.gov


 Charles E. Roy          21—Republican   https://roy.house.gov


 Troy E. Nehls           22—Republican   https://nehls.house.gov


 E. Anthony Gonzalez     23—Republican   https://gonzales.house.gov
 Elizabeth A. Van Duyne    24—Republican           https://vanduyne.house.gov


 J. Roger Williams         25—Republican           http://williams.house.gov


 Brandon Gill              26—Republican           http://gill.house.gov


 Michael J. Cloud          27—Republican           https://cloud.house.gov


 Enrique R. Cuellar        28—Democrat             http://cuellar.house.gov


 Sylvia R. Garcia          29—Democrat             https://sylviagarcia.house.gov


 Jasmine Crockett          30—Democrat             http://crockett.house.gov


 John R. Carter            31—Republican           https://carter.house.gov


 Julie Johnson             32—Democrat             https://johnson.house.gov


 Marc A. Veasey            33—Democrat             http://veasey.house.gov


 Vincente Gonzalez         34—Democrat             https://gonzalez.house.gov


 Greg Casar                35—Democrat             https://casar.house.gov


 Brian Babin               36—Republican           http://babin.house.gov


 Lloyd A. Doggett, II      37—Democrat             https://doggett.house.gov


 Wesley Hunt               38—Republican           https://hunt.house.gov

Utah

 Blake D. Moore            01—Republican          https://blakemoore.house.gov


 Celeste Maloy             02—Republican          http://maloy.house.gov


 Mike Kennedy              03—Republican          https://kennedy.house.gov


 C. Burgess Owens          04—Republican          https://owens.house.gov

Vermont

 Becca Balint                  At Large—Democrat         https://balint.house.gov

Virgin Islands

 Stacey E. Plaskett           Delegate—Democrat       https://plaskett.house.gov

Virginia

 Robert J. Wittman        01—Republican      http://wittman.house.gov


 Jennifer Kiggans         02—Republican      https://kiggans.house.gov
 Robert C. Scott           03—Democrat          http://bobbyscott.house.gov


 Jennifer McClellan        04—Democrat          https://mcclellan.house.gov


 John McGuire              05—Republican        https://mcguire.house.gov


 Benjamin L. Cline         06—Republican        https://cline.house.gov


 Eugene Vindman            07—Democrat          https://vindman.house.gov


 Donald S. Beyer, Jr.      08—Democrat          http://beyer.house.gov


 H. Morgan Griffith        09—Republican        http://morgangriffith.house.gov


 Suhas Subramanyam         10—Democrat          https://subramanyam.house.gov


 Gerald E. Connolly        11—Democrat          https://connolly.house.gov

Washington

 Suzan K. DelBene       01—Democrat         https://delbene.house.gov


 Richard R. Larsen      02—Democrat         http://larsen.house.gov


 Marie Perez            03—Democrat         http://gluesenkampperez.house.gov/


 Daniel M. Newhouse     04—Republican       https://newhouse.house.gov


 Michael Baumgartner    05—Republican       http://baumgartner.house.gov


 Emily Randall          06—Democrat         https://randall.house.gov


 Pramila Jayapal        07—Democrat         https://jayapal.house.gov


 Kimberly M. Schrier    08—Democrat         https://schrier.house.gov


 D. Adam Smith          09—Democrat         https://adamsmith.house.gov


 Marilyn Strickland     10—Democrat         https://strickland.house.gov

West Virginia

 Carol D. Miller               01—Republican            https://miller.house.gov


 Riley Moore                   02—Republican            https://moore.house.gov

Wisconsin

 Bryan G. Steil             01—Republican         https://steil.house.gov


 Mark Pocan                 02—Democrat           http://pocan.house.gov


 Van Orden, Derrick         03—Republican         https://vanorden.house.gov
  Gwendolynne S. Moore                                           04—Democrat                https://gwenmoore.house.gov


  Scott L. Fitzgerald                                            05—Republican              https://fitzgerald.house.gov


  Glenn S. Grothman                                              06—Republican              http://grothman.house.gov


  Thomas P. Tiffany                                              07—Republican              https://tiffany.house.gov


  Tony Wied                                                      08—Republican              https://wied.house.gov

Wyoming

  Harriet Hageman                                                  At Large—Republican        https://hageman.house.gov


  Information on House.gov may be more accurate and current.



  THE ABOVE LIST OF 435 REPRESENTATIVES WAS UPDATED 3–2021.


  Democrats are 219; Republicans are 211; and 5 districts do not have a
  Representative.


  The Resident Commissioner and Delegates are not counted as Members.

https://www.house.gov/representatives

  Information on the Office of the Clerk's website may be more accurate and current.



https://clerkpreview.house.gov/Members#MemberProfiles



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Additional Resources
The "House of Representatives Resources" web page contains links that allow easy access to calendars, committee

assignments, current House floor activities, directories, documents, profiles, statistics, texts of bills, the Office of the

Clerk and the House Library, and information on committee meetings, House history, precedents, procedures, rules,

salaries, Speakers of the House, vacancies, and information for those who are planning a visit to the U.S. Capitol.

https://www.congress.gov/help/house-of-representatives

Art Competition
Each spring, the Congressional Institute sponsors a nationwide high school visual art competition to recognize and

encourage artistic talent. Students submit their entries to their Representative’s office, and panels of district artists

select the winning artwork, which is displayed at the U.S. Capitol for 1 year.

http://www.house.gov/content/educate/art_competition

Campaign Finance
The Federal Election Commission maintains a campaign finance database that contains information on candidates,

including congressional candidates, who file reports with the Commission. Users of the online "Candidate and

Committee Viewer" can sort data and download them. The data presentations consist of biennial summaries, report

summaries, and report images and downloads.

http://www.fec.gov/finance/disclosure/candcmte_info.shtml?tabIndex=1

Campaign Websites
The Library of Congress maintains a "Web Archives" that includes thousands of official campaign websites. Former

congressional candidates' websites are part of this collection.

https://www.loc.gov/websites

Career Opportunities
The House Vacancy Announcement and Placement Service assists House Members, committees, and leadership by

posting job vacancies and maintaining a resume bank. The Service provides confidential referral of resumes when

House offices request them. Information on submitting a resume is available online.

http://www.house.gov/content/jobs/members_and_committees.php
To apply for positions with House organizations, read the individual vacancy announcements and follow the

instructions.

http://www.house.gov/content/jobs/vacancies.php

Committees
Information on House committees is available on House.gov.

http://www.house.gov/committees
Additional information is available on the Office of the Clerk's website.

http://clerk.house.gov/committee_info/index.aspx

Congressional Record
Starting with the year 1995, the official record of the proceedings and debates of the U.S. Congress is available on

Congress.gov.

https://www.congress.gov/congressional-record
Starting with the year 1994, the official record of the proceedings and debates of the U.S. Congress is available on the

Government Publishing Office's govinfo website.

https://www.govinfo.gov/app/collection/crec

Contact the Clerk
Additional information on the House of Representatives is available from the Clerk, U.S. Capitol, Room H-154,

Washington, DC 20515-6601. Phone, 202-225-7000.

https://clerkpreview.house.gov/About#OverviewContact | Email: info.clerkweb@mail.house.gov

Directories
The website House.gov has a directory that contains the committee assignment, congressional district, name, phone
number, political affiliation, and room number of each Member of the U.S. House of Representatives, as well as the

Uniform Resources Locator (URL) that leads to his or her website.

http://www.house.gov/representatives
The online "Biographical Directory of the United States Congress, 1774–Present," allows visitors to search for Members

of Congress—past and present—by first or last name, political affiliation, position, State, or year or Congress.

http://bioguide.congress.gov/biosearch/biosearch.asp
Present and former Members of Congress have control numbers associated with their records in the "Biographical

Directory of the United States Congress." Member IDs or "BioGuide IDs" serve as metadata within Congress.gov and

legislative documents that the Government Publishing Office publishes.

https://www.congress.gov/help/field-values/member-bioguide-ids

Find a Representative
A Zip code-based search tool is available on House.gov for locating a representative.

http://www.house.gov/representatives/find

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Office of the Clerk has posted answers to general legislative questions and to more specific questions related to

members and committees.

https://clerkpreview.house.gov/Help#MemberFAQs

Glossaries
The Office of the Clerk's website has a short glossary for children.

https://kids-clerk.house.gov/high-school/glossary.html
House.gov has a glossary of terms for readers of congressional records.

http://history.house.gov/Records-and-Research/FAQs/Congressional-Glossary/
House.gov features a glossary of records management terms.

http://history.house.gov/Records-and-Research/FAQs/Records-Glossary/
The "Statement of Disbursements" is a quarterly public report of all receipts and expenditures for U.S. House of

Representatives committees, leadership, Members, and officers and offices. To help the general public read this report,

House.gov maintains an online glossary.

https://www.house.gov/the-house-explained/open-government/statement-of-disbursements/glossary-of-terms

History
The House of Representative's "History, Art and Archives" website features resources and a trove of information,

including online collections, exhibitions, publications, and records.

http://history.house.gov | Email: history@mail.house.gov
In 2015, the "History, Art & Archives" team presented 10 favorite historical highlights and blog posts. Its selection had

an eclectic character and includes highlights on a lavaliere of diamonds, the protective power of a thrice-folded

newspaper, the House gym, an amendment to abolish the U.S. Senate, national weather forecasts, possums, dueling in

the House, hunting dogs on the floor, a titanic story of love and courage, and a very kissable man.
https://history.house.gov/Blog/2015/May/5-20-Top-Ten/

Learning About the House
The Office of the Clerk's website features educational and entertaining information on the legislative branch of the

Government for students of all ages. Its "Kids in the House" site explains the role of the House of Representatives,

describes the legislative process, and covers House history.

https://kids-clerk.house.gov
Adults seeking to learn about commissions, committees, House history, House leadership, Representatives, rules, or a

Representative's schedule may benefit from "The House Explained" section on House.gov.

http://www.house.gov/content/learn

Member Profiles
The "Members of the U.S. Congress" database contains profiles for Representatives who have held office since 1973 or

were still serving in the 93d Congress. Users of the database can filter profiles by chamber, Congress, political

affiliation, and State or U.S. Territory. A Member profile includes the following: dates of service, district number and

State, party affiliation, and a picture when available, as well as a link to the Member's entry in the "Biographical

Directory of the United States Congress, 1774–Present" and a link to remarks made in the "Congressional Record." A

profile also includes the list of legislation that the Member sponsored and cosponsored.

https://www.congress.gov/members
The Office of the Clerk's website also maintains a database of Member profiles.

https://clerkpreview.house.gov/Members#MemberProfiles

Most-Viewed Bills
The top ten most-viewed bills list is compiled each Monday and posted on the Congress.gov website.

https://www.congress.gov/resources/display/content/Most-Viewed+Bills

Oath of Office
The constitutional oath of office requires each Member of Congress to swear or affirm that he or she will support and

defend the U.S. Constitution against foreign and domestic enemies; bear faith and allegiance to the Constitution; take

this obligation freely, with neither mental reservation nor purpose of evasion; and discharge the duties of the office

well and faithfully.

https://clerkpreview.house.gov/Members#MemberOaths

Party Seats / Vacancies
The Office of the Clerk's "House at a Glance" page keeps a tally of the number of Democratic, Independent,

Libertarian, Republican, and vacant seats in the House of Representatives.

https://clerk.house.gov/#view-at-a-glance

People Search
The "History, Art, and Archives" section on the House.gov website has a versatile tool that allows users to search a

comprehensive database containing biographical information on Members of the House of Representatives and on
     nonmember officers like chaplains, clerks, parliamentarians, sergeants at arms, and others.

     https://history.house.gov/People/Search

     Publications
     The Congressional Directory, Rules and Manual of the House of Representatives, and telephone directory for the

     House of Representatives are available from the Government Publishing Office's bookstore. Phone, 202-512-0132.

     https://bookstore.gpo.gov/agency/congress-legislative-branch | Email: mainbks@gpo.gov

     Schedule
     The House's schedule and related resources are available in the "Legislative Activity" section on House.gov.

     http://www.house.gov/legislative

     Site Map
     House.gov features a site map that allows visitors to look for a specific topic or to browse content that aligns with their

     interests.

     http://www.house.gov/content/site_tools/sitemap.php

     Vacancies
     The Office of the Clerk posts recent resignations, deaths, and other separations from the House of Representatives on

     its "Current Vacancies" web page. Vacancies are grouped according to congressional session, and the page includes

     the results of recent special elections that have been held to fill vacancies.

     http://clerk.house.gov/member_info/vacancies.aspx?pr=house&%3Bvid=130

        The above Sources of Information for the House of Representatives were updated 2–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




   Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                  Not Found.
                  Resource you are looking for does not exist.


                                                            Home
                                                            Home




Home


The Government of the United States
About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                              Congressional Research Service




The United States Government Manual




     CONGRESSIONAL RESEARCH SERVICE
    101 Independence Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20540


    202-707-5000


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Mary B. Mazanec


      Deputy Director                                                                       T.J. Halstead


    https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about/ofc-dir.html
  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Congressional Research Service provides high quality research, analysis, information, and confidential consultation

to help the U.S. Congress carry out its legislative, representational and oversight duties.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
In 1914, President Woodrow Wilson approved a law to to establish a separate department within the Library of

Congress. That department was named the Legislative Reference Service, and its purpose was to serve the legislative

needs of the U.S. Congress.

https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about/history.html
With the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1970, the U.S. Congress changed the name of the Legislative Reference

Service to the Congressional Research Service (CRS) and expanded its statutory obligations.

https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about/history.html
The CRS is organized into five research divisions: American Law; Domestic Social Policy; Foreign Affairs, Defense and

Trade; Government and Finance; and Resources, Science and Industry. Research support services are given to the

policy experts in each of the five divisions by the Knowledge Services Group.

https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/research/
The Office of the Director and other infrastructure offices oversee long-term goals and provide management and

administrative support.


The CRS has about 600 employees who are based in Washington, DC. More than 400 of them are attorneys,

information professionals, and policy analysts working in one of the five research divisions.

https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about/structure.html

ACTIVITIES
The CRS provides comprehensive research and analysis on all legislative and oversight issues of interest to the U.S.

Congress. The CRS assists Congress by responding to specific questions and by preparing reports on legislative topics

in anticipation of questions and emerging issues. The CRS works with Members, committees, and congressional staff to

identify and clarify policy problems and assess the implications of proposed policy alternatives. CRS experts play a role

in every stage of the legislative process.

http://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Annual Reports
The CRS posts its annual reports on the "About CRS" webs page.

https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about/

Career Opportunities
    The CRS hires motivated and talented individuals who can contribute to its unique role in supporting the U.S.

    Congress. To carry out the CRS's mission, the research divisions rely on attorneys, information professionals, and policy

    analysts, whose expertise falls within a variety of disciplines. Those disciplines include defense, economics, education,

    energy, environmental protection, foreign affairs, healthcare, homeland security, immigration, law, public

    administration, science, and technology.

    https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/opportunities/

    Contact Information
    The "Contact Us" web page contains an electronic comment and question form. CRS staff responds to questions about

    employment and specific job listings. CRS staff works exclusively for the U.S. Congress; therefore, they do not respond

    to inquiries pertaining to other subjects.

    https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/contact/

    History
    To mark the centennial of the CRS, communications specialist Cory V. Langley complied the article "CRS at 100—

    Informing the Legislative Debate Since 1914." The article was published in the May and June 2014 issue of "Library of

    Congress Magazine," pages 14–18. Accompanying the article is a CRS timeline that runs from 1914 though 2014.

    https://www.loc.gov/lcm/pdf/LCM_2014_0506.pdf

    Reports
    CRS reports are accessible on the website Congress.gov. A search tool is available on the "Search CRS Reports" web

    page.

    https://crsreports.congress.gov/

    Values
    All queries from Members of Congress and exchanges between them and CRS staff are confidential; all CRS services

    and products are authoritative; and to the maximum extent that human nature allows, CRS analyses are objective and

    nonpartisan.

    https://www.loc.gov/crsinfo/about/values.html

        The Sources of Information were updated 12–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy
Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                          The Supreme Court of the United States




The United States Government Manual




     THE SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
    United States Supreme Court Building, One First Street NE., Washington, DC 20543


    202-479-3000

    http://www.supremecourt.gov




    MEMBERS
 CHIEF JUSTICE OF THE UNITED STATES                   John G. Roberts, Jr.




 Associate Justice                                    Clarence Thomas


 Associate Justice                                    Samuel A. Alito, Jr.


 Associate Justice                                    Sonia M. Sotomayor


 Associate Justice                                    Elena Kagan


 Associate Justice                                    Neil M. Gorsuch


 Associate Justice                                    Brett M. Kavanaugh


 Associate Justice                                    Amy C. Barrett


 Associate Justice                                    Ketanji B. Jackson


 The above list of Justices was updated 7–2022.


https://www.supremecourt.gov/about/biographies.aspx



OFFICERS


 COUNSELOR TO THE CHIEF JUSTICE                       Jeffrey P. Minear




 Clerk                                                Scott S. Harris


 Court Counsel                                        Ethan V. Torrey


 Curator                                              Catherine E. Fitts


 Director of Information Technology                   Charles W. Gerald


 Librarian                                            Linda S. Maslow


 Marshal                                              Gail Curley


 Public Information Officer                           Patricia McCabe


 Reporter of Decisions                                Rebecca A. Womeldorf
  The above list of officers was updated 7–2022.


https://www.supremecourt.gov/about/about.aspx
Article III, section 1, of the Constitution of the United States provides that "[t]he judicial Power of the United States, shall

be vested in one supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and

establish."


The Supreme Court of the United States was created on the basis of this constitutional provision and by authority of

the Judiciary Act of September 24, 1789 (1 Stat. 73), which President George Washington approved. The Supreme

Court was organized on February 2, 1790.

https://memory.loc.gov/cgi-bin/ampage?collId=llsl&fileName=001/llsl001.db&recNum=18
Article III, section 2, of the Constitution defines the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court.

https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/constitution-transcript#toc-article-iii-
The Supreme Court comprises the Chief Justice of the United States and such number of Associate Justices as may be

fixed by Congress (28 U.S.C. 1). Currently, the total number of Associate Justices has been fixed at eight. Six Justices are

needed for a quorum. If more than three of the nine Justices are unable to participate in a case, the Supreme Court

lacks the authority to render a decision.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title28/part1/chapter1&edition=prelim
The President nominates the Justices with the advice and consent of the Senate. Article III, section 1, of the Constitution

further provides that "[t]he Judges, both of the supreme and inferior Courts, shall hold their Offices during good

Behaviour, and shall, at stated Times, receive for their Services, a Compensation, which shall not be diminished during

their Continuance in Office."


In the performance of its functions, the Court is assisted by nine court officers: the Clerk, the Counselor to the Chief

Justice, the Court Counsel, the Curator, the Director of Information Technology, the Librarian, the Marshal, the Public

Information Officer, and the Reporter of Decisions.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/about/about.aspx

Appellate Jurisdiction
The Constitution has given authority to the Congress to pass statutes that confer appellate jurisdiction upon the

Supreme Court. The basic statute that is effective at this time, in conferring and controlling jurisdiction of the Supreme

Court, may be found in 28 U.S.C. 1251, 1253, 1254, 1257-1259, and various special statutes. Congress has no authority

to change the original jurisdiction of this Court.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title28/part4/chapter81&edition=prelim

Court Term
The term of the Court begins on the first Monday in October and lasts until the first Monday in October of the next

year. Over the course of a term, approximately 10,000 petitions are filed for cases to be briefed before the Court.

Moreover, each year, about 1,200 applications, which can be acted upon by a single Justice while serving in the

capacity of a Circuit Justice, are filed.

http://www.supremecourt.gov/about/procedures.aspx
Rulemaking
From time to time, Congress has conferred upon the Supreme Court power to prescribe rules of procedure to be

followed by the lower courts of the United States.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that records belonging to the

Supreme Court of the United States have been assigned to record group 267.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/267.html

Art Collections
The Supreme Court has been acquiring artwork since the 1830s. Today, it continues to add to its three collections of

decorative art, fine art, and graphic art. These collections include antique furniture, busts, engravings, historic

furnishings, lithographs, miniatures, photographs, and portraits.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/about/historicCollections.aspx

Audio Recordings
Recordings of oral arguments become publicly accessible at the end of each argument week. A listener has the option

to download the audio files or to hear the arguments on the Supreme Court’s website. Recordings are listed by case

name, docket number, and the date of oral argument.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_audio/2018

Calendars / Lists
Supreme Court calendars and argument calendars, as well as day call and hearing lists, are posted in Portable

Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/calendarsandlists.aspx

Career Opportunities
The Supreme Court posts vacancy announcements. It also has programs for docents, fellows, and interns.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/jobs/jobs.aspx

Chief and Associate Justices
A Chief Justices list and Associate Justices list are available on the "Justices 1789 to Present" web page. The lists include

all of the Justices who have served on the Supreme Court.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/about/members_text.aspx
A timeline of Chief and Associate Justices is also available.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/about/members.aspx

Constitutional Interpretation
See the cornerstone address of Chief Justice Charles E. Hughes: "The Republic Endures and This Is the Symbol of Its

Faith."

https://www.supremecourt.gov/about/constitutional.aspx

Contact Information
General contact information is available on the "Contact Us" web page. The Public Information Office receives general

questions that are not time sensitive.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/contact/contactus.aspx | Email: pio@supremecourt.gov

Docket Search
The online docket database contains information on the status of cases filed since the beginning of the 2001 Term.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/docket/docket.aspx
The engrossed dockets from 1791 to 1995 have been scanned by the National Archives from its microfilm collection

and are available in its catalog.

https://catalog.archives.gov/id/1524561

Exhibitions
The Office of the Curator creates exhibitions to highlight the work and history of the Nation's highest court, the lives of

individual Justices, and the architecture of the Supreme Court building. Exhibitions are self-guided and located on the

ground floor of the building.

http://www.supremecourt.gov/visiting/exhibition.aspx

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Supreme Court posts answers to FAQs online.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/about/faq.aspx
The Public Information Office has answered questions that reporters often ask in its "Reporter’s Guide to Applications

Pending Before The Supreme Court of the United States."

https://www.supremecourt.gov/publicinfo/reportersguide.pdf | Email: pio@supremecourt.gov

Gift Shop
The Supreme Court Historical Society Gift Shop is accessible online and located on the ground floor of the Supreme

Court building. Merchandise ranges from books, folders, statues, and woven throws to jewelry, learning games,

scarves, ties, and writing instruments. The shop is open Monday–Friday, from 9 a.m. to 4:25 p.m., excluding Federal

Holidays. Phone, 888-539-4438.

http://supremecourtgifts.org/ | Email: giftshop@supremecourthistory.org

Granted and Noted Cases List
Annual lists are posted in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading. The earliest of the lists starts

with the October term of 2007.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/orders/grantednotedlists.aspx

History
CIRCUIT RIDING—For most of its existence, circuit riding was an unpopular hold-over from the early days of the

Republic. Accordingly, the history of circuit riding could be described as the "history to abolish circuit riding." Given

circuit riding's practical shortcomings, one marvels at the longevity of the practice, that it lasted for as long as it did. To

learn more, see Joshua Glick's Cardozo Law Review article "On the Road: The Supreme Court and the History of Circuit

Riding" (APR 2003).

https://supremecourthistory.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/06/SCHS-publications-digitized-volumes-circuit-riding.pdf
19TH CENTURY DECISIONS AND ARGUMENTS—The dates of Supreme Court decisions and arguments from 1791

through 1882 ("United States Reports," vols. 2–107) were compiled by the staff of the Anne Ashmore Library. The

compilation of dates is available online in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/datesofdecisions.pdf
THE SUPREME COURT HISTORICAL SOCIETY—This private nonprofit organization, collects and preserves the history

of the Supreme Court. Incorporated in the District of Columbia in 1974, its founder Chief Justice Warren E. Burger

served as the first honorary chairman. The Society is headquartered in the Opperman House in Washington, DC,

where it maintains The Goldman Library. The books housed therein comprise one of the finest collections of Court

histories, Justices' writings, and judicial biographies. The library also has materials relating to U.S. attorneys general,

solicitors, and Presidents.

https://supremecourthistory.org/supreme-court-historical-society-mission

Indigent Petitioners
The “Guide for Filing In Forma Pauperis Cases" assists litigants who may lack the financial resources to pay the filing fee

or to submit booklet-format documents under Court Rule 33.1.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/casehand/guideforIFPcases2019.pdf

Landmark Cases
The "United States Courts" website has a web page that is dedicated to "Supreme Court Landmarks." The page

presents information on 22 landmark cases.

https://www.uscourts.gov/about-federal-courts/educational-resources/supreme-court-landmarks
ROE ET AL. V. WADE DISTRICT ATTORNEY OF DALLAS COUNTY (410 U.S. 113)—The syllabus to this landmark case

and the opinion of the Court are available on the Library of Congress website. The 66-page document was posted in

Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/usrep/usrep410/usrep410113/usrep410113.pdf

Links
The Supreme Court's website has links to other Internet sources of information on the Federal Government, the

Judiciary, and the Supreme Court.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/links/links.aspx

Minutes of the Court
The "Journal of the Supreme Court" contains the official minutes. It reflects the disposition of each case, identifies the

court whose judgment is under review, lists the cases argued that day and the attorneys who presented oral
argument, contains miscellaneous announcements by the Chief Justice from the bench, and names the attorneys who

have been admitted to the bar of the Supreme Court.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/orders/journal.aspx

Press Releases
Press releases are posted online.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/publicinfo/press/pressreleases.aspx

Reports on the Federal Judiciary
"Year-End Reports on the Federal Judiciary," which the current and former Chief Justices have prepared, are posted on

the Supreme Court's website. Starting with the year 2000, most of the reports are available in Portable Document

Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/publicinfo/year-end/year-endreports.aspx

Search Tips
Use the search tips to refine a search and find more specific results on the Supreme Court's website.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/search_help.aspx

Seating To Hear Oral Arguments
All oral arguments are open to the public. Seating is limited and on a first-come, first-seated, basis. Before a session

begins, two lines form on the plaza in front of the building. One line is for those attending an entire argument; the

other, a 3-minute line, is for those observing the Court in session for a brief period of time.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/courtroomseating.aspx

Site Map
The site map allows visitors to look for specific information or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/sitemap.aspx

Slip Opinions
Slip opinions are posted within minutes after the Justices issue their opinions. They remain posted until the opinions for

the entire term are published in the bound volumes of the "United States Reports." A slip opinion comprises the

majority or principal opinion, concurring or dissenting opinions, and a prefatory syllabus summarizing the decision.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/slipopinion/21

Speeches
Speeches of current and former Supreme Court Justices are available online.

https://www.supremecourt.gov/publicinfo/speeches/speeches.aspx

United States Reports
The "United States Reports" contain the official opinions of the Supreme Court. The reports are available online, being

accessible on the Library of Congress website. They also are accessible, indirectly, through the govinfo.gov website,

which the Government Publishing Office manages.
     LIBRARY OF CONGRESS

     https://www.loc.gov/collections/united-states-reports
     GOVERNMENT PUBLISHING OFFICE

     https://www.govinfo.gov/browse-a-z#U

     Visiting the Court
     The Supreme Court building is open to the public Monday–Friday, from 9:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m, excluding Federal

     holidays.

     http://www.supremecourt.gov/visiting/visiting.aspx
     Maps and brochures are available online. The visitors' guide and map are available in translation: Chinese, French,

     German, Japanese, Russian, and Spanish.

     https://www.supremecourt.gov/visiting/mapsandbrochures.aspx

        The Sources of Information were updated 5–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                     Search
                                                                                             Search




                                                       Lower Courts
                                             United States Courts of Appeals
                                   United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit
                                                United States District Courts
                                                     Territorial Courts
                                        United States Court of International Trade
                                          Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation




The United States Government Manual




     LOWER COURTS
    Article III of the Constitution declares, in section 1, that the judicial power of the United States shall be invested in one

    Supreme Court and in "such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish." The

    Supreme Court has held that these constitutional courts ". . . share in the exercise of the judicial power defined in that
section, can be invested with no other jurisdiction, and have judges who hold office during good behavior, with no

power in Congress to provide otherwise."



United States Courts of Appeals
The courts of appeals are intermediate appellate courts created by act of March 3, 1891 (28 U.S.C. ch. 3), to

relieve the Supreme Court of considering all appeals in cases originally decided by the Federal trial courts. They

are empowered to review all final decisions and certain interlocutory decisions (18 U.S.C. 3731; 28 U.S.C. 1291,

1292) of district courts. They also are empowered to review and enforce orders of many Federal administrative

bodies. The decisions of the courts of appeals are final except as they are subject to review on writ of certiorari

by the Supreme Court.


The United States is divided geographically into 12 judicial circuits, including the District of Columbia. Each circuit

has a court of appeals (28 U.S.C. 41, 1294). Each of the 50 States is assigned to one of the circuits. The territories

and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico are assigned variously to the first, third, and ninth circuits. There is also a

Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit, which has nationwide jurisdiction defined by subject matter. At present

each court of appeals has from 6 to 28 permanent circuit judgeships (179 in all), depending upon the amount of

judicial work in the circuit. Circuit judges hold their offices during good behavior as provided by Article III,

section 1, of the Constitution. The judge senior in commission who is under 70 years of age (65 at inception of

term), has been in office at least 1 year, and has not previously been chief judge, serves as the chief judge of the

circuit for a 7-year term. One of the Justices of the Supreme Court is assigned as circuit justice for each of the 13

judicial circuits. Each court of appeals normally hears cases in panels consisting of three judges but may sit en

banc with all judges present.


The judges of each circuit (except the Federal Circuit) by vote determine the size of the judicial council for the

circuit, which consists of the chief judge and an equal number of circuit and district judges. The council considers

the state of Federal judicial business in the circuit and may "make all necessary and appropriate orders for [its]

effective and expeditious administration . . ." (28 U.S.C. 332).


The chief judge of each circuit may summon periodically a judicial conference of all judges of the circuit,

including members of the bar, to discuss the business of the Federal courts of the circuit (28 U.S.C. 333). The

chief judge of each circuit and a district judge elected from each of the 12 geographical circuits, together with

the chief judge of the Court of International Trade, serve as members of the Judicial Conference of the United

States, over which the Chief Justice of the United States presides. This is the governing body for the

administration of the Federal judicial system as a whole (28 U.S.C. 331).


To obtain a complete list of judges, court officials, and official stations of the United States Courts of Appeals for

the Federal Circuit, as well as information on opinions and cases before the court, consult the Judicial Circuit

Web sites listed below.

Circuit                                                     URL

  District of Columbia Circuit                                http://www.cadc.uscourts.gov


  First Circuit                                               http://www.ca1.uscourts.gov
  Second Circuit                                           http://www.ca2.uscourts.gov


  Third Circuit                                            http://www.ca3.uscourts.gov


  Fourth Circuit                                           http://www.ca4.uscourts.gov


  Fifth Circuit                                            http://www.ca5.uscourts.gov


  Sixth Circuit                                            http://www.ca6.uscourts.gov


  Seventh Circuit                                          http://www.ca7.uscourts.gov


  Eighth Circuit                                           http://www.ca8.uscourts.gov


  Ninth Circuit                                            http://www.ca9.uscourts.gov


  Tenth Circuit                                            http://www.ca10.uscourts.gov


  Eleventh Circuit                                         http://www.ca11.uscourts.gov


United States Court of Appeals for the
Federal Circuit
This court was established under Article III of the Constitution pursuant to the Federal Courts Improvement Act

of 1982 (28 U.S.C. 41, 44, 48), as successor to the former United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals

and the United States Court of Claims. The jurisdiction of the court is nationwide (as provided by 28 U.S.C. 1295)

and includes appeals from the district courts in patent cases; appeals from the district courts in contract, and

certain other civil actions in which the United States is a defendant; and appeals from final decisions of the U.S.

Court of International Trade, the U.S. Court of Federal Claims, and the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims.

The jurisdiction of the court also includes the review of administrative rulings by the Patent and Trademark

Office, U.S. International Trade Commission, Secretary of Commerce, agency boards of contract appeals, and

the Merit Systems Protection Board, as well as rulemaking of the Department of Veterans Affairs; review of

decisions of the U.S. Senate Committee on Ethics concerning discrimination claims of Senate employees; and

review of a final order of an entity to be designated by the President concerning discrimination claims of

Presidential appointees.


The court consists of 12 circuit judges. It sits in panels of three or more on each case and may also hear or

rehear a case en banc. The court sits principally in Washington, DC, and may hold court wherever any court of

appeals sits (28 U.S.C. 48).

http://www.cafc.uscourts.gov

United States District Courts
The Nation's district courts are the trial courts of general Federal jurisdiction. These courts resolve disputes by

determining the facts and applying legal principles to decide which party is right. Each State has at least one
district court, and large States have as many as four. There are 89 district courts in the 50 States, plus one in the

District of Columbia and another in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Three other U.S. Territories also have

courts that hear Federal cases: Guam and the Northern Mariana and Virgin Islands.


At present, each district court has from 2 to 28 Federal district judgeships, depending upon the amount of

judicial work within its territory. Only one judge is usually required to hear and decide a case in a district court,

but in some limited cases it is required that three judges be called together to comprise the court (28 U.S.C.

2284). The judge senior in commission who is under 70 years of age (65 at inception of term), has been in office

for at least 1 year, and has not previously been chief judge, serves as chief judge for a 7-year term. There are

645 permanent district judgeships in the 50 States and 15 in the District of Columbia. There are seven district

judgeships in Puerto Rico. District judges hold their offices during good behavior as provided by Article III,

section 1, of the Constitution. However, Congress may temporary judgeships for a court with the provision that

when a future vacancy occurs in that district, such vacancy shall not be filled. Each district court has one or more

United States magistrate judges and bankruptcy judges, a clerk, a United States attorney, a United States

marshal, probation officers, court reporters, and their staffs. The jurisdiction of the district courts is set forth in

title 28, chapter 85, of the United States Code and at 18 U.S.C. 3231.


Cases from the district courts are reviewable on appeal by the applicable court of appeals.

http://www.uscourts.gov/about-federal-courts/court-role-and-structure

Territorial Courts
Pursuant to its authority to govern the Territories (Art. IV, sec. 3, clause 2, of the Constitution), Congress has

established district courts in the territories of Guam and the Virgin Islands. The District Court of the Canal Zone

was abolished on April 1, 1982, pursuant to the Panama Canal Act of 1979 (22 U.S.C. 3601 note). Congress has

also established a district court in the Northern Mariana Islands, which is administered by the United States

under a trusteeship agreement with the United Nations. These Territorial courts have jurisdiction not only over

the subjects described in the judicial article of the Constitution, but also over many local matters that, within the

States, are decided in State courts. The District Court of Puerto Rico, by contrast, is established under Article III, is

classified like other "district courts," and is called a "court of the United States" (28 U.S.C. 451). There is one judge

each in Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands, and two in the Virgin Islands. The judges in these courts are

appointed for terms of 10 years.

http://www.uscourts.gov/about-federal-courts/court-role-and-structure
For further information concerning the lower courts, contact the Administrative Office of the United States

Courts, Thurgood Marshall Federal Judiciary Building, One Columbus Circle NE., Washington, DC 20544. Phone,

202-502-2600.



United States Court of International Trade
This court was originally established as the Board of United States General Appraisers by act of June 10, 1890,

which conferred upon it jurisdiction theretofore held by the district and circuit courts in actions arising under the

tariff acts (19 U.S.C. ch. 4). The act of May 28, 1926 (19 U.S.C. 405a), created the United States Customs Court to

supersede the Board; by acts of August 7, 1939, and June 25, 1948 (28 U.S.C. 1582, 1583), the court was
    integrated into the United States court structure, organization, and procedure. The act of July 14, 1956 (28 U.S.C.

    251), established the court as a court of record of the United States under Article III of the Constitution. The

    Customs Court Act of 1980 (28 U.S.C. 251) constituted the court as the United States Court of International

    Trade.


    The Court of International Trade has jurisdiction over any civil action against the United States arising from

    Federal laws governing import transactions. This includes classification and valuation cases, as well as authority

    to review certain agency determinations under the Trade Agreements Act of 1979 (19 U.S.C. 2501) involving

    antidumping and countervailing duty matters. In addition, it has exclusive jurisdiction of civil actions to review

    determinations as to the eligibility of workers, firms, and communities for adjustment assistance under the Trade

    Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2101). Civil actions commenced by the United States to recover customs duties, to recover

    on a customs bond, or for certain civil penalties alleging fraud or negligence are also within the exclusive

    jurisdiction of the court.


    The court is composed of a chief judge and eight judges, not more than five of whom may belong to any one

    political party. Any of its judges may be temporarily designated and assigned by the Chief Justice of the United

    States to sit as a court of appeals or district court judge in any circuit or district. The court has a clerk and deputy

    clerks, a librarian, court reporters, and other supporting personnel. Cases before the court may be tried before a

    jury. Under the Federal Courts Improvement Act of 1982 (28 U.S.C. 1295), appeals are taken to the U.S. Court of

    Appeals for the Federal Circuit, and ultimately review may be sought in appropriate cases in the Supreme Court

    of the United States.


    The principal offices are located in New York, NY, but the court is empowered to hear and determine cases

    arising at any port or place within the jurisdiction of the United States.

    http://www.cit.uscourts.gov
    For further information, contact the Clerk, United States Court of International Trade, One Federal Plaza, New

    York, NY 10278-0001. Phone, 212-264-2814.



    Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation
    The Panel, created by act of April 29, 1968 (28 U.S.C. 1407), and consisting of seven Federal judges designated

    by the Chief Justice from the courts of appeals and district courts, is authorized to temporarily transfer to a

    single district, for coordinated or consolidated pretrial proceedings, civil actions pending in different districts that

    involve one or more common questions of fact.

    http://www.jpml.uscourts.gov
    For further information, contact the Clerk, Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation, Room G–255, Thurgood

    Marshall Federal Judiciary Building, One Columbus Circle NE., Washington, DC 20002-8041. Phone, 202-502-

    2800.




Home


The Government of the United States
About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                     Search
                                                                                             Search




                                                United States Courts of Appeals




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES COURTS OF APPEALS
    The courts of appeals are intermediate appellate courts created by act of March 3, 1891 (28 U.S.C. ch. 3), to relieve the

    Supreme Court of considering all appeals in cases originally decided by the Federal trial courts. They are empowered

    to review all final decisions and certain interlocutory decisions (18 U.S.C. 3731; 28 U.S.C. 1291, 1292) of district courts.

    They also are empowered to review and enforce orders of many Federal administrative bodies. The decisions of the

    courts of appeals are final except as they are subject to review on writ of certiorari by the Supreme Court.


    The United States is divided geographically into 12 judicial circuits, including the District of Columbia. Each circuit has a

    court of appeals (28 U.S.C. 41, 1294). Each of the 50 States is assigned to one of the circuits. The territories and the

    Commonwealth of Puerto Rico are assigned variously to the first, third, and ninth circuits. There is also a Court of
Appeals for the Federal Circuit, which has nationwide jurisdiction defined by subject matter. At present each court of

appeals has from 6 to 28 permanent circuit judgeships (179 in all), depending upon the amount of judicial work in the

circuit. Circuit judges hold their offices during good behavior as provided by Article III, section 1, of the Constitution.

The judge senior in commission who is under 70 years of age (65 at inception of term), has been in office at least 1

year, and has not previously been chief judge, serves as the chief judge of the circuit for a 7-year term. One of the

Justices of the Supreme Court is assigned as circuit justice for each of the 13 judicial circuits. Each court of appeals

normally hears cases in panels consisting of three judges but may sit en banc with all judges present.


The judges of each circuit (except the Federal Circuit) by vote determine the size of the judicial council for the circuit,

which consists of the chief judge and an equal number of circuit and district judges. The council considers the state of

Federal judicial business in the circuit and may "make all necessary and appropriate orders for [its] effective and

expeditious administration . . ." (28 U.S.C. 332).


The chief judge of each circuit may summon periodically a judicial conference of all judges of the circuit, including

members of the bar, to discuss the business of the Federal courts of the circuit (28 U.S.C. 333). The chief judge of each

circuit and a district judge elected from each of the 12 geographical circuits, together with the chief judge of the Court

of International Trade, serve as members of the Judicial Conference of the United States, over which the Chief Justice

of the United States presides. This is the governing body for the administration of the Federal judicial system as a

whole (28 U.S.C. 331).


To obtain a complete list of judges, court officials, and official stations of the United States Courts of Appeals for the

Federal Circuit, as well as information on opinions and cases before the court, consult the Judicial Circuit Web sites

listed below.

Circuit                                                                                   URL

  District of Columbia Circuit                                                              http://www.cadc.uscourts.gov


  First Circuit                                                                             http://www.ca1.uscourts.gov


  Second Circuit                                                                            http://www.ca2.uscourts.gov


  Third Circuit                                                                             http://www.ca3.uscourts.gov


  Fourth Circuit                                                                            http://www.ca4.uscourts.gov


  Fifth Circuit                                                                             http://www.ca5.uscourts.gov


  Sixth Circuit                                                                             http://www.ca6.uscourts.gov


  Seventh Circuit                                                                           http://www.ca7.uscourts.gov


  Eighth Circuit                                                                            http://www.ca8.uscourts.gov


  Ninth Circuit                                                                             http://www.ca9.uscourts.gov


  Tenth Circuit                                                                             http://www.ca10.uscourts.gov
        Eleventh Circuit              http://www.ca11.uscourts.gov




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                  United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE FEDERAL CIRCUIT
    This court was established under Article III of the Constitution pursuant to the Federal Courts Improvement Act of 1982

    (28 U.S.C. 41, 44, 48), as successor to the former United States Court of Customs and Patent Appeals and the United

    States Court of Claims. The jurisdiction of the court is nationwide (as provided by 28 U.S.C. 1295) and includes appeals

    from the district courts in patent cases; appeals from the district courts in contract, and certain other civil actions in

    which the United States is a defendant; and appeals from final decisions of the U.S. Court of International Trade, the

    U.S. Court of Federal Claims, and the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims. The jurisdiction of the court also

    includes the review of administrative rulings by the Patent and Trademark Office, U.S. International Trade Commission,

    Secretary of Commerce, agency boards of contract appeals, and the Merit Systems Protection Board, as well as
     rulemaking of the Department of Veterans Affairs; review of decisions of the U.S. Senate Committee on Ethics

     concerning discrimination claims of Senate employees; and review of a final order of an entity to be designated by the

     President concerning discrimination claims of Presidential appointees.


     The court consists of 12 circuit judges. It sits in panels of three or more on each case and may also hear or rehear a

     case en banc. The court sits principally in Washington, DC, and may hold court wherever any court of appeals sits (28

     U.S.C. 48).

     http://www.cafc.uscourts.gov



Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                United States District Courts




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURTS
    The Nation's district courts are the trial courts of general Federal jurisdiction. These courts resolve disputes by

    determining the facts and applying legal principles to decide which party is right. Each State has at least one district

    court, and large States have as many as four. There are 89 district courts in the 50 States, plus one in the District of

    Columbia and another in the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico. Three other U.S. Territories also have courts that hear

    Federal cases: Guam and the Northern Mariana and Virgin Islands.


    At present, each district court has from 2 to 28 Federal district judgeships, depending upon the amount of judicial

    work within its territory. Only one judge is usually required to hear and decide a case in a district court, but in some

    limited cases it is required that three judges be called together to comprise the court (28 U.S.C. 2284). The judge
     senior in commission who is under 70 years of age (65 at inception of term), has been in office for at least 1 year, and

     has not previously been chief judge, serves as chief judge for a 7-year term. There are 645 permanent district

     judgeships in the 50 States and 15 in the District of Columbia. There are seven district judgeships in Puerto Rico.

     District judges hold their offices during good behavior as provided by Article III, section 1, of the Constitution.

     However, Congress may temporary judgeships for a court with the provision that when a future vacancy occurs in that

     district, such vacancy shall not be filled. Each district court has one or more United States magistrate judges and

     bankruptcy judges, a clerk, a United States attorney, a United States marshal, probation officers, court reporters, and

     their staffs. The jurisdiction of the district courts is set forth in title 28, chapter 85, of the United States Code and at 18

     U.S.C. 3231.


     Cases from the district courts are reviewable on appeal by the applicable court of appeals.

     http://www.uscourts.gov/about-federal-courts/court-role-and-structure



Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                      Search
                                                                                             Search




                                                       Territorial Courts




The United States Government Manual




     TERRITORIAL COURTS
    Pursuant to its authority to govern the Territories (Art. IV, sec. 3, clause 2, of the Constitution), Congress has

    established district courts in the territories of Guam and the Virgin Islands. The District Court of the Canal Zone was

    abolished on April 1, 1982, pursuant to the Panama Canal Act of 1979 (22 U.S.C. 3601 note). Congress has also

    established a district court in the Northern Mariana Islands, which is administered by the United States under a

    trusteeship agreement with the United Nations. These Territorial courts have jurisdiction not only over the subjects

    described in the judicial article of the Constitution, but also over many local matters that, within the States, are decided

    in State courts. The District Court of Puerto Rico, by contrast, is established under Article III, is classified like other

    "district courts," and is called a "court of the United States" (28 U.S.C. 451). There is one judge each in Guam and the
     Northern Mariana Islands, and two in the Virgin Islands. The judges in these courts are appointed for terms of 10 years.

     http://www.uscourts.gov/about-federal-courts/court-role-and-structure

        For further information concerning the lower courts, contact the Administrative Office of the United
        States Courts, Thurgood Marshall Federal Judiciary Building, One Columbus Circle NE., Washington, DC
        20544. Phone, 202-502-2600.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                       Search
                                                                                               Search




                                           United States Court of International Trade




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES COURT OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE
    This court was originally established as the Board of United States General Appraisers by act of June 10, 1890, which

    conferred upon it jurisdiction theretofore held by the district and circuit courts in actions arising under the tariff acts (19

    U.S.C. ch. 4). The act of May 28, 1926 (19 U.S.C. 405a), created the United States Customs Court to supersede the

    Board; by acts of August 7, 1939, and June 25, 1948 (28 U.S.C. 1582, 1583), the court was integrated into the United

    States court structure, organization, and procedure. The act of July 14, 1956 (28 U.S.C. 251), established the court as a

    court of record of the United States under Article III of the Constitution. The Customs Court Act of 1980 (28 U.S.C. 251)

    constituted the court as the United States Court of International Trade.


    The Court of International Trade has jurisdiction over any civil action against the United States arising from Federal
     laws governing import transactions. This includes classification and valuation cases, as well as authority to review

     certain agency determinations under the Trade Agreements Act of 1979 (19 U.S.C. 2501) involving antidumping and

     countervailing duty matters. In addition, it has exclusive jurisdiction of civil actions to review determinations as to the

     eligibility of workers, firms, and communities for adjustment assistance under the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2101).

     Civil actions commenced by the United States to recover customs duties, to recover on a customs bond, or for certain

     civil penalties alleging fraud or negligence are also within the exclusive jurisdiction of the court.


     The court is composed of a chief judge and eight judges, not more than five of whom may belong to any one political

     party. Any of its judges may be temporarily designated and assigned by the Chief Justice of the United States to sit as

     a court of appeals or district court judge in any circuit or district. The court has a clerk and deputy clerks, a librarian,

     court reporters, and other supporting personnel. Cases before the court may be tried before a jury. Under the Federal

     Courts Improvement Act of 1982 (28 U.S.C. 1295), appeals are taken to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal

     Circuit, and ultimately review may be sought in appropriate cases in the Supreme Court of the United States.


     The principal offices are located in New York, NY, but the court is empowered to hear and determine cases arising at

     any port or place within the jurisdiction of the United States.

     http://www.cit.uscourts.gov

        For further information, contact the Clerk, United States Court of International Trade, One Federal Plaza,
        New York, NY 10278-0001. Phone, 212-264-2814.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                     Search
                                                                                             Search




                                             Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation




The United States Government Manual




     JUDICIAL PANEL ON MULTIDISTRICT LITIGATION
    The Panel, created by act of April 29, 1968 (28 U.S.C. 1407), and consisting of seven Federal judges designated by the

    Chief Justice from the courts of appeals and district courts, is authorized to temporarily transfer to a single district, for

    coordinated or consolidated pretrial proceedings, civil actions pending in different districts that involve one or more

    common questions of fact.

    http://www.jpml.uscourts.gov

      For further information, contact the Clerk, Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation, Room G–255,
      Thurgood Marshall Federal Judiciary Building, One Columbus Circle NE., Washington, DC 20002-8041.
      Phone, 202-502-2800.
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                     Special Courts
                                 United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces
                                  United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims
                                        United States Court of Federal Claims
                                                United States Tax Court




The United States Government Manual




     SPECIAL COURTS

    United States Court of Appeals for the
    Armed Forces
    450 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20442-0001
202-761-1448

202-761-4672

http://www.armfor.uscourts.gov


This court was established under Article I of the Constitution of the United States pursuant to act of May 5, 1950,

as amended (10 U.S.C. 867). Subject only to certiorari review by the Supreme Court of the United States in a

limited number of cases, the court serves as the final appellate tribunal to review court-martial convictions of all

the Armed Forces. It is exclusively an appellate criminal court, consisting of five civilian judges who are appointed

for 15-year terms by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate.


The court is called upon to exercise jurisdiction to review the record in all cases extending to death; certified to

the court by a Judge Advocate General of one of the Armed Forces; or petitioned by accused who have

received a sentence of confinement for 1 year or more and/or a punitive discharge.


The court also exercises authority under the All Writs Act (28 U.S.C. 1651(a)).


In addition, the judges of the court are required by law to work jointly with the senior uniformed lawyer from

each of the Armed Forces and two members of the public appointed by the Secretary of Defense to make an

annual comprehensive survey, to report annually to the Congress on the operation and progress of the military

justice system under the Uniform Code of Military Justice, and to recommend improvements wherever

necessary.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
Job openings and available clerkships are posted online.

http://www.armfor.uscourts.gov/newcaaf/employment.htm
http://www.armfor.uscourts.gov/newcaaf/contact.htm
For further information, contact the Clerk, United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces, 450 E Street

NW., Washington, DC 20442-0001. Phone, 202-761-1448. Fax, 202-761-4672.



United States Court of Appeals for Veterans
Claims
Suite 900, 625 Indiana Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20004-2950


202-501-5970

202-501-5848

http://www.uscourts.cavc.gov


The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims, a court of record under Article I of the Constitution, was

established on November 18, 1988 (38 U.S.C. 7251) and given exclusive jurisdiction to review decisions of the

Board of Veterans' Appeals. Appeals concern veteran disability benefits, dependent educational assistance,
survivor benefits, and pension benefits claims. In addition to its review authority, the Court has contempt

authority, as well as the authority to compel action by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, the authority to grant a

petition for extraordinary relief under the All Writs Act (28 U.S.C. 1651), and the authority to make attorney fee

determinations under the Equal Access to Justice Act (28 U.S.C. 2412). Decisions of the Court of Appeals for

Veterans Claims are subject to review by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit on questions

of law and on writ of certiorari by the United States Supreme Court.


The Court consists of nine judges whom the President appoints with the advice and consent of the Senate for

15-year terms. One of the judges serves as chief judge.


The Chief Judge generally conducts a judicial conference every 2 years. The primary purpose of the conference,

which involves the active participation of members of the legal community, attorneys, and practitioners admitted

to practice before the Court, is to consider the business of the Court and to recommend means of improving

the administration of justice within the Court's jurisdiction.


The Court is located in Washington, DC, but it is a court of national jurisdiction and may sit at any location within

the United States.


Opinions issued by the Court, case information, and a current list of judges and officials of the United States

Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims are available online.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
Job opportunities are posted online.

http://www.uscourts.cavc.gov/employment.php
http://www.uscourts.cavc.gov/contact.php
For further information, contact the Clerk, United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims, Suite 900, 625

Indiana Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20004-2950. Phone, 202-501-5970. Fax, 202-501-5848



United States Court of Federal Claims
717 Madison Place NW., Washington, DC 20439


202-357-6400

http://www.uscfc.uscourts.gov


The United States Court of Federal Claims has jurisdiction over claims seeking money judgments against the

United States. A claim must be founded upon the Constitution, an act of Congress, an Executive order, a

contract with the United States, or Federal regulations. Judges are appointed by the President for 15-year terms,

subject to Senate confirmation. Appeals are to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
Information on job opportunities and internships is available online.

http://www.uscfc.uscourts.gov/job-opportunitiesemployment
http://www.uscfc.uscourts.gov/court-directory
For further information, contact the Clerk's Office, United States Court of Federal Claims, 717 Madison Place NW.,

Washington, DC 20439. Phone, 202-357-6400.



United States Tax Court
400 Second Street NW., Washington, DC 20217-0002


202-521-0700

http://www.ustaxcourt.gov


The United States Tax Court is a court of record under Article I of the Constitution of the United States (26 U.S.C.

7441). The court was created as the United States Board of Tax Appeals by the Revenue Act of 1924 (43 Stat.

336). The name was changed to the Tax Court of the United States by the Revenue Act of 1942 (56 Stat. 957).

The Tax Reform Act of 1969 (83 Stat. 730) established the court under Article I and then changed its name to the

United States Tax Court.


The court comprises 19 judges who are appointed by the President to 15-year terms and subject to Senate

confirmation. The court also has varying numbers of both senior judges (who may be recalled by the chief judge

to perform further judicial duties) and special trial judges (who are appointed by the chief judge and may hear

and decide a variety of cases). The court's jurisdiction is set forth in various sections of title 26 of the U.S. Code.


The offices of the court and its judges are in Washington, DC. However, the court has national jurisdiction and

schedules trial sessions in more than 70 cities in the United States. Each trial session is conducted by one judge,

senior judge, or special trial judge. Court proceedings are open to the public and are conducted in accordance

with the court's rules of practice and procedure and the rules of evidence applicable in trials without a jury in the

U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia. A fee of $60 is charged for the filing of a petition. Practice before

the court is limited to practitioners admitted under the court's rules of practice and procedure.


Decisions entered by the court, other than decisions in small tax cases, may be appealed to the regional courts

of appeals and, thereafter, upon the granting of a writ of certiorari, to the Supreme Court of the United States.

At the option of petitioners, simplified procedures may be used in small tax cases. Small tax cases are final and

not subject to review by any court.

http://www.ustaxcourt.gov/about.htm



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
     Vacancy announcements and information on the court's law clerk program are available online.

     http://www.ustaxcourt.gov/employment.htm

     Forms
     Applications, certificates, notices, and other forms can be completed online and then printed.

     http://www.ustaxcourt.gov/forms.htm

     Taxpayer Information
     An online guide provides information—not legal advice—that may be helpful for those representing themselves

     before the Tax Court. It answers frequent questions that taxpayers ask and explains the process of filing a

     petition to begin a Tax Court case and things that occur before, during, and after trial. It also features a glossary.

     http://www.ustaxcourt.gov/taxpayer_info_intro.htm | Email: info@ustaxcourt.gov
     http://www.ustaxcourt.gov/phone.htm
     For further information, contact the Office of the Clerk of the Court, United States Tax Court, 400 Second Street

     NW., Washington, DC 20217-0002. Phone, 202-521-0700.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                 United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR THE ARMED FORCES
    450 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20442-0001


    202-761-1448

    202-761-4672

    http://www.armfor.uscourts.gov


    This court was established under Article I of the Constitution of the United States pursuant to act of May 5, 1950, as

    amended (10 U.S.C. 867). Subject only to certiorari review by the Supreme Court of the United States in a limited

    number of cases, the court serves as the final appellate tribunal to review court-martial convictions of all the Armed
     Forces. It is exclusively an appellate criminal court, consisting of five civilian judges who are appointed for 15-year

     terms by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate.


     The court is called upon to exercise jurisdiction to review the record in all cases extending to death; certified to the

     court by a Judge Advocate General of one of the Armed Forces; or petitioned by accused who have received a

     sentence of confinement for 1 year or more and/or a punitive discharge.


     The court also exercises authority under the All Writs Act (28 U.S.C. 1651(a)).


     In addition, the judges of the court are required by law to work jointly with the senior uniformed lawyer from each of

     the Armed Forces and two members of the public appointed by the Secretary of Defense to make an annual

     comprehensive survey, to report annually to the Congress on the operation and progress of the military justice system

     under the Uniform Code of Military Justice, and to recommend improvements wherever necessary.




     SOURCES OF INFORMATION

     Career Opportunities
     Job openings and available clerkships are posted online.

     http://www.armfor.uscourts.gov/newcaaf/employment.htm
     http://www.armfor.uscourts.gov/newcaaf/contact.htm

        For further information, contact the Clerk, United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces, 450 E
        Street NW., Washington, DC 20442-0001. Phone, 202-761-1448. Fax, 202-761-4672.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                   United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS FOR VETERANS CLAIMS
    Suite 900, 625 Indiana Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20004-2950


    202-501-5970

    202-501-5848

    http://www.uscourts.cavc.gov


    The United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims, a court of record under Article I of the Constitution, was

    established on November 18, 1988 (38 U.S.C. 7251) and given exclusive jurisdiction to review decisions of the Board of

    Veterans' Appeals. Appeals concern veteran disability benefits, dependent educational assistance, survivor benefits,
     and pension benefits claims. In addition to its review authority, the Court has contempt authority, as well as the

     authority to compel action by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, the authority to grant a petition for extraordinary relief

     under the All Writs Act (28 U.S.C. 1651), and the authority to make attorney fee determinations under the Equal Access

     to Justice Act (28 U.S.C. 2412). Decisions of the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims are subject to review by the

     United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit on questions of law and on writ of certiorari by the United States

     Supreme Court.


     The Court consists of nine judges whom the President appoints with the advice and consent of the Senate for 15-year

     terms. One of the judges serves as chief judge.


     The Chief Judge generally conducts a judicial conference every 2 years. The primary purpose of the conference, which

     involves the active participation of members of the legal community, attorneys, and practitioners admitted to practice

     before the Court, is to consider the business of the Court and to recommend means of improving the administration

     of justice within the Court's jurisdiction.


     The Court is located in Washington, DC, but it is a court of national jurisdiction and may sit at any location within the

     United States.


     Opinions issued by the Court, case information, and a current list of judges and officials of the United States Court of

     Appeals for Veterans Claims are available online.




     SOURCES OF INFORMATION

     Employment
     Job opportunities are posted online.

     http://www.uscourts.cavc.gov/employment.php
     http://www.uscourts.cavc.gov/contact.php

        For further information, contact the Clerk, United States Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims, Suite 900,
        625 Indiana Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20004-2950. Phone, 202-501-5970. Fax, 202-501-5848




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act
No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                            United States Court of Federal Claims




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES COURT OF FEDERAL CLAIMS
    717 Madison Place NW., Washington, DC 20439


    202-357-6400

    http://www.uscfc.uscourts.gov


    The United States Court of Federal Claims has jurisdiction over claims seeking money judgments against the United

    States. A claim must be founded upon the Constitution, an act of Congress, an Executive order, a contract with the

    United States, or Federal regulations. Judges are appointed by the President for 15-year terms, subject to Senate

    confirmation. Appeals are to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.
     SOURCES OF INFORMATION

     Career Opportunities
     Information on job opportunities and internships is available online.

     http://www.uscfc.uscourts.gov/job-opportunitiesemployment
     http://www.uscfc.uscourts.gov/court-directory

        For further information, contact the Clerk's Office, United States Court of Federal Claims, 717 Madison
        Place NW., Washington, DC 20439. Phone, 202-357-6400.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                     Search
                                                                                            Search




                                                    United States Tax Court




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES TAX COURT
    400 Second Street NW., Washington, DC 20217-0002


    202-521-0700

    http://www.ustaxcourt.gov


    The United States Tax Court is a court of record under Article I of the Constitution of the United States (26 U.S.C. 7441).

    The court was created as the United States Board of Tax Appeals by the Revenue Act of 1924 (43 Stat. 336). The name

    was changed to the Tax Court of the United States by the Revenue Act of 1942 (56 Stat. 957). The Tax Reform Act of

    1969 (83 Stat. 730) established the court under Article I and then changed its name to the United States Tax Court.
    The court comprises 19 judges who are appointed by the President to 15-year terms and subject to Senate

    confirmation. The court also has varying numbers of both senior judges (who may be recalled by the chief judge to

    perform further judicial duties) and special trial judges (who are appointed by the chief judge and may hear and

    decide a variety of cases). The court's jurisdiction is set forth in various sections of title 26 of the U.S. Code.


    The offices of the court and its judges are in Washington, DC. However, the court has national jurisdiction and

    schedules trial sessions in more than 70 cities in the United States. Each trial session is conducted by one judge, senior

    judge, or special trial judge. Court proceedings are open to the public and are conducted in accordance with the

    court's rules of practice and procedure and the rules of evidence applicable in trials without a jury in the U.S. District

    Court for the District of Columbia. A fee of $60 is charged for the filing of a petition. Practice before the court is limited

    to practitioners admitted under the court's rules of practice and procedure.


    Decisions entered by the court, other than decisions in small tax cases, may be appealed to the regional courts of

    appeals and, thereafter, upon the granting of a writ of certiorari, to the Supreme Court of the United States. At the

    option of petitioners, simplified procedures may be used in small tax cases. Small tax cases are final and not subject to

    review by any court.

    http://www.ustaxcourt.gov/about.htm



    SOURCES OF INFORMATION

    Career Opportunities
    Vacancy announcements and information on the court's law clerk program are available online.

    http://www.ustaxcourt.gov/employment.htm

    Forms
    Applications, certificates, notices, and other forms can be completed online and then printed.

    http://www.ustaxcourt.gov/forms.htm

    Taxpayer Information
    An online guide provides information—not legal advice—that may be helpful for those representing themselves

    before the Tax Court. It answers frequent questions that taxpayers ask and explains the process of filing a petition to

    begin a Tax Court case and things that occur before, during, and after trial. It also features a glossary.

    http://www.ustaxcourt.gov/taxpayer_info_intro.htm | Email: info@ustaxcourt.gov
    http://www.ustaxcourt.gov/phone.htm

       For further information, contact the Office of the Clerk of the Court, United States Tax Court, 400 Second
       Street NW., Washington, DC 20217-0002. Phone, 202-521-0700.




Home


The Government of the United States
About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                   Administrative Office of the United States Courts




The United States Government Manual




     ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES COURTS
    One Columbus Circle NE., Washington, DC 20544


    202-502-2600

    http://www.uscourts.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              James C. Duff


      Deputy Director                                                                       Lee Ann Bennett
Associate Directors


  DEPARTMENTS


  Administrative Services                                                                  James R. Baugher


  Program Services                                                                         Mary Louise Mitterhoff


  Technology Services                                                                      Joseph R. Peters, Jr.




Officers


  Defender Services                                                                        Cait T. Clarke


  Judicial Conference Secretariat                                                          Katherine H. Simon


  Judicial Integrity                                                                       Jill Langley


  Legislative Affairs                                                                      David T. Best


  Public Affairs                                                                           David A. Sellers


  General Counsel                                                                          Sheryl L. Walter


https://www.uscourts.gov/statistics-reports/profile-administrative-office-us-courts-annual-report-2019



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2020.



The Administrative Office of the United States Courts supports and serves the nonjudicial, administrative business of the

United States Courts.


ESTABLISHMENT
On August 7, 1939, President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved Public Law 76–299, which provided "for the

administration of the United States courts" (53 Stat. 1223). The new statute included an effective date: 90 days after its

approval by the President (53 Stat. 1226). On November 6, 1939, the Administrative Office of the United States Courts

(AOUSC) was established.

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/76th-congress/session-1/c76s1ch501.pdf
On June 25, 1948, President Harry S. Truman approved Public Law 80–773, which "revised, codified, and enacted into

law" 28 U.S.C. The law provided for the annual summoning of the chief judges of the judicial circuits by the Chief

Justice of the United States to the newly named Judicial Conference of the United States, at which the Chief Justice
presides (62 Stat. 902). It also described the general duties of the AOUSC Director, who serves as "the administrative

officer of the courts, and under the supervision and direction of the Judicial Conference of the United States" (62 Stat.

914).

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/80th-congress/session-2/c80s2ch646.pdf
The Chief Justice of the United States, after consultation with the Judicial Conference, appoints the Director and

Deputy Director of the AOUSC.


STATUTORY AUTHORITIES
Codified statutory material on the "Judiciary and Judicial Procedure" has been assigned to 28 U.S.C. Part III, which

deals with court officers and employees, comprises chapters 41–58.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title28/part3&edition=prelim
"Chapter 41—Administrative Office of United States Courts," which comprises sections 601–613, has been assigned to

28 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title28/part3/chapter41&edition=prelim

ACTIVITIES
The AOUSC provides a range of administrative, financial, legal, legislative, management, technology, and program

support services to Federal courts. Judicial Conference committees, with input from the courts, advise the AOUSC as it

develops the annual judiciary budget for approval by the U.S. Congress and the President. The AOUSC also carries out

Judicial Conference policies. Providing staff support and counsel to the Judicial Conference and its committees is a

primary responsibility of the AOUSC.

http://www.uscourts.gov/about-federal-courts/judicial-administration

Administering the Courts
The Director is the administrative officer of the courts of the United States—except of the Supreme Court. Under the

guidance of the Judicial Conference of the United States, the Director supervises all administrative matters relating to

the offices of clerks and other clerical and administrative personnel of the courts; examines the state of the dockets of

the courts, secures information as to the courts' need of assistance, and prepares statistical data and reports each

quarter and transmits them to the chief judges of the circuits; submits an activities report of the Administrative Office

and the courts' state of business to the annual meeting of the Judicial Conference of the United States; fixes the

compensation of court employees whose compensation is not otherwise fixed by law; regulates and pays annuities to

widows and surviving dependent children of judges; disburses moneys appropriated for the maintenance and

operation of the courts; examines accounts of court officers; regulates travel of judicial personnel; provides

accommodations and supplies for the courts and their clerical and administrative personnel; establishes and maintains

programs for the certification and utilization of court interpreters and the provision of special interpretation services in

the courts; and performs such other duties as may be assigned by the Supreme Court or the Judicial Conference of

the United States.


The Director also prepares and submits the budget of the courts, which the Office of Management and Budget

transmits to Congress without change.
http://www.uscourts.gov/about-federal-courts/judicial-administration

Bankruptcy
According to the Bankruptcy Amendments and Federal Judgeship Act of 1984 (28 U.S.C. 151), the bankruptcy judges

for each judicial district constitute a unit of the district court known as the bankruptcy court. The courts of appeals

appoint bankruptcy judges in such numbers as authorized by Congress. These judges serve for a term of 14 years as

judicial officers of the district courts.


This act placed jurisdiction in the district courts over all cases under title 11, United States Code, and all proceedings

arising in or related to cases under that title (28 U.S.C. 1334). The district court may refer such cases and proceedings

to its bankruptcy judges (as authorized by 28 U.S.C. 157).


The Director of the Administrative Office recommends to the Judicial Conference the duty stations of bankruptcy

judges and the places they hold court, surveys the need for additional bankruptcy judgeships to be recommended to

Congress, and determines the staff needs of bankruptcy judges and the clerks of the bankruptcy courts.

http://www.uscourts.gov/services-forms/bankruptcy

Federal Magistrate Judges
The Director of the Administrative Office exercises general supervision over administrative matters in offices of U.S.

magistrate judges, compiles and evaluates statistical data relating to such offices, and submits reports thereon to the

Judicial Conference. The Director reports annually to Congress on the business that has come before U.S. magistrate

judges and also prepares legal and administrative manuals for the magistrate judges. In compliance with the act, the

Administrative Office conducts surveys of the conditions in the judicial districts to make recommendations as to the

number, location, and salaries of magistrate judges. The Judicial Conference then determines their number, location,

and salaries, subject to the availability of appropriated funds.

https://www.uscourts.gov/judges-judgeships/about-federal-judges

Probation / Pretrial Services
The Administrative Office exercises general supervision of the accounts and practices of the Federal probation offices,

which are subject to primary control by the respective district courts that they serve. The Administrative Office

publishes, in cooperation with the Department of Justice's Bureau of Prisons, the "Federal Probation Journal." This

online, quarterly publication presents current thought, research, and practice in corrections, community supervision,

and criminal justice.


In accordance with the Pretrial Services Act of 1982 (18 U.S.C. 3152), the Director establishes pretrial services in the

district courts. The offices of these district courts report information on pretrial release of persons charged with Federal

offenses and supervise such persons who are released to their custody.

http://www.uscourts.gov/services-forms/probation-and-pretrial-services

Representation
The Criminal Justice Act (18 U.S.C. 3006A) establishes the procedure for the appointment of private panel attorneys in

Federal criminal cases for individuals who are unable to afford adequate representation, under plans adopted by each

district court. The act also permits the establishment of Federal public defender or Federal community defender
organizations by the district courts in districts where at least 200 persons annually require the appointment of counsel.

Two adjacent districts may be combined to reach this total.


Each defender organization submits to the Director of the Administrative Office an annual report of its activities along

with a proposed budget or, in the case of community defender organizations, a proposed grant for the coming year.

The Director is responsible for the submission of the proposed budgets and grants to the Judicial Conference for

approval. The Director also makes payments to the defender organizations out of appropriations in accordance with

the approved budgets and grants, as well as compensating private counsel appointed to defend criminal cases in the

United States courts.

http://www.uscourts.gov/services-forms/defender-services



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Administrative Office

records have been assigned to record group 116.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/116.html

Business Opportunities
The Federal Acquisition Regulation does not apply to procurement within the Federal judiciary. Judiciary procurement

policies are the responsibility of the Procurement Management Division within the Administrative Office and are issued

in the "Guide to Judiciary Policy" (volume 14—Procurement).

https://www.uscourts.gov/services-forms/business-opportunities

Career Opportunities
To help carry out its mission, the Federal Judiciary relies on attorneys, interpreters, information technology experts,

probation officers, and other skilled professionals.

https://www.uscourts.gov/careers

Contact Information
Postal correspondence should be sent to the Administrative Office of the United States Courts, One Columbus Circle

NE., Washington, DC 20544. The "Contact Us" web page also allows online visitors to send an electronic message.

https://www.uscourts.gov/contact-us

eJuror Program
The national eJuror program allows a potential juror to respond online to his or her jury qualification questionnaire.

Using the eJuror service, a potential juror may revise personal information, check when he or she needs to report for

jury service, submit a request for an excuse or deferral, and select an alternate time to serve.

https://www.uscourts.gov/services-forms/jury-service/national-ejuror-program

Electronic Filing
Attorneys and others may submit files online using the Federal courts' Case Management and Electronic Case Files

system.

http://www.uscourts.gov/courtrecords/electronic-filing-cmecf

Email Updates
A subscriber receives notifications by email when new information is available, including news, newsletters, specific

website content, and other alerts.

https://www.uscourts.gov/email-updates

Federal Courts
The Federal court finder search tool allows online visitors to find a Federal court by location or court name, including

appellate, bankruptcy, district, probation, and pretrial office, or Federal defender organization.

https://www.uscourts.gov/federal-court-finder/search

Federal Register
Documents that the Administrative Office published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/administrative-office-of-united-states-courts

Forms
National Federal court forms are accessible online. National court forms can be used in all Federal courts. Each Federal

court also maintains its own local court forms.

https://www.uscourts.gov/services-forms/forms

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
Answers to FAQs on the Federal Judiciary are available online.

http://www.uscourts.gov/frequently-asked-questions-faqs

Glossaries
A glossary of legal terms is available online.

http://www.uscourts.gov/glossary
A glossary of common legal terms is also available in the 50-page publication "Understanding the Federal Courts,"

starting on page 29.

https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/understanding-federal-courts.pdf

Judicial Vacancies
Judicial vacancies on the U.S. Court of Appeals, U.S. Court of Federal Claims, U.S. Court of International Trade, U.S.

District Courts, and U.S. Supreme Court are posted online.

https://www.uscourts.gov/judges-judgeships/judicial-vacancies

Law Day
"Your Vote, Your Voice, Our Democracy: The 19th Amendment at 100" is the theme of Law Day 2020.

https://www.uscourts.gov/about-federal-courts/educational-resources/annual-observances/law-day
    News
    Judiciary news is available online.

    https://www.uscourts.gov/judiciary-news

    Public Access to Court Electronic Records (PACER)
    The online PACER service allows account holders to search and locate appellate, district, and bankruptcy court case

    and docket information. A person may register for an account, using the "Find a Case (PACER)" web page.

    https://www.uscourts.gov/court-records/find-case-pacer

    Publications
    The Federal judiciary and Administrative Office produce publications for the Congress, the public, and others to

    educate and inform about the work of the courts.

    http://www.uscourts.gov/statistics-reports/publications

    Social Media
    The Administrative Office tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/uscourts
    The Administrative Office posts videos on its YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/user/uscourts

    Statistical Data
    Statistical data on the business of the Federal Judiciary are available online.

    http://www.uscourts.gov/statistics-reports/caseload-statistics-data-tables

    Understanding Federal Courts
    The AOUSC developed the 50-page publication "Understanding the Federal Courts" as an introduction to the Federal

    judicial system, its organization and administration, and its relationship to the legislative and executive branches of the

    Government. The publication is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

    https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/understanding-federal-courts.pdf

        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy
Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                   Federal Judicial Center




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL JUDICIAL CENTER
    Thurgood Marshall Federal Judiciary Building, One Columbus Circle NE., Washington, DC 20002-8003


    202-502-4000

    http://www.fjc.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              John S. Cooke


      Deputy Director                                                                       Clara J. Altman
Division Directors


 Education                               Dana K. Chipman


 Research                                Elizabeth C. Wiggins




Office Directors


 Administration                          Nancy Payne


 Editorial and Information Services      José Idler


 Federal Judicial History                Christine Lamberson


 International Judicial Relations        Mira Gur-Arie


 Information Technology                  Esther DeVries

https://www.fjc.gov/about/senior-staff



Board of the Federal Judicial Center


 CHAIR                                   John G. Roberts, Jr.




 MEMBERS


 Judge                                   Carol B. Amon


 Judge                                   Duane Benton


 Judge                                   Nancy D. Freudenthal


 Judge                                   Thomas M. Hardiman


 Judge                                   Raymond A. Jackson


 Judge **                                Roslynn R. Mauskopf


 Chief Bankruptcy Judge                  Mildred Cabán


 Magistrate Judge                        Anthony E. Porcelli
  *The Chief Justice of the United States chairs the Board of the Federal Judicial Center. ** Judge Roslynn R.
  Mauskopf is an ex officio member of the Board because she serves as the Director of the Administrative
  Office.


https://www.fjc.gov/about/board-members



  The above list of key personnel was updated 3–2022.



The Federal Judicial Center is the judicial branch's agency for policy research and continuing education.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On December 20, 1967, President Lyndon B. Johnson approved Public Law 90–219, "an act to provide for the

establishment of a Federal Judicial Center [FJC], and for other purposes." The FJC was established "to further the

development and adoption of improved judicial administration in the courts of the United States" (81 Stat. 664).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-81/pdf/STATUTE-81-Pg664.pdf
The FJC's statutory duties are described in chapter 42, sections 620–629, of 28 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/browse/prelim@title28/part3/chapter42&edition=prelim
The Board of the FJC determines the agency's basic policies and activities. The Board comprises the Chief Justice of the

United States, who permanently chairs of the Board by statute; two circuit judges of the U.S. courts of appeals; three

judges of the U.S. district courts; one bankruptcy judge; and one magistrate judge. The Judicial Conference of the

United States elects these eight members of the Board for 4-year terms. The ninth member is the Director of the

Administrative Office of the United States Courts, who serves on Board in a permanent capacity. An elected member

may serve only for one four-year term on the Board.

https://www.fjc.gov/about/statute
The FJC does not post an organizational chart on its website.




ACTIVITIES
The organization of the FJC reflects its primary statutory mandates. The Education Division plans education and

produces training—including curriculum packages for in-district training, in-person programs, publications, video

programs, and web-based programs and resources—for judges and court staff. The Research Division examines and

evaluates current and alternative Federal court practices and policies. Its research assists Judicial Conference

committees in developing policy recommendations. The research also supports the FJC's educational programs. The

Federal Judicial History Office helps courts and other parties study and preserve Federal judicial history. The

International Judicial Relations Office provides information to judicial and legal officials from foreign countries and

informs Federal judicial personnel of developments in international law and other court systems that may affect their
work. Two units of the Director's Office—the Editorial and Information Services Office and the Information Technology

Office—provide editorial and design assistance, organization and dissemination of FJC resources, and technology.

https://www.fjc.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Annual Reports
Annual Reports, from 1969 to the present, are available to download as Portable Document Format (PDF) files.

https://www.fjc.gov/content/annual-reports

Archived Judicial Records
The FJC record group does not currently have a description associated with it in the "Guide to Federal Records in the

National Archives of the United States." The Guide is accessible online, and FJC records have been assigned to Record

Group 516.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/000.html
The National Archives does maintain a "Judicial Records" web page that contains information and resources for

identifying and locating Federal court documents within its holdings. These documents comprise records of hearings

and trials of Federal jurisdiction.

https://www.archives.gov/research/court-records/archives.html

Biographical Directory of Judges
The directory includes the biographies of judges appointed by the President to serve during good behavior since 1789

on the U.S. district courts, U.S. courts of appeals, Supreme Court of the United States, and U.S. Court of International

Trade, as well as the former U.S. circuit courts, Court of Claims, U.S. Customs Court, and U.S. Court of Customs and

Patent Appeals. Also included are judges who received presidential recess appointments to the above named courts

but were not confirmed by the Senate to serve during good behavior.

https://www.fjc.gov/history/judges

Career Opportunities
The FJC posts job openings online. Contact the Human Resources Office for more information. Phone, 202-502-4165.

https://www.fjc.gov/about/job-vacancies | Email: personnel@fjc.gov

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" page has fax and phone numbers for FJC offices and divisions.

https://www.fjc.gov/about/contact-us

Educational Materials
Materials that the FJC produces as part of its educational programs for judges and court employees are accessible

online.

https://www.fjc.gov/education
Environmental Law
The FJC published "International Environmental Law: A Guide for Judges" (2015) that Roger R. Martella, Jr., and James

W. Coleman wrote. The guide introduces judges to some of the major areas of international environmental law and

examines how the law might arise in Federal litigation involving climate change, hazardous chemicals and materials,

protected species, water pollution, air pollution, environmental disaster response, and transborder enforcement of

environmental regulations. It also discusses the sources of international environmental laws, such as bilateral

investment treaties, international standards and standard-setting organizations, and multilateral trade agreements. The

FJC regards the content of the guide as responsible and valuable, but it does not reflect the policy or

recommendations of the FJC Board.

https://www.fjc.gov/content/309707/international-environmental-law-guide-judges

History
Questions about the history of the Federal judiciary? Submit them to the experts at the Federal Judicial History Office.

Phone, 202-502-4180. Fax, 202-502-4077.

https://www.fjc.gov/history | Email: history@fjc.gov
Hundreds of images of historic Federal courthouses and other buildings that have served as the meeting places of

Federal courts are available online.

https://www.fjc.gov/history/courthouses
Timelines of the structure of the Federal courts, jurisdiction of the Federal courts, administration of the Federal courts,

and cases that shaped the them are posted online.

https://www.fjc.gov/history/timeline

Integrated Database
Under a working arrangement with the Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts, The FJC provides public access to its

Integrated Data Base, which contains data on civil case and criminal defendant filings and terminations in the district

courts, as well as bankruptcy court and appellate court case information.

https://www.fjc.gov/research/idb

Publications
The online catalog contains records of FJC publications: manuals, monographs, reference guides, and research

reports. A bibliographic record, which includes abstract or description, author and title, and additional information, is

available for each item. Phone, 202-502-4153. Fax, 202-502-4077.

https://www.fjc.gov/publications | Email: publications@fjc.gov

Reports / Studies
The FJC posts studies that were published in the past on its website in Portable Document Format (PDF) for

downloading. Its Research Division conducted them. Some Center reports are not published or made publicly available

due to restrictions in place from the source of the research request.

https://www.fjc.gov/research/reports-and-studies

Resources on Law and Practice
     The "Special Topics" web page provides online access to curated collections of FJC resources on discrete areas of law

     and judicial practice.

     https://www.fjc.gov/research/special-topics

     Site Map
     The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

     https://www.fjc.gov/sitemap

     Teaching Resources
     Teaching and civic outreach resources are available online.

     https://www.fjc.gov/education/civic-education-about-courts

     Visiting Foreign Judicial Fellows
     Foreign judges, court officials, and scholars may apply for the opportunity to conduct research at the FJC on topics

     concerning the administration of justice in the United States.

     https://www.fjc.gov/content/visiting-foreign-judicial-fellows-program

        The Sources of Information were updated 3–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                           United States Sentencing Commission




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES SENTENCING COMMISSION
    Suite 2-500, One Columbus Circle NE., Washington, DC 20002-8002


    202-502-4500

    http://www.ussc.gov


      CHAIR                                                                                 William H. Pryor, Jr., Acting




      Vice Chair                                                                            (vacancy)
  Vice Chair                                                                            (vacancy)


  Vice Chair                                                                            (vacancy)


  Commissioner                                                                          Charles R. Breyer


  Commissioner                                                                          Rachel E. Barkow


  Commissioner                                                                          Danny C. Reeves


  Commissioner                                                                          Wiiliam H. Pryor, Jr.


  Commissioner (ex officio)                                                             Jonathan Wroblewski


  Commissioner (ex officio)                                                             J. Patricia Wilson Smoot




  Staff Director                                                                        Kenneth P. Cohen


  Director, Office of Administration and Planning                                       Susan M. Brazel


  Director, Office of Education and Sentencing Practice                                 Raquel Wilson


  Director, Office of Legislative and Public Affairs                                    Christine M. Leonard


  Director, Office of Research and Data                                                 Glenn R. Schmitt


  General Counsel                                                                       Kathleen C. Grilli



The United States Sentencing Commission develops sentencing guidelines and policies for the Federal court system.

Organizational Chart
The United States Sentencing Commission was established as an independent agency in the judicial branch of the

Federal Government by the Sentencing Reform Act of 1984 (28 U.S.C. 991 et seq. and 18 U.S.C. 3551 et seq.). The

Commission establishes sentencing guidelines and policies for the Federal courts, advising them of the appropriate

form and severity of punishment for offenders convicted of Federal crimes.


The Commission comprises seven voting members and two nonvoting members. The President appoints the voting

members with the advice and consent of the Senate for 6-year terms. The President also appoints one of the voting

members as the Chair and designates three others as Vice Chairs.


The Commission evaluates the effects of the sentencing guidelines on the criminal justice system, advises Congress on

the modification or enactment of statutes pertaining to criminal law and sentencing matters, establishes a research and

development program on sentencing issues, and performs other related duties.
In executing its duties, the Commission promulgates and distributes to Federal courts and to the U.S. probation system

guidelines for determining sentences to be imposed in criminal cases, general policy statements regarding the

application of guidelines, and policy statements on the appropriate use of probation and supervised release

revocation provisions. These sentencing guidelines and policy statements are intended to support the principles of just

punishment, deterrence, incapacitation, and rehabilitation; provide fairness in meeting the purposes of sentencing;

avoid unwarranted disparity; and reflect advancement in the knowledge of human behavior as it relates to the criminal

justice process.


The Commission also provides training, conducts research on sentencing-related issues, and serves as an information

resource for Congress, criminal justice practitioners, and the public.

http://www.ussc.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Education
The Commission offers courses that fulfill continuing legal education requirements in several jurisdictions.

http://www.ussc.gov/education/training-resources/continuing-legal-education

Career Opportunities
The Commission posts job announcements on its Web site.

http://www.ussc.gov/employment

Guidelines Manual
The current "USSC Guidelines Manual" is available in Portable Document Format on the Commission's Web site. An

electronic archive of the yearly manual starts with the year 1987.

http://www.ussc.gov/guidelines/2015-guidelines-manual/archive

Helpline
Attorneys, judges, and probation officers who have questions may call the Commission's helpline for assistance. The

helpline also handles data requests. Its hours of operations are 8:30 a.m.–5 p.m., eastern standard time, Monday–

Friday, excluding Federal holidays. Phone, 202-502-4545.


News
Press releases are available on the Commission's Web site.

http://www.ussc.gov/about/news/press-releases
The Commission also posts amicus curiae briefs, reports, speeches, statements, and testimonies online.

http://www.ussc.gov/about/news/testimony-speeches/speeches-and-submissions

Publications
A topical index of publications is available online.
     http://www.ussc.gov/research/topical-index-publications

     Reports
     The Commission posts reports to the Congress on its Web site.

     http://www.ussc.gov/research/reports-congress
     Annual overviews of Federal criminal cases are available online.

     http://www.ussc.gov/topic/year-review
     The Office of Research and Data publishes periodic reports on Federal sentencing practices. The reports include

     information on the types of crimes committed, offenders who commit those crimes, the punishments imposed, and

     the manner in which the sentencing guidelines were applied.

     http://www.ussc.gov/topic/data-reports

     Site Map
     The Web site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

     http://www.ussc.gov/sitemap

     Updates
     An online subscription form is available to sign up for regular email updates from the USSC.

     http://www.ussc.gov/sign-regular-updates
     http://www.ussc.gov | Email: pubaffairs@ussc.gov

        For further information, contact the Office of Legislative and Public Affairs, U.S. Sentencing Commission,
        Suite 2–500, One Columbus Circle NE., Washington, DC 20002-8002. Phone, 202-502-4500.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                                         The President




The United States Government Manual




     THE PRESIDENT
    1600 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20500


      THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES                                                     Donald J. Trump


    https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/donald-j-trump/

      First Lady of the United States                                                        Melania Trump


    https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/melania-trump/
  The above list of key personnel was updated 1–2021.



ESTABLISHMENT
The U.S. Constitution vests the President with the executive power of the Federal Government. It stipulates that the

President will hold his (or her) office for a term of 4 years and will serve the duration of this term together with the

Vice President (ART. II, Sec. 1).

https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/constitution-transcript#toc-section-1--2

CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY AUTHORITIES
The second article of the Constitution addresses the "executive Power" and "Office" of the President.

https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/constitution-transcript#toc-article-ii-
In addition to the powers set forth in the U.S. Constitution, the statutes have conferred specific authority and

responsibility covering a range of matters upon the President. Subject matter affecting the President is codified in 3

U.S.C. Title 3 contains four chapters that currently remain in effect: "Presidential Elections and Vacancies"; "Office and

Compensation of President"; "Delegation of Functions"; and "Extension of Certain Rights and Protections to

Presidential Offices."

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title3&edition=prelim

ACTIVITIES
The President serves as the administrative head of the Government's executive branch, which includes over 55

permanent independent agencies and Government corporations, as well as the 15 executive departments.


The President is the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy (and Air Force). The President also has the power, by

the advice and with the consent of the Senate, to make treaties and to appoint the Justices of the U.S. Supreme Court,

U.S. Ambassadors, and other consuls, officers, and public ministers (ART. II, Sec. 2).

https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/constitution-transcript#toc-section-2--2
The Cabinet comprises the Vice President and the heads of the 15 executive departments. These department heads

include the Secretaries of Agriculture, Commerce, Defense, Education, Energy, Health and Human Services, Homeland

Security, Housing and Urban Development, Interior, Labor, State, Transportation, Treasury, and Veterans Affairs, plus

the Attorney General.

https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/cabinet
The Cabinet, which is a creation of custom and tradition and which dates back to the administration of President

George Washington, functions at the pleasure of the President. Cabinet members advise the President on topics that

relate to the duties of their respective appointments. In the language of the Constitution: The President "may require

the Opinion, in writing, of the principal Officer in each of the executive Departments, upon any Subject relating to the

Duties of their respective Offices" (ibid.).

https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/constitution-transcript#toc-section-2--2
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Cabinet
In addition to the Vice President and heads of the 15 executive departments, President Trump's Cabinet includes the

White House Chief of Staff, the U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, the Director of National Intelligence, and the

U.S. Trade Representative, as well as the heads of the Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Management and

Budget, Council of Economic Advisers, Office of Science and Technology Policy, and Small Business Administration.

https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/cabinet

Compilation of Presidential Documents (CPD)
This collection of Presidential documents comprises the official publications of materials that the White House Press

Secretary has released. The Office of the Federal Register publishes the CPD, and the Government Publishing Office

maintains the collection on its govinfo web site.

https://www.govinfo.gov/app/collection/CPD

Contact the President
An electronic message box is available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.whitehouse.gov/contact

Issues
This web page highlights the priorities of the Trump-Vance administration.

https://www.whitehouse.gov/issues/

Farewell Addresses
The Our Documents initiative is a cooperative effort in which the National Archives and Records Administration

(NARA) participates. As part of the initiative, NARA has selected 100 milestone documents from American history.

Among those select documents are two Presidential farewell addresses, one of which was given by President Dwight

D. Eisenhower in 1961.

https://www.ourdocuments.gov/doc.php?flash=false&doc=90&page=transcript
President George Washington's farewell address to the people of the United States—which he did not publicly deliver,

but which was published first on September 19, 1796, in the "Philadelphia Daily American Advertiser"—is among the

100 milestone American documents that the National Archives and Records Administration has compiled. Since 1893,

the Senate has observed the first President's birthday by having one of its Members read his farewell address aloud.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/GPO-CDOC-106sdoc21/pdf/GPO-CDOC-106sdoc21.pdf

News
The "News" web page is a convenient resource for seeing recent articles, briefings and statements, fact sheets,

Presidential actions and remarks released by the White House.

https://www.whitehouse.gov/news

Libraries / Museums
The National Archives and Records Administration oversees Presidential libraries and museums, which are repositories

for Presidential papers, records, and historical materials.

https://www.archives.gov/presidential-libraries

Nominations
The website congress.gov has a large searchable database that allows users to apply filters and limit search results.

One of the search options is "Nominations" (i.e., Presidential nominations that require Senate approval for

confirmation).

https://www.congress.gov

Pardons / Commutations
The Department of Justice's Office of the Pardon Attorney maintains a list of Presidential pardons and commutations

on its "Clemency Recipients" web page. The list starts with pardons and commutations that President Richard M. Nixon

granted and ends with those that were granted by President Donald J. Trump. .

https://www.justice.gov/pardon/clemency-recipients

Policy and Supporting Positions
Published after each Presidential election, by either the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental

Affairs or the House Committee on Oversight and Reform, the "Plum Book" lists thousands of Federal civil service

leadership and support positions that may be subject to noncompetitive appointment, nationwide.

https://www.govinfo.gov/collection/plum-book?
path=/GPO/United%20States%20Government%20Policy%20and%20Supporting%20Positions%20%2528Plum%20Boo
k%2529

Presidential Actions
President Trumps's announcements, Executive orders, memorandums, and proclamations are posted online.

https://www.whitehouse.gov/presidential-actions/

Fact Sheets
The White House posts fact sheets on their website.

https://www.whitehouse.gov/fact-sheets/

Briefings and Statements
The White House posts press briefings and statements on its website.

https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/

Shared Heritage Travel Itinerary
The Heritage Education Services of the National Park Service (NPS), in partnership with the NPS Office of Tourism,

White House Historical Association, and National Conference of State Historic Preservation Officers, produced the

American Presidents "Discover Our Shared Heritage Travel Itinerary." The travel itinerary helps visitors explore the lives

and contributions of 43 American Presidents. It includes places that American Presidents knew during their lifetimes

and that now honor their public service.
     https://www.nps.gov/nr/travel/presidents/list_of_sites.html

     Social Media
     The White House tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on X.com.

     https://x.com/whitehouse

     Remarks
     President Trump's remarks are posted online.

     https://www.whitehouse.gov/remarks/

     Statements / Releases
     Announcements, readouts of phone conversations, and statements are posted on the White House website.

     https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefings-statements/

     Travels Abroad
     Starting with President Theodore Roosevelt and his visit to Panama, the Department of State's Office of the Historian

     maintains a "Travels Abroad of the President" web page.

     https://history.state.gov/departmenthistory/travels/president

        The Sources of Information were updated 2–2025.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                     The Vice President




The United States Government Manual




     THE VICE PRESIDENT

      THE VICE PRESIDENT                                                                    JD Vance


    https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/jd-vance/

      Second Lady of the United States                                                      Usha Vance


    https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/usha-vance/



    ESTABLISHMENT
The U.S. Constitution stipulates that while occupying his (or her) office for a term of 4 years, the President will serve the

duration of that term together with the Vice President (ART. II, Sec. 1).

https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/constitution-transcript#toc-section-1--2

CONSTITUTIONAL AND STATUTORY AUTHORITIES
The Vice President is mentioned in two articles of the U.S. Constitution: Article I, Section 3, and Article II, Sections 1 and

4.

https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/constitution-transcript
The contents of the 12th, 20th, and 25th Amendments directly affect the office and responsibilities of the Vice

President.

https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/amendments-11-27#toc-amendment-xii
In addition to the powers set forth in the U.S. Constitution, the statutes have conferred specific authority and

responsibility, covering a range of matters, upon the President and Vice President. Subject matter affecting both the

President and Vice President is codified in 3 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title3&edition=prelim

ACTIVITIES
The executive functions of the Vice President include participation in Cabinet meetings.

https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/cabinet
Public Law 81–216, which is also cited as the National Security Act Amendments of 1949, changed the composition of

the National Security Council to include the Vice President (63 Stat. 579).

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/81st-congress/session-1/c81s1ch412.pdf
By an Act that was approved on August 10, 1846, to establish the Smithsonian Institution, the Vice President serves as a

regent on the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution (9 Stat. 103).

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/29th-congress/session-1/c29s1ch178.pdf
Pursuant to Article II, Section 1, the powers and duties of the Presidency devolve on the Vice President in the case of

the President's death, inability to discharge the office's powers and duties, or removal from office.

https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/constitution-transcript#toc-section-1--2
The Vice President also fills a legislative role as President of the Senate. In this capacity, the Vice President had been

expected to preside at regular sessions of the Senate and cast votes only to break ties. From the vice-presidency of

John Adams in 1789 to that of Richard Nixon in the 1950s, presiding over the Senate was the chief function of the Vice

President. Each one had an office in the Capitol, received staff support and office expenses through the legislative

appropriations, and rarely was invited to participate in executive activities, including Cabinet meetings. In 1961, Vice

President Lyndon B. Johnson moved his chief office from the Capitol to the White House, directed his attention to

executive functions, and started attending Senate sessions only at critical times. His actions changed the traditional role

of the Vice President, and those changes continue in effect today.

https://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/common/briefing/President_Pro_Tempore.htm#1
    SOURCES OF INFORMATION

    Contact Information
    The website of the United States Senate has a "Suite and Telephone List" (JAN 2025) that is accessible from its

    "Contacting U.S. Senators" web page. The list is posted in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and

    downloading. Vice President J.D. Vance is the first entry on the list. Phone, 202-224-2424.

    https://www.senate.gov/general/resources/pdf/senators_phone_list.pdf

    Biography
    A brief biographical description of Vice President J.D. Vance is part of the "Biographical Directory of the United States

    Congress, 1774–Present."

    https://bioguideretro.congress.gov/Home/MemberDetails?memIndex=V000137
    https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/jd-vance/

    Executive Branch
    "The Executive Branch" web page includes a section describing the responsibilities and powers of the Vice President.

    https://www.whitehouse.gov/about-the-white-house/our-government/the-executive-branch

    Immediate Priorities

    President of the Senate
    Vice President Vance also serves in a constitutionally mandated capacity as the President of the Senate.

    https://www.senate.gov/senators/leadership.htm

    Service Academy Nominations
    The Vice President is authorized to nominate candidates to the U.S. Military, Naval, and Air Force Academies, but

    cannot make nominations to the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy and does not nominate to the U.S. Coast Guard

    Academy.

    https://www.whitehouse.gov/service-academy-nominations

        The Sources of Information were updated 2–2025.


    https://www.whitehouse.gov/administration/jd-vance/



Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy
Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                 Department of Agriculture




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
    1400 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250


    202-720-2791

    http://www.usda.gov


      SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE                                                              Brooke L. Rollins


      Deputy Secretary                                                                      Michael L. Young, Acting
https://www.usda.gov/our-agency/about-usda/our-secretary



MISSION AREAS

https://www.usda.gov/our-agency/about-usda/mission-areas



Farm Production and Conservation


 Under Secretary                                                                   (vacancy)


 Deputy Under Secretary                                                            Robert Johansson, Acting




 Administrator, Farm Service Agency                                                Steven J. Peterson, Acting


 Chief, Natural Resources Conservation Service                                     Leonard Jordan


 Administrator, Risk Management Agency                                             Heather Manzano, Acting

https://www.usda.gov/media/press-releases/2017/06/16/perdue-names-leadership-acting-roles-usda-reorganization-
takes



Food, Nutrition and Consumer Services


 Under Secretary                                                                   (vacancy)


 Deputy Under Secretary                                                            John Walk, Acting




 Administrator, Food and Nutrition Service                                         James C. Miller


 Director, Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion                               (vacancy)

https://www.usda.gov/media/press-releases/2017/07/19/secretary-perdue-announces-new-leadership-food-nutrition-
and



Food Safety


 Under Secretary                                                                   (vacancy)


 Deputy Under Secretary                                                            Carmen Rottenberg, Acting
 Administrator, Food Safety and Inspection Service                               Paul Kiecker, Acting

https://www.fsis.usda.gov/wps/portal/informational/aboutfsis/agency-leadership



Marketing and Regulatory Programs


 Under Secretary                                                                 Gregory Ibach




 Administrator, Agricultural Marketing Service                                   Bruce Summers, Acting


 Administrator, Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service                       Kevin Shea


 Administrator, Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration          Randall D. Jones, Acting

https://www.ams.usda.gov/about-ams/our-leadership/under-secretary-greg-ibach



Natural Resources and Environment


 Under Secretary                                                                 (vacancy)


 Deputy Under Secretary                                                          Dan Jiron, Acting




 Chief, Forest Service                                                           Tony Tooke

https://www.fs.fed.us/about-agency/newsroom/leadership-biographies



Research, Education and Economics


 Under Secretary                                                                 (vacancy)


                                                                                 Chavonda Jacobs-Young,
 Deputy Under Secretary
                                                                                 Acting




 Administrator, Agricultural Research Service                                    Chavonda Jacobs-Young


 Administrator, Economic Research Service                                        Mary Bohman
 Administrator, National Agricultural Statistics Service   Hubert Hamer, Jr.


 Director, National Agricultural Library                   Paul Wester


 Director, National Institute of Food and Agriculture      Sonny Ramaswamy

https://www.ree.usda.gov/about-ree/biographies



Rural Development


 Assistant to the Secretary                                Anne Hazlett




 Adminstrator, Rural Business-Cooperative Service          Mark Brodziski, Acting


 Administrator, Rural Housing Service                      Curtis Anderson, Acting


 Administrator, Rural Utilities Service                    Chris McLean, Acting

https://www.rd.usda.gov/about-rd/leadership



Trade and Foreign Agricultural Affairs


 Under Secretary                                           (vacancy)


 Deputy Under Secretary                                    Jason Hafemeister, Acting




 Administrator, Farm Agricultural Service                  Holly Higgins, Acting

https://www.fas.usda.gov/about-fas/leadership



OFFICE HEADS


 Assistant Secretary for Administration                    Malcom Shorter, Acting


 {%blankline}




 Chief Economist                                           Robert Johansson
  Chief Financial Officer                                                               Lynn M. Moaney, Acting


  Chief Information Officer                                                             Gary Washington, Acting


                                                                                        Chavonda Jacobs-Young ,
  Chief Scientist
                                                                                        Acting




  Deputy Assistant Secretary for Congressional Relations                                Abbey Fretz, Acting


  Deputy Assistant Secretary for External and Intergovernmental Affairs                 Doug Crandall, Acting




  Director, Advocacy and Outreach                                                       Carolyn Parker


  Director, Budget and Program Analysis                                                 Diem-Linh Jones, Acting


  Director, Communications                                                              Timothy M. Murtaugh


  Director, National Appeals Division                                                   Steven C. Silverman


  Director, Tribal Relations                                                            Ben Keel




  General Counsel                                                                       Stephen A. Vaden, Acting

https://www.usda.gov/our-agency/staff-offices

  Inspector General                                                                     Phyllis K. Fong


https://www.usda.gov/oig



The above list of key personnel was updated 06–2017.


  [For the Department of Agriculture statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations, Title
  7, Part 2]



The Department of Agriculture develops agricultural markets, fights hunger and malnutrition, conserves natural

resources, and ensures food quality standards.


The Department of Agriculture (USDA) was created by an act of Congress on May 15, 1862 (7 U.S.C. 2201). In carrying

out its work in the program mission areas, the USDA relies on the support of departmental administration staff, as well

as on the Offices of Communications, Congressional Relations, the Chief Economist, the Chief Financial Officer, the

Chief Information Officer, the General Counsel, and the Inspector General.
http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=USDA150



FARM AND FOREIGN AGRICULTURAL SERVICES
This mission area centers on helping America's farmers and ranchers deal with the unpredictable nature of weather

and markets. These services deliver commodity, conservation, credit, disaster, and emergency assistance programs to

strengthen and stabilize the agricultural economy.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=USDA_MISSION_AREAS

Farm Service Agency (FSA)
The Farm Service Agency administers farm commodity, disaster, and conservation programs for farmers and ranchers.

It also makes and guarantees farm emergency, ownership, and operating loans through a network of State and county

offices.

http://www.fsa.usda.gov/index

Commodity Credit Corporation
The Commodity Credit Corporation, an agency and instrumentality of the United States within the USDA, is under the

supervision of the Secretary of Agriculture. The Corporation does not have any employees, but relies on various

Federal agencies, principally those in the USDA, to conduct its operations. It carries out a wide array of functions as

authorized by the Commodity Credit Corporation Charter Act and as specifically authorized by the Congress in

numerous statutes. Corporation funds are used to offer marketing assistance loans to producers of certain

commodities, fund conservation programs to protect or enhance natural resources, support the export of agricultural

commodities, provide humanitarian assistance abroad, and further economic progress in developing countries.

http://www.fsa.usda.gov/about-fsa/structure-and-organization/commodity-credit-corporation/index

Commodity Operations
FSA facilitates the purchase, storage, transportation, and disposition of U.S.-origin commodities acquired as a result of

commodity loan forfeiture or through procurement for humanitarian food aid programs. FSA administers the United

States Warehouse Act, which authorizes the Secretary of Agriculture to license warehouse operators who store

agricultural products. The FSA also enters into agreements with warehouse operators to store commodities owned by

the Commodity Credit Corporation or pledged by farmers as security for Commodity Credit Corporation marketing

assistance loans.

http://www.fsa.usda.gov/about-fsa/structure-and-organization/commodity-operations/index

Conservation Programs
FSA's conservation programs include the Conservation Reserve Program, which is the Federal Government's largest

environmental improvement program on private lands. It safeguards millions of acres of topsoil from erosion,

improves air quality, increases wildlife habitat, and reduces water runoff and sedimentation. In return for planting a

protective cover of grass or trees on environmentally sensitive land, participants receive an annual rental payment.

Cost-share payments are available to help establish conservation practices such as the planting of native grass, trees,

windbreaks, or plants that improve water quality and give shelter and food to wildlife.
http://www.fsa.usda.gov/FSA/webapp?area=home&subject=copr&topic=landing

Farm Commodity Programs
FSA manages farm safety net programs for America’s farmers and ranchers. Its Commodity Credit Corporation

stabilizes, supports, and protects farm income and prices; helps maintain balanced and adequate supplies of

agricultural commodities; and aids in their orderly distribution.

http://www.fsa.usda.gov/about-fsa/structure-and-organization/commodity-credit-corporation/index

Farm Loan Programs
FSA makes and guarantees loans to family farmers and ranchers to purchase farmland and finance agricultural

production. These programs offer credit on reasonable rates and terms to farmers—those who have suffered financial

setbacks from natural disasters, those with limited resources for establishing and maintaining profitable farming

operations, and beginners.

http://www.fsa.usda.gov/programs-and-services/farm-loan-programs/index

Noninsured Crop Disaster Assistance Program
The Noninsured Crop Disaster Assistance Program gives financial assistance to producers of noninsurable crops when

yields are low, inventory is lost, or natural disasters prevent planting.

http://www.fsa.usda.gov/programs-and-services/disaster-assistance-program/noninsured-crop-disaster-
assistance/index

Other Emergency Assistance
In counties that are declared disaster areas, low-interest loans for eligible farmers help cover physical and production

losses. Eligible producers can be compensated for crop losses, livestock feed losses, tree damage, and for the cost of

rehabilitating certain farmlands damaged by natural disaster.

http://www.fsa.usda.gov/programs-and-services/disaster-assistance-program/index

  For further information, contact the Office of External Affairs, Farm Service Agency, Department of
  Agriculture, Stop 0506, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250. Phone, 202-720-7807.
  Or, contact the Information Division, Foreign Agricultural Service, Department of Agriculture, Stop 1004,
  1400 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250. Phone, 202-720-7115. Fax, 202-720-1727.



Foreign Agricultural Service (FAS)
The Foreign Agricultural Service improves foreign market access for U.S. products, builds new markets, improves the

competitive position of U.S. agriculture in the global marketplace, and provides food aid and technical assistance to

foreign countries.


FAS has the primary responsibility for USDA's activities in the areas of international marketing, trade agreements and

negotiations, and the collection and analysis of international statistics and market information. It also administers the

USDA's export credit guarantee and food aid programs. FAS helps increase income and food availability in developing

nations by mobilizing expertise for agriculturally led economic growth.


FAS also enhances U.S. agricultural competitiveness through a global network of agricultural economists, marketing

experts, negotiators, and other specialists. FAS agricultural counselors, attaches, trade officers, and locally employed
staff are stationed in over 93 countries to support U.S. agricultural interests and cover 171 countries.


In addition to agricultural affairs offices in U.S. embassies, trade offices operate in a number of key foreign markets.

They function as service centers for U.S. exporters and foreign buyers seeking market information.


Reports prepared by FAS overseas offices cover changes in policies and other developments that could affect U.S.

agricultural exports. FAS staff in U.S. embassies worldwide assess U.S. export marketing opportunities and respond to

the daily informational needs of those who develop, initiate, monitor, and evaluate U.S. food and agricultural policies

and programs.


The Service also maintains a worldwide agricultural reporting system based on information from U.S. agricultural

traders, remote sensing systems, and other sources. Analysts in Washington, DC, prepare production forecasts, assess

export marketing opportunities, and track changes in policies affecting U.S. agricultural exports and imports.


FAS programs help U.S. exporters develop and maintain markets for hundreds of food and agricultural products, from

bulk commodities to brand-name items. Formal market promotion activities are carried out chiefly in cooperation with

agricultural trade associations, State-regional trade groups, small businesses, and cooperatives that plan, manage, and

contribute human and financial resources to these efforts. The Service also advises exporters on locating buyers and

provides assistance through a variety of other methods, including supporting U.S. participation in trade shows and

single-industry exhibitions each year.

http://www.fas.usda.gov

  For further information, contact the Public Affairs Division, Foreign Agricultural Service, Stop 1004, 1400
  Independence Avenue SW., Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC 20250-1004. Phone, 202-720-
  7115. Fax, 202-720-1727.



Risk Management Agency (RMA)
The Risk Management Agency, on behalf of the Federal Crop Insurance Corporation (FCIC), oversees and administers

the Federal crop insurance program under the Federal Crop Insurance Act.


Federal crop insurance is offered to qualifying producers through 16 private sector crop insurance companies. Under

the Standard Reinsurance Agreement (SRA), RMA provides reinsurance, pays premium subsidies, reimburses insurers

for administrative and operating expenses, and oversees the financial integrity and operational performance of the

delivery system. RMA bears much of the noncommercial insurance risk under the SRA, allowing insurers to retain

commercial insurance risks or reinsure those risks in the private market.


In 2016, the Federal crop insurance program provided producers with more than $100 billion in protection. Twenty-five

insurance plans are available, covering over 550 varieties of crops, 37 reinsured privately developed products, and 18

RMA-developed pilot programs in various stages of operation.


RMA also works closely with the private sector to find innovative ways to expand coverage. The expansion affects risk

protection for specialty crops, livestock and forage, and rangeland and pasture. Thus, RMA is able to reduce the need

for ad hoc disaster assistance, while providing coverage for production declines that result from adverse weather in

many areas.
Additional information is available on the RMA Web site, which features agency news, State profiles, publications, and

announcements on current issues. It also has summaries of insurance sales, pilot programs, downloadable crop

policies, and agency-sponsored events. Online tools, calculators, and applications are also part of the Web site.

http://www.rma.usda.gov

  For further information, contact the Office of the Administrator, Risk Management Agency, Department
  of Agriculture, Stop 0801, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250. Phone, 202-690-2803.




FOOD, NUTRITION AND CONSUMER SERVICES
The mission area of the food, nutrition, and consumer services centers on harnessing the Nation's agricultural

abundance to reduce hunger and improve health in the United States. Its agencies administer Federal domestic

nutrition assistance programs and the Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion, which links scientific research to the

nutrition needs of consumers through science-based dietary guidance, nutrition policy coordination, and nutrition

education.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=USDA_MISSION_AREAS

Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion (CNPP)
The Center for Nutrition Policy and Promotion improves the health and well-being of Americans by developing and

promoting dietary guidance that links the latest evidence-based scientific research to consumers' nutrition needs.

Initiatives range from setting Federal dietary guidance to consumer-based nutrition education (MyPlate), to cutting-

edge personalized electronic tools (SuperTracker), to “report cards" on the status of the American diet.

https://www.choosemyplate.govhttps://www.supertracker.usda.govhttp://www.cnpp.usda.gov

  For further information, contact the Office of Public Information, Center for Nutrition Policy and
  Promotion, Suite 200, 1120 20th Street NW., Washington, DC 20036-3406. Phone, 202-418-2312.



Food and Nutrition Service (FNS)
The Food and Nutrition Service administers the USDA domestic nutrition assistance programs, serving one in four

Americans in the course of a year. The FNS works in partnership with States and local agencies to increase food

security and reduce hunger by providing children and low-income people with access to food, a healthy diet, and

nutrition education.

http://www.fns.usda.gov
FNS administers the following nutrition assistance programs:


The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) gives nutrition assistance to millions of eligible low-income

individuals and families, and it provides economic benefits to communities. SNAP is the largest program in the

domestic hunger safety net. FNS also works with State partners and the retail community to improve program

administration and ensure program integrity.

http://www.fns.usda.gov/snap/supplemental-nutrition-assistance-program-snap
The Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC) provides Federal grants to States

for supplemental foods, health care referrals, and nutrition education for low-income pregnant, breastfeeding, and

nonbreastfeeding postpartum women, and to infants and children up to age 5 who are found to be at nutritional risk.

WIC and the Seniors' Farmers' Market Nutrition Programs provide WIC participants and senior citizens with increased

access to fresh produce through coupons to purchase fresh fruits and vegetables from authorized farmers.

http://www.fns.usda.gov/wic/women-infants-and-children-wic
The Farmers' Market Nutrition Program is linked to WIC, which provides supplemental foods, health care referrals, and

nutrition education at no cost to low-income pregnant, breastfeeding, and nonbreastfeeding post partum women, and

to infants and children who are up to 5 years of age and found to be at nutritional risk.

http://www.fns.usda.gov/fmnp/wic-farmers-market-nutrition-program-fmnp
The Senior Farmers' Market Nutrition Program awards grants to States, U.S. Territories, and federally recognized Indian

tribal governments for coupons that low-income seniors can use to purchase eligible foods at farmers' markets,

roadside stands, and community-supported agriculture programs.

http://www.fns.usda.gov/sfmnp/senior-farmers-market-nutrition-program-sfmnp
The Commodity Supplemental Food Program improves the health of low-income pregnant and breastfeeding women,

nonbreastfeeding mothers up to 1 year postpartum, infants, and children up to age 6. The program supplements their

diets with nutritious USDA commodity foods. It also provides food and administrative funds to States to supplement

the diets of these groups.

http://www.fns.usda.gov/csfp/commodity-supplemental-food-program-csfp
School districts and independent schools that choose to take part in the National School Lunch Program receive cash

subsidies and donated commodities from the USDA. In return, they must serve lunches that meet Federal

requirements and must offer free or reduced-price lunches to eligible children. School food authorities can also be

reimbursed for snacks served to children through age 18 in afterschool educational or enrichment programs.

http://www.fns.usda.gov/nslp/national-school-lunch-program-nslp
The School Breakfast Program operates like the National School Lunch Program. School districts and independent

schools that choose to take part in the breakfast program receive cash subsidies from the USDA for each meal they

serve. In return, they must serve breakfasts that meet Federal requirements and must offer free or reduced-price

breakfasts to eligible children.

http://www.fns.usda.gov/sbp/school-breakfast-program-sbp
The Special Milk Program provides milk to schoolchildren and children in childcare institutions who do not participate

in other Federal meal service programs. The program reimburses schools for the milk that they serve. Schools in the

National School Lunch or School Breakfast Programs may participate so that milk is available to prekindergarten and

kindergarten children who may not have access to school meal programs.

http://www.fns.usda.gov/smp/special-milk-program
The Child and Adult Care Food Program helps child and adult care institutions and family or group day care homes

provide nutritious foods to promote the health and wellness of young children, older adults, and chronically impaired

disabled persons.

http://www.fns.usda.gov/cacfp/child-and-adult-care-food-program
The Summer Food Service Program ensures that low-income children receive nutritious meals when they are not

attending school.

http://www.fns.usda.gov/sfsp/summer-food-service-program-sfsp
The Emergency Food Assistance Program helps low-income and elderly Americans access free emergency food and

nutrition assistance. The program provides food and administrative funds to States to supplement the diets of these

groups.

http://www.fns.usda.gov/tefap/emergency-food-assistance-program-tefap
The Food Distribution Program on Indian Reservations helps low-income households—including the elderly living on

Indian reservations—and Native American families residing in designated areas in Oklahoma and near reservations

elsewhere to access USDA foods.

http://www.fns.usda.gov/fdpir/food-distribution-program-indian-reservations-fdpir
The Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Program helps make fruits and vegetables available to students free of charge, during

the schoolday, in participating elementary schools. The program is a tool for reducing childhood obesity: It exposes

schoolchildren to fresh produce that they otherwise might not have the opportunity to sample.

http://www.fns.usda.gov/ffvp/fresh-fruit-and-vegetable-program

 For further information, contact the Public Information Officer, Food and Nutrition Service, Department
 of Agriculture, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, VA 22302. Phone, 703-305-2286.




FOOD SAFETY
This mission area centers on the labeling and packaging, safety, and wholesomeness of the Nation's commercial

supply of egg, poultry, and meat. It also contributes significantly to the President's Council on Food Safety and has

helped coordinate a nationwide food safety strategic plan.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=USDA_MISSION_AREAS

Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS)
The Food Safety and Inspection Service was established by the Secretary of Agriculture on June 17, 1981, pursuant to

authority contained in 5 U.S.C. 301 and Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1953 (5 U.S.C. app.). FSIS monitors the Nation's

commercial supply of meat, poultry, and processed egg products.

http://www.fsis.usda.gov/wps/portal/fsis/home

Meat, Poultry, and Processed Egg Products Inspection
FSIS is the public health regulatory agency in the U.S. Department of Agriculture that ensures commercial meat,

poultry, and processed egg products are safe, wholesome, accurately labeled, and properly packaged. FSIS enforces

the Federal Meat Inspection Act (FMIA), the Poultry Products Inspection Act (PPIA), and the Egg Products Inspection

Act (EPIA), which require Federal inspection and regulation of meat, poultry, and processed egg products prepared for

distribution in commerce for use as human food. FSIS is also responsible for administering the Humane Methods of

Slaughter Act, which requires that livestock are handled and slaughtered humanely at the FSIS-inspected

establishment.
FSIS administers FMIA, PPIA, and EPIA by developing and implementing data-driven regulations, including inspection,

testing, and enforcement activities for the products under FSIS’s jurisdiction. In addition to mandatory inspection of

meat, poultry, and processed egg products, FSIS tests samples of these products for microbial and chemical residues

to monitor trends for enforcement purposes and to understand, predict, and prevent contamination. FSIS also ensures

that only meat, poultry, and processed egg products that meet U.S. requirements are imported into the United States,

and it certifies meat, poultry, and processed egg products for export.


FSIS also monitors meat, poultry, and processed egg products throughout storage, distribution, and retail channels,

and it ensures regulatory compliance to protect the public, including detention of products, voluntary product recalls,

court-ordered seizures of products, administrative suspension and withdrawal of inspection, and referral of violations

for criminal and civil prosecution. To protect against intentional contamination, the Agency conducts food defense

activities, as well.


FSIS maintains a toll-free Meat and Poultry Hotline (phone, 888-674-6854; TTY, 800-256-7072) and chat feature to

answer questions in English and Spanish about the safe handling of meat, poultry, and egg products. The Hotline's

hours are weekdays, from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., EST, year round. An extensive selection of food safety messages in English

and Spanish is available at the same number at all hours of the day. Questions can also be submitted anytime to

MPHotline.fsis@usda.gov.


"Ask Karen," an online virtual representative, provides answers to consumer questions on preventing foodborne illness,

safe    food     handling   and   storage,   and    safe   preparation    of   meat,    poultry,   and   egg    products

(http://www.fsis.usda.gov/wps/portal/informational/askkaren).

http://www.fsis.usda.gov

  For further information, contact the Assistant Administrator, Office of Public Affairs and Consumer
  Education, Department of Agriculture, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250. Phone,
  202-720-3884.




MARKETING AND REGULATORY PROGRAMS
The scope of the marketing and regulatory mission area includes marketing and regulatory programs other than those

concerned with food safety.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=USDA_MISSION_AREAS

Agricultural Marketing Service (AMS)
The Agricultural Marketing Service was established by the Secretary of Agriculture on April 2, 1972, under the authority

of Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1953 (5 U.S.C. app.) and other authorities. The Service facilitates the fair and efficient

marketing of U.S. agricultural products. It supports agriculture through a variety of programs: cotton and tobacco;

dairy; fruit and vegetable; livestock, poultry, and seed; organic products; transportation and marketing, and science

and technology. The Service's activities support American agriculture in the global marketplace and help ensure the

availability of wholesome food.
http://www.ams.usda.gov

Audit and Accreditation Services
AMS audit and accreditation programs give producers and suppliers of agricultural products the opportunity to assure

customers of their ability to provide consistent quality products and services. The AMS verifies their documented

programs through independent, third-party audits. AMS audit and accreditation programs are voluntary and paid

through hourly user-fees.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/services/auditing

Commodity Purchasing
The AMS purchases a variety of domestically produced and processed commodity food products through a

competitive process involving approved vendors. The purchasing supports American agriculture by providing an outlet

for surplus products and encouraging domestic consumption of domestic foods. The wholesome, high quality

products, collectively called USDA Foods, are delivered to schools, food banks, and households across the country and

constitute a vital component of the Nation's food safety net.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/selling-food

Farmers Markets / Direct-to-Consumer Marketing
The AMS regularly collects data and analyzes farmers market operations and other direct-to-consumer marketing

outlets—Community Supported Agriculture, food hubs, on-farm markets—to help market managers, planners, and

researchers better understand the effect of these outlets on food access and local economic development, and to help

the public find sources of fresh, local food.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/services/local-regional

Grades / Standards
USDA grade shields, official seals, and labels are symbols of the quality and integrity of American agricultural products.

Large-volume buyers such as grocery stores, military institutions, restaurants, and foreign governments benfit from the

quality grades and standards because they serve as as a common "language" that simplifies business transactions.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/AMSv1.0/standards

Grant Programs
The AMS administers a series of grant programs that make over $100 million available to support a variety of

agricultural activities, including the specialty crop industry and local and regional food system expansion. These grant

programs improve domestic and international opportunities for growers and producers and help support rural

America.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/services/grants

Laboratory Testing and Approval Services
The AMS oversees the National Science Laboratories (NSL), a fee-for-service lab network. NSL scientists and

technicians conduct chemical, microbiological, and biomolecular analyses on food and agricultural commodities. The

network provides testing services for AMS commodity programs, other USDA agencies, Federal and State agencies,

research institutions, private sector food and agricultural industries, and the U.S. military. The AMS also approves or
accredits labs to perform testing services in support of domestic and international trade. At the request of industry,

other Federal agencies, or foreign governments, it develops and administers laboratory approval programs to verify

that the analysis of food and agricultural products meet country or customer-specified requirements.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/services/lab-testing

Marketing Agreements and Orders
Marketing agreements and orders are initiated by industry to stabilize markets for dairy products, fruits, vegetables,

and specialty crops. An agreement is binding only for handlers who sign the agreement. Marketing orders are a

binding regulation for the entire industry in the specified geographical area, once the producers and the Secretary of

Agriculture have approved it.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/rules-regulations/moa

Market News
Market News issues thousands of reports each year, providing the agricultural industry with important wholesale, retail,

and shipping data. The reports give farmers, producers, and other agricultural businesses the information they need to

evaluate market conditions, identify trends, make purchasing decisions, monitor price patterns, evaluate transportation

equipment needs, and accurately assess movement.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/market-news

National Organic Program
The National Organic Program is a regulatory program housed within the AMS. It develops national standards for

organically-produced agricultural products. The "USDA ORGANIC" seal means that a product met consistent and

uniform standards. USDA organic regulations do not address food safety or nutrition. Organic production integrates

cultural, biological, and mechanical practices to increase cycling of resources, biodiversity, and ecological balance.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/about-ams/programs-offices/national-organic-program

Pesticide Data Program
The Pesticide Data Program (PDP) monitors pesticide residue nationwide. It produces the most comprehensive

pesticide residue database in the Nation. The PDP administers the sampling, testing, and reporting of pesticide

residues on agricultural commodities in the U.S. food supply—with an emphasis on those commodities regularly

consumed by infants and children. The AMS implements the program in cooperation with State agriculture

departments and other Federal agencies. The Environmental Protection Agency relies on PDP data to assess dietary

exposure, and Food and Drug Administration and other government experts use them for making informed decisions.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/datasets/pdp

Plant Variety Protection Program
The Plant Variety Protection Office protects the intellectual property of breeders of new seed and tuber varieties.

Implementing the Plant Variety Protection Act, the Office examines new applications and grants certificates that

protect varieties for 20 or 25 years. Certificate owners have exclusive rights to market and sell their varieties, manage

the use of their varieties by other breeders, and benefit from legal protection of their work.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/services/plant-variety-protection
Regulatory Programs
The AMS administers several regulatory programs designed to protect producers, handlers, and consumers of

agricultural commodities from financial loss or personal injury resulting from careless, deceptive, or fraudulent

marketing practices. These regulatory programs encourage fair trading practices in the marketing of fruits and

vegetables, and they require accuracy in seed labeling and in advertising. The AMS also enforces the Country of Origin

Labeling law, which requires retailers—full-line grocery stores, supermarkets, club warehouse stores—to notify their

customers with information regarding the source of certain foods.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/rules-regulations

Research and Promotion Programs
The AMS monitors certain industry-sponsored research, promotion, and information programs authorized by Federal

laws. These programs give farmers and processors a means to finance and operate various research, promotion, and

information activities for agricultural products.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/rules-regulations/research-promotion

Quality Grading / Inspections
Nearly 600 grade standards have been established for some 230 agricultural commodities to help buyers and sellers

trade on agreed-upon quality levels. Standards are developed with assistance from individuals outside the

Department, particularly from those involved with the industries directly affected. The AMS also participates in

developing international commodity standards to facilitate trade. Grading and classing services are provided to certify

the grade and quality of products. These grading services are provided to buyers and sellers of live cattle, swine,

sheep, meat, poultry, eggs, rabbits, fruits, vegetables, tree nuts, peanuts, dairy products, tobacco, and other

miscellaneous food products. Classing services are provided to buyers and sellers of cotton and cotton products.

These services are mainly voluntary and are provided upon request and for a fee. The AMS is also responsible for

testing seed.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/services/grading

Transportation Research and Analysis
The Transportation Services Division (TSD) of the AMS serves as the definitive source for economic analysis of

agricultural transportation. TSD experts support domestic and international agribusinesses by giving technical

assistance and releasing reports and offering analysis. They track developments in truck, rail, barge, and ocean

transportation and provide information on and analysis of these modes of moving food from farm to table, from port

to market.

http://www.ams.usda.gov/services/transportation-analysis

  For further information, contact the Public Affairs Staff, Agricultural Marketing Service, Department of
  Agriculture, Room 3933, South Agriculture Building, Stop 0273, 1400 Independence Ave, SW.,
  Washington, DC 20250. Phone, 202-720-8998.



Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS)
[For the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations,

Title 7, Part 371]
The Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service was originally established in 1972 and reestablished by the Secretary of

Agriculture on March 14, 1977, pursuant to authority contained in 5 U.S.C. 301 and Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1953

(5 U.S.C. app.). The APHIS was established to conduct regulatory and control programs to protect and improve animal

and plant health for the benefit of agriculture and the environment. In cooperation with State governments, industry

stakeholders, and other Federal agencies, the APHIS works to prevent the entry and establishment of foreign animal

and plant pests and diseases. It also regulates certain genetically engineered organisms and supports healthy

international agricultural trade and exports of U.S. agricultural products. The agency also works to ensure the humane

treatment of certain animals and carries out research and operational activities to mitigate damage caused by birds,

rodents, and other wildlife.

https://www.aphis.usda.gov/wps/portal/aphis/home

Animal Care
Animal Care upholds and enforces the Animal Welfare Act and the Horse Protection Act. The Animal Welfare Act

requires that federally established standards of care and treatment be provided for certain warmblooded animals bred

for commercial sale, used in research, transported commercially, or publicly exhibited. The Horse Protection Act seeks

to end soring by preventing sored horses from participating in auctions, exhibitions, sales, and shows. The Center for

Animal Welfare collaborates with other animal welfare entities to help the USDA build partnerships domestically and

internationally, improve regulatory practices, and develop outreach, training, and educational resources. Animal Care's

emergency response component provides national leadership on the safety and well-being of pets during disasters—

supporting animal safety during emergencies is a significant factor in ensuring the well-being of pet owners.

https://www.aphis.usda.gov/wps/portal/aphis/ourfocus/animalwelfare

Biotechnology Regulatory Services
To protect plant health, Biotechnology Regulatory Services implements APHIS regulations affecting the importation,

movement, and field release of genetically engineered plants and certain other genetically engineered organisms that

may pose a risk to plant health. The APHIS coordinates these responsibilities along with the other designated Federal

agencies as part of the Federal coordinated framework for the regulation of biotechnology.

https://www.aphis.usda.gov/wps/portal/aphis/ourfocus/biotechnology

International Services
APHIS protects the health and value of American agriculture and natural resources. Its International Services supports

this mission in an international environment. The Services collaborate with foreign partners to control pests and

diseases, facilitate safe agricultural trade, ensure effective and efficient management of internationally-based

programs, and invest in international capacity-building with foreign counterparts to build technical and regulatory skills

that prevent diseases and pests from spreading.

https://www.aphis.usda.gov/wps/portal/aphis/ourfocus/internationalservices

Plant Protection and Quarantine
APHIS oversees Plant Protection and Quarantine. The program protects U.S. agriculture and natural resources against

the entry, establishment, and spread of economically and environmentally significant pests. It also facilitates the safe

trade of agricultural products.
https://www.aphis.usda.gov/wps/portal/aphis/ourfocus/planthealth

Veterinary Services
Veterinary Services supports APHIS' efforts to protect and improve the health, quality, and marketability of the Nation's

animals, animal products, and veterinary biologics. The Service is organized strategically into four sections:

surveillance, preparedness, and response; national import export services; science, technology, and analysis; and

program support services.

https://www.aphis.usda.gov/wps/portal/aphis/ourfocus/animalhealth

Wildlife Services
Wildlife Services provides Federal leadership and expertise for resolving conflicts between wildlife and people to allow

coexistence. It conducts program delivery, research, and other activities through regional and State offices, the

National Wildlife Research Center and field stations, as well as through national programs. Contact the APHIS

customer service call center for more information. Phone, 844-820-2234.

https://www.aphis.usda.gov/wps/portal/aphis/ourfocus/wildlifedamage

  For further information, contact Legislative and Public Affairs, Animal and Plant Health Inspection
  Service, Department of Agriculture, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250. Phone, 202-
  799-7030.



Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration (GIPSA)
The Grain Inspection, Packers and Stockyards Administration was established in 1994 to facilitate the marketing of

livestock, poultry, meat, cereals, oilseeds, and related agricultural products, and to promote fair and competitive

trading practices for the overall benefit of consumers and American agriculture. The Packers and Stockyards Program

protects fair trade practices, financial integrity, and competitive markets for livestock, meat, and poultry. The Federal

Grain Inspection Service facilitates the marketing of U.S. grains, oilseeds, and related agricultural products through its

grain inspection and weighing system. The Service also maintains the integrity of the grain marketing system by

developing unbiased grading standards and methods for assessing grain quality.

http://www.gipsa.usda.gov

Inspection
The United States Grain Standards Act requires most U.S. export grain to be inspected. At export port locations, GIPSA

or State agencies that have been delegated authority by the Administrator carry out inspections. For domestic grain

marketed at inland locations, the Administrator designates private and State agencies to provide official inspection

services upon request. Both export and domestic services are provided on a fee-for-service basis.

http://www.gipsa.usda.gov/fgis/inspectionservices.aspx

Methods Development
GIPSA’s methods development activities include applied research or tests to produce new or improved techniques for

measuring grain quality. Examples include knowledge gained through the study of how to establish real-time grain

inspection, develop reference methods in order to maintain consistency and standardization in the grain inspection

system, as well as the comparison of different techniques for evaluation of end-use quality in wheat.
Packers and Stockyards Activities
GIPSA prohibits deceptive, discriminatory, and unfair practices by market agencies, dealers, stockyards, packers, swine

contractors, and live poultry dealers in the livestock, meat packing, and poultry industries. According to the provisions

of the Packers and Stockyards Act, it fosters fair competition and ensures payment protection for growers and farmers

through regulatory activities: investigating alleged violations of the act, auditing regulated entities, verifying the

accuracy of scales, and monitoring industry trends to protect consumers and members of the livestock, meat, and

poultry industries. The Administration also has certain responsibilities derived from the Truth-in-Lending and the Fair

Credit Reporting Acts. GIPSA carries out the Secretary's responsibilities under section 1324 of the Food Security Act of

1985 pertaining to State-established central filing systems to prenotify buyers, commission merchants, and selling

agents of security interests against farm products. GIPSA administers the section of the act commonly referred to as

the "Clear Title" provision and certifies qualifying State systems.

http://www.gipsa.usda.gov/psp/psp.aspx

Standardization
Official inspections of grains, oilseeds, and other agricultural and processed commodities are based on established

official U.S. standards. The inspections also rely on sound, proven, and standardized procedures, techniques, and

equipment. The official standards and accompanying procedures, techniques, and equipment produce consistent test

results and services, from elevator to elevator and State to State.

http://www.gipsa.usda.gov/fgis/standardprocedures.aspx

Weighing
GIPSA or State agencies that have been delegated authority the Administrator officially weigh U.S. export grain at port

locations. For domestic grain marketed at inland locations, GIPSA or designated private or State agencies provide the

weighing services. Weighing services are provided on a fee-for-service basis.

http://www.gipsa.usda.gov/fgis/weighingservices.aspx

  For further information, contact the Grain Inspection, Packers, and Stockyards Administration,
  Department of Agriculture, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250. Phone, 202-720-
  0219.




NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT
This mission area centers on stewardship of 75 percent of the Nation's total land area. The USDA's operating

philosophy in this mission area places a premium on collaboration with diverse partners and on the health and

sustainability of ecosystems to maximize stewardship of the Nation's natural resources. This approach ensures that the

necessary requirements for maintaining healthy and sustainable systems are in balance with people's priorities and the

products and services that they desire.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=USDA_MISSION_AREAS

Forest Service (FS)
[For the Forest Service statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 36, Part 200.1]


In 1876, Congress created the Office of Special Agent in the Department of Agriculture to assess the condition of the

forests in the United States. The Forest Service was created decades later by the Transfer Act of February 1, 1905 (16

U.S.C. 472), which transferred the Federal forest reserves and the responsibility for their management to the USDA

from the Department of the Interior. The mission of the Forest Service is to achieve quality land management under

the sustainable, multiple-use management concept to meet the diverse needs of people. The Service advocates a

conservation ethic in promoting the health, productivity, diversity, and beauty of forests and associated lands; listens to

people and responds to their diverse needs in making decisions; protects and manages the National Forests and

Grasslands to best demonstrate the sustainable, multiple-use management concept; provides technical and financial

assistance to State, tribal, and private forest landowners, encouraging them to become better stewards and quality

land managers; helps cities and communities improve their natural environment by planting trees and caring for their

forests; provides international technical assistance and scientific exchanges to sustain and enhance global resources

and to encourage quality land management; assists States and communities in using the forests wisely to promote

rural economic development and a quality rural environment; develops and disseminates scientific and technical

knowledge that helps protect, manage, and improve use of forests and rangelands; and offers employment, training,

and educational opportunities to the unemployed, underemployed, disadvantaged, elderly, and youth.

http://www.fs.fed.us

Forest Research
The Service performs basic and applied research to develop the scientific information and technology needed to

protect, manage, use, and sustain the natural resources of the Nation's forests and rangelands, including those on

private and tribal lands. Its forest research strategy focuses on three major program components: understanding the

structure and functions of forest and range ecosystems; understanding how people perceive and value the protection,

management, and use of natural resources; and determining which protection, management, and utilization practices

are most suitable for sustainable production and use of natural resources worldwide.

http://www.fs.fed.us/research/research-topics

National Forest System
Using the principles of multiple-use and sustained yield, the Service manages 154 National Forests, 20 National

Grasslands, 1 tall grass prairie, and 8 national monuments on approximately 193 million acres of land in 44 States, the

U.S. Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico. The Nation's need for wood and paper products must be balanced against the

other vital, renewable resources or benefits that the National Forests and Grasslands provide: recreation and natural

beauty, wildlife habitat, livestock forage, and water supplies. As a guiding principle, the Service tries to achieve greatest

good for the greatest number in the long run.


These lands are managed to promote resiliency against catastrophic wildfire, epidemics of disease and insect pests,

erosion, and other threats. Burned areas receive emergency seeding treatment to prevent massive erosion and stream

siltation. Roads and trails are built where needed to give the public access to outdoor recreation areas and provide

scenic drives and hikes. Picnic, camping, skiing, water sport and other recreational areas feature facilities for public

convenience and enjoyment. Vegetative management methods protect the land and streams, ensure rapid renewal of

the forest, provide food and cover for wildlife and fish, and mitigate human impact on scenic and recreation assets.
Local communities benefit from activities on National Forest lands. These lands also provide needed oil, gas, and

minerals. Millions of livestock and game animals benefit from improved rangelands. The National Forests serve as a

refuge for many species of endangered birds, animals, and fish. Some 34.6 million acres are set aside as wilderness

and 175,000 acres as primitive areas where timber will not be harvested.

http://www.fs.fed.us/managing-land/national-forests-grasslands

State and Private Forestry
The State and Private Forestry organization of the Forest Service reaches across the boundaries of National Forests to

States, tribes, communities, and nonindustrial private landowners. The organization is the Federal leader in giving

technical and financial assistance to landowners and resource managers to help sustain the Nation’s forests and

protect communities and the environment from wildland fires. National priorities for State and private forestry

promote four core actions: conserving and managing working forest landscapes for multiple values and uses,

protecting forests from threats, enhancing public benefits from trees and forests, and increasing organizational

effectiveness. The State and Private Forestry organization supports sustainable stewardship of non-Federal forest land

nationwide, including 423 million acres of private forest land, 69 million acres of State forest land, 18 million acres of

tribal forests, and over 130 million acres of urban and community forests. The organization offers leadership in

wildland fire management, operations, methods development, risk mapping, forest products utilization, and advanced

survey and monitoring, as well as geospatial technologies.

http://www.fs.fed.us/spf

Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
[For the Natural Resources Conservation Service statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations, Title

7, Parts 600 and 601]


The Natural Resources Conservation Service, formerly known as the Soil Conservation Service, helps America's farmers,

ranchers, and other private landowners develop and implement voluntary efforts to conserve and protect the Nation's

natural resources.

http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/site/national/home

Agricultural Conservation Easement Program
The Agricultural Conservation Easement Program helps conserve agricultural lands and wetlands by offering financial

and technical assistance. Under the program's Agricultural Land Easements component, NRCS supports Indian tribes,

State and local governments, and nongovernmental organizations in their efforts to protect working agricultural lands

and to limit agricultural land use for nonagricultural purposes. Under the program's Wetlands Reserve Easements

component, NRCS supports efforts to restore, protect, and enhance enrolled wetlands.

http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/programs/easements/acep

Agricultural Management Assistance
Agricultural Management Assistance, by giving financial and technical assistance to agricultural producers, encourages

them to incorporate conversation practices into their farming operations to improve water management and quality,

to reduce erosion, and to mitigate risk through production diversification. The assistance supports producers' in their

efforts to plant trees for windbreaks, construct irrigation structures, use integrated pest management, and transition to
organic farming. NRCS administers the program's conservation components, while AMS and RMA handle the others.

http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/programs/financial/ama

Conservation Stewardship Program
The Conservation Stewardship Program helps agricultural producers maintain and improve their existing conservation

systems and adopt additional conservation practices that address resource concerns of high priority. Participants earn

program payments for conservation performance: Payments are directly proportional to performance. The program

offers two types of payments through 5-year contracts: annual payments for adopting new conservation practices and

maintaining current ones, and supplemental payments for initiating a resource-conserving crop rotation. Producers

may be able to renew a contract if they met the obligations of the initial contract and agree to achieve additional

conservation goals.

http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/programs/financial/csp

Conservation Technical Assistance
Conservation Technical Assistance makes conservation technology and the delivery system needed to achieve the

benefits of a healthy and productive landscape available to land users. The program reduces the loss of soil from

erosion; offers solutions for agricultural waste management, air quality, soil, and water conservation and quality

problems; mitigates potential water, sedimentation, or drought damage; improves fish and wildlife habitat; assists

others in facilitating changes in land use for natural resource protection and sustainability; and increases the long term

sustainability of all lands—cropland, forestland, grazing lands, coastal lands, and developing or developed lands.

Technical Assistance supports clients in their efforts to address concerns and problems and explore opportunities

related to the use of natural resources. NRCS staff and the employees of other agencies or entities under the technical

supervision of NRCS provide the assistance.

http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/programs/technical/cta

Emergency Watershed Protection Program
The Emergency Watershed Protection Program safeguards lives and property in jeopardy due to sudden watershed

impairment caused by natural disasters. Emergency assistance includes quickly establishing a protective plant cover on

denuded land and stream banks, opening dangerously restricted channels, and repairing diversions and levees. To be

eligible for assistance under this program, an emergency area does not need to be declared a national disaster area.

NRCS may bear up to 75 percent of the construction cost of emergency measures. The remaining cost must come

from local sources. Funding is subject to Congressional approval.

http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/programs/landscape/ewpp

Environmental Quality Incentives Program
The Environmental Quality Incentives Program assists agricultural producers by offering contracts up to a maximum

term of 10 years in length. These contracts provide financial assistance for planning and implementing conservation

practices that address natural resource concerns and for improving air, animal, plant, soil, water, and related resources

on agricultural land and nonindustrial private forestland. Sixty percent of the available funds are for conservation

activities related to livestock production. The program also helps producers meet Federal, State, tribal and local

environmental regulations.
http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/programs/financial/eqip

Healthy Forests Reserve Program
The Healthy Forests Reserve Program helps landowners restore, enhance, and protect forestland resources on private

lands through easements, 30-year contracts, and 10-year cost-share agreements. The program supports the efforts of

landowners to promote the recovery of endangered or threatened species, increase plant and animal biodiversity, and

improve carbon sequestration.

http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/programs/easements/forests

National Cooperative Soil Survey
The National Cooperative Soil Survey, a nationwide partnership of Federal, State, regional, and local agencies and

private entities and institutions, works cooperatively to investigate, inventory, document, classify, interpret, disseminate,

and publish soil information. It informs the public about the uses and capabilities of local soils. The published survey

for a county or other designated area includes maps and interpretations that are essential for farm planning, other

private land use decisions, and governmental policy development and resource planning.

http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/soils/survey/partnership/ncss

Plant Materials Program
The Plant Materials Program selects conservation plants and develops innovative planting technology for addressing

natural resource challenges and maintaining healthy and productive farms and ranches. It focuses on using plants as a

natural solution for conservation issues and reestablishing ecosystem function; collects, selects, and releases grasses,

legumes, wildflowers, trees and shrubs, working with commercial, private, public, and tribal partners and land

managers to apply new plant-based conservation methods; provides plant materials and new applied technologies for

national initiatives; offers plant solutions to fight invasive species, heal lands damaged by natural disasters, reduce

drought effects, promote air and water quality, and produce alternative energy; and assists Native American tribes with

producing and protecting culturally significant plants.

http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/plantmaterials/about

Regional Conservation Partnership Program
The Regional Conservation Partnership Program promotes coordination between NRCS and its partners for the

delivery of conservation assistance to producers and landowners. NRCS assists producers through partnership

agreements and program contracts or easement agreements. The program combines the authorities of four previous

programs: the Cooperative Conservation Partnership Initiative, the Agricultural Water Enhancement, the Chesapeake

Bay Watershed, and the Great Lakes Basin Programs.

http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/programs/farmbill/rcpp

Small Watershed Program
The Small Watershed Program relies on local government sponsors to help participants solve natural resource and

related economic problems on a watershed basis. Projects include efforts to protect watersheds, prevent floods,

control erosion and sedimentation, improve water supply and quality, enhance fish and wildlife habitat, create and

restore wetlands, and support public recreation in watersheds of 250,000 or fewer acres. The program offers both

financial and technical assistance. Through the Small Watershed Program, NRCS maps flood hazard areas, solves local
flooding problems, evaluates potential greenbelts along streams, develops guidelines for erosion control and runoff

management, helps farmers control erosion in high priority watersheds, and improves the water quality of ground

water and water bodies.

http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/detail/nd/programs/?cid=nrcs141p2_001682

Snow Survey and Water Supply Forecasts
The Snow Survey is conducted by NRCS to make information on future water supplies available to residents of Alaska

and Western States. At more than 1,800 mountain sites, NRCS personnel collect and analyze data on snowpack depth

and its water equivalent to estimate annual water availability, spring runoff, and summer streamflows. Federal and

State agencies, organizations, and individuals rely on these forecasts for agricultural production, fish and wildlife

management, municipal and industrial water supply, urban development, flood control, recreation power generation,

and water quality management. The National Weather Service includes the forecasts in their river forecasting function.

http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/water/snowsurvey

Watershed Surveys and Planning
The Watershed Surveys and Planning program supports Federal, State, and local agencies and tribal governments in

their efforts to protect watersheds from damage caused by erosion, floodwater, and sediment and to conserve and

develop water and land resources. The program addresses a number of resource concerns: agricultural drought

problems, municipal and industrial water needs, rural development, upstream flood damages, water quality and

conservation, wetland and water storage capacity, and water needs for fish, wildlife, and forest-based industries.

http://www.nrcs.usda.gov/wps/portal/nrcs/main/national/programs/landscape/wsp



RESEARCH, EDUCATION AND ECONOMICS
This mission area centers on creating, applying, and transferring knowledge and technology to make available

affordable food and fiber, ensure food safety and nutrition, and support rural development and people's natural

resource needs. The creation, application, and transfer of this knowledge and technology are achieved by conducting

integrated national and international research and by providing information, education, and statistical programs and

services.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=USDA_MISSION_AREAS

Agricultural Research Service (ARS)
The Agricultural Research Service conducts research on agricultural problems of high national priority. It provides

information access and dissemination to ensure high-quality, safe food and other agricultural products; to assess the

nutritional needs of Americans; to sustain a competitive agricultural economy; to enhance the natural resource base

and the environment; and to promote economic opportunities for rural citizens, communities, and society as a whole.


Research activities are carried out at 96 domestic locations, including Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands, and five

overseas locations. ARS conducts much of this research in cooperation with partners in State universities and

experiment stations, other Federal agencies, and private organizations. National Programs, headquartered in Beltsville,

MD, plans and coordinates the research programs, and five area offices carry out the day-to-day management of the
respective programs for specific field locations.


The National Agricultural Library, the primary resource in the United States for information on food, agriculture, and

natural resources, serves as an electronic gateway to a widening array of scientific literature, printed text, and

agricultural images. The library supports the USDA and a broad customer base of policymakers, agricultural specialists,

research scientists, and the general public. It works with other agricultural libraries and institutions to advance open

and democratic access specifically to the Nation's agricultural knowledge and to agricultural information in general.

http://www.nal.usda.gov

  For further information, contact the Agricultural Research Service, Department of Agriculture, 1400
  Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250. Phone, 202-720-3656. Fax, 202-720-5427.



The National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA)
The National Institute of Food and Agriculture invests in and advances agricultural education, extension, and research

to address societal challenges. The Institute works with academic institutions, land-grant universities, and other science

organizations nationwide. With its partners and customers, NIFA promotes a global system of research, extension, and

higher education in the food and agricultural sciences and related environmental and human sciences for the good of

people, communities, and the Nation.


The Institute collaborates with scientists, policymakers, experts, and educators in organizations worldwide to find

innovative solutions to pressing local and global problems. Scientific discovery and application advance the

competitiveness of American agriculture, strengthen the U.S. economy, make the Nation's food supply safer, improve

the nutrition and well-being of American citizens, sustain natural resources and the environment, and build energy

independence. Partnering with other Federal science agencies, NIFA also makes important contributions to science

policy decisionmaking.

http://nifa.usda.gov

  For further information, contact the Communications Staff, The National Institute of Food and
  Agriculture , Department of Agriculture, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250-2207.
  Phone, 202-720-4651. Fax, 202-690-0289.



Economic Research Service (ERS)
The Service informs and strengthens public and private decisionmaking on economic and policy issues affecting

agriculture, food, rural development, and the environment. ERS also serves as a primary source of economic

information and research in the USDA.


Using a variety of means, ERS disseminates economic information and research results. It produces agency-published

research reports, economic briefs, data products, and market analysis and outlook reports. "Amber Waves," its award-

winning online magazine features articles on the economics of food, farming, natural resources, and rural America

(www.ers.usda.gov/amber-waves). The ERS Web site allows access to all agency products, and it connects users

directly with ERS analysts. The agency delivers oral briefings, written staff analyses, and congressionally mandated

studies to executive and legislative branch policymakers and program administrators. Its experts also write articles for

professional journals and present papers at academic conferences and meetings.
http://www.ers.usda.gov

  For further information, contact the Information Services Division, Economic Research Service,
  Department of Agriculture, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250. Phone, 202-694-
  5100. Fax, 202-245-4781.



National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS)
The National Agricultural Statistics Service prepares estimates and reports on production, supply, price, chemical use,

and other items necessary for the orderly operation of the U.S. agricultural economy.


NAAS reports include statistics on field crops, fruits and vegetables, dairy, cattle, hogs, sheep, poultry, aquaculture, and

related commodities or processed products. Estimates concern farm numbers, farm production expenditures,

agricultural chemical use, prices received by farmers for products sold, prices paid for commodities and services,

indexes of prices received and paid, parity prices, farm employment, and farm wage rates.


NASS prepares these estimates through a complex system of sample surveys of producers, processors, buyers, and

others associated with agriculture. Information is gathered by mail, electronic data reporting, telephone, and personal

interviews.


The Service conducts the Census of Agriculture, which is taken every 5 years and provides comprehensive data on the

agricultural economy down to the county level. It also conducts follow-on studies on aquaculture, irrigation,

horticultural energy, and organic agriculture.


NASS performs reimbursable survey work and statistical consulting services for other Federal and State agencies. It

also helps other countries develop agricultural data systems by offering technical assistance.

http://www.nass.usda.gov

  For further information, contact the Customer Service Center, National Agricultural Statistics Service,
  Department of Agriculture, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250-2000. Phone, 202-
  720-3878.




RURAL DEVELOPMENT
The rural development mission area centers on increasing the economic opportunities of rural Americans and

improving their quality of life. To achieve these goals, the USDA creates and fosters cooperative relationships among

Government, industry, and communities. As a capital investment bank, the USDA provides financing for rural housing

and community facilities, business and cooperative development, telephone and high-speed Internet access, and

electric, water, and sewer infrastructure. Approximately 3,400 employees in 47 State offices and 477 field offices

administer rural development loan and grant programs at the local level.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=USDA_MISSION_AREAS

Advanced Biofuel Repayment Program
The program provides payments to producers to support and expand production of advanced biofuels refined from
sources other than corn kernel starch.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/advanced-biofuel-payment-program

Biorefinery, Renewable Chemical, and Biobased Product Manufacturing Assistance
Program
This program assists in the development, construction, and retrofitting of new and emerging technologies for

developing advanced biofuels, renewable chemicals, and biobased product manufacturing by giving loan guarantees.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/biorefinery-renewable-chemical-and-biobased-product-manufacturing-
assistance

Business and Industry Guaranteed Loan Program
This program creates jobs and stimulates the rural economy by financially backing rural businesses. It bolsters the

existing private credit structure through the guaranteeing of loans for rural businesses, allowing private lenders to

increase the credit that they extend. Borrowers use loan proceeds for working capital, machinery and equipment,

buildings, real estate, and certain types of debt refinancing. A borrower may be a cooperative organization,

corporation, partnership, nonprofit corporation, Native American tribe, federally recognized tribal group, public body,

or individual.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/business-industry-loan-guarantees

Cooperative Programs
USDA Cooperative Programs is the Nation's major source for information on cooperatives. Its library of more than 150

co-op publications—many of which are available in hardcopy, as well as online—range from co-op primers, such as

"Co-ops 101," to reports on technical topics, such as "Tax Law for Cooperatives," to reports focusing on co-op

economic theory, such as "The Nature of the Cooperative." These publications may be accessed on the "Publications

for Cooperatives" Web page.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/all-programs/cooperative-programs

Delta Health Care Services Grant Program
This program provides financial assistance to meet ongoing health needs in the Delta Region through cooperation

among health care professionals, institutions of higher education, research institutions, and others in the Delta Region.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/delta-health-care-services-grants

Intermediary Relending Program
This program provides capital to rural areas through low-interest and direct loans made to nonprofit corporations,

public agencies, Native American groups, and certain corporations (intermediaries). These intermediaries establish

revolving loan funds so they can relend the money to businesses in economically and socially disadvantaged rural

communities. The process creates a source of capital that promotes job growth and economic development.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/intermediary-relending-program

Repowering Assistance Program
This program funds up to 50 percent of the total eligible costs for biorefineries to install renewable biomass systems

for heating and power or to produce new energy from renewable biomass.
http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/repowering-assistance-program

Rural Business Development Grant Program
This program provides grants for rural projects that promote small and emerging business development, business

incubators, employment, and related adult education programs. It also provides grants for sustainable economic

development in rural communities with exceptional needs. Recipients use the grants to fund community- and

technology-based economic development projects, feasibility studies, leadership and entrepreneur training, rural

business incubators, and long-term business strategic planning. Eligible organizations include Native American tribes,

nonprofit corporations, and rural public entities.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/rural-business-development-grants

Rural Business-Cooperative Service
To meet business credit needs in underserved rural areas, USDA's Rural Business-Cooperative Service provides loan

guarantees, direct loans, and grants to rural businesses, cooperatives, farmers, and ranchers, often in partnership with

private sector lenders. The following is a list and description of USDA's Rural Development business and cooperative

programs.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/about-rd/agencies/rural-business-cooperative-service

Rural Cooperative Development Grant Program
This program improves rural economic conditions by assisting individuals and businesses in the startup, expansion or

operational improvement of rural cooperatives and other mutually-owned businesses through Cooperative

Development Centers.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/rural-cooperative-development-grant-program

Rural Economic Development (RED) Loan and Grant Program
The RED Loan and Grant programs provide funding to rural projects through local utility organizations. Under the loan

program, USDA gives zero-interest loans that local utilities pass through to local businesses for projects that create

and retain employment in rural areas. Under the grant program, USDA gives grant funds to local utility organizations

that use them to establish revolving loan funds.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/rural-economic-development-loan-grant-program

Rural Energy for America Program
Grant recipients assist rural small businesses and agricultural producers by conducting and promoting energy audits

and assisting in the development of renewable energy.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/rural-energy-america-program-energy-audit-renewable-energy-
development-assistance

Rural Housing Programs
USDA Rural Development improves the quality of life in rural America. Its Rural Housing Service offers loans, grants,

and loan guarantees to support essential services such as housing, economic development, health care, first-

responder equipment and personnel, and water, electric and communications infrastructure. It also helps rural

residents buy or rent safe and affordable housing, and make home repairs to improve safety and to create healthier

living environments.
http://www.rd.usda.gov/about-rd/agencies/rural-housing-service

Rural Microentrepreneur Assistance Program
This program makes loans and gives grants to Microenterprise Development Organizations. These organizations then

provide microloans for microenterprise startups and growth through a rural microloan revolving fund. They also offer

training and technical assistance to microloan borrowers and microentrepreneurs.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/rural-microentrepreneur-assistance-program

Rural Utilities Programs
USDA Rural Development strengthens rural economies and makes life better for Americans living in rural areas. Its

Rural Utilities Service administers programs that provide infrastructure or infrastructure improvements to nonurban

communities. These programs include water and waste treatment and electric power and telecommunications services.

Utilities programs connect residents to the global community and its economy by increasing access to broadband and

21st-century telecommunications services, funding sustainable renewable energy development and conservation,

financing reliable and affordable electric systems, working to integrate electric smart grid technologies, and developing

reliable and affordable rural water and wastewater systems.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/about-rd/agencies/rural-utilities-service

Socially-Disadvantaged Groups Grant Program
This program gives technical assistance to small socially-disadvantaged agricultural producers in rural areas.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/socially-disadvantaged-groups-grant

Value-Added Producer Grant Program
This program helps agricultural producers engage in value-added activities related to the processing and marketing of

bio-based, value-added products. The program is designed to generate new products, create and expand marketing

opportunities, and increase producer income.

http://www.rd.usda.gov/programs-services/value-added-producer-grants

  For further information, contact the Rural Development Legislative and Public Affairs Staff, Department
  of Agriculture, Stop 0705, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250-0320. Phone, 202-
  690-0498.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Ask the Expert
This tool helps Web site visitors locate the answers to their USDA-related questions.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=ASK_EXPERT2

A–Z Index
The USDA Web site has a topical index that is arranged in alphabetical order.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=AZ_INDEX
Blog
The USDA Web site features a blog that includes contributions on conservation, energy, food and nutrition, forestry,

knowing your farmer and your food, rural development, and other topics.

http://blogs.usda.gov

Business Opportunities
Marketing to the USDA can be a daunting task. To assist businessmen and women who seek to sell their products and

services to the agency, the USDA has collected all of the necessary information and packaged it in one place—in the

"Doing Business with USDA Kit" (2005 edition).

http://www.dm.usda.gov/procurement/business/index.htm
The USDA awards over 50 percent of eligible contracting dollars to small businesses nationwide. Information on

contracting or subcontracting opportunities, attending small business outreach events, or how to do business with the

USDA is available on the "Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization" Web site. Phone, 202-720-7117.

http://www.dm.usda.gov/smallbus/index.php

Career Opportunities
For information on vacant positions within the USDA and opportunities for students, recent graduates, and veterans,

visit the "Careers and Jobs" Web page.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=CAREERS
In 2017, the USDA ranked 7th among 18 large agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/AG00

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Departmental Management oversees the USDA's FOIA program. Twenty-one USDA FOIA officers at the mission area

and agency levels work to increase Government transparency through proactive disclosures and the use of

technology.

http://www.dm.usda.gov/foia
Agency reading rooms are updated frequently and contain commonly requested records. Information seekers should

visit the relevant reading rooms before submitting a FOIA request.

http://www.dm.usda.gov/foia/agencyfoia.htm
The FOIA public access link (PAL) is a web portal that allows information seekers to create and submit a FOIA request

and to check its status. Registration, which requires creating a user name and password, is the first step for using PAL.

https://efoia-pal.usda.gov/palMain.aspx

Glossary
The USDA maintains a glossary of agency acronyms.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=glossary#top

Newsroom
Announcements, factsheets, reports, and statements are accessible online.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=NEWSROOM

Open Government
The USDA supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=USDA_OPEN

Organic Agriculture
The USDA is committed to increasing organic agriculture. It operates many programs that serve the growing organic

sector. The USDA Organic Seal, which has been in use nearly 15 years, is a leading global standard. Visit the "Organic

Agriculture" Web pages to learn more.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=organic-agriculture
Instructions for becoming a certified organic operation are available online.

https://www.ams.usda.gov/services/organic-certification/faq-becoming-certified
To receive "USDA Organic Insider" updates via email, use the online subscription form.

https://visitor.r20.constantcontact.com/manage/optin/ea?v=001tanuLSmJHqsq1D840Z7eyw%3D%3D

Organizational Chart
The USDA's organizational chart is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.usda.gov/sites/default/files/documents/usda-organization-chart.pdf

Plain Language
In support of the Plain Writing Act of 2010, USDA editors and writers strive to provide the public with information that

is clear, understandable, and useful in forms, instructions, letters, notices, and publications. If a USDA document or

content on the Department's Web site is unclear or difficult to understand, contact the USDA via email.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=PLAIN_WRITING | Email: plainlanguage@osec.usda.gov

Reports
Agency reports, data, and forecasts and outlooks are accessible online.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=AGENCY_REPORTS

Site Map
The Web site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse for topics that align with their interests.

http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navtype=FT&navid=SITE_MAP

Snarge
Birds and other animals occasionally collide with airborne aircraft and planes moving on the ground. These collisions

are called wildlife strikes, and snarge is the remaining residue after impact. To learn about efforts to reduce wildlife

strikes, visit the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service's (APHIS) wildlife strike web page.

https://www.aphis.usda.gov/aphis/ourfocus/wildlifedamage/programs/SA_Airport
    Watch the USDA's video to see how bird parts and snarge are collected, reported, shipped, and identified.

    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_OhJXexmmTg&list=PLF1BE3AC34367E99E

    Social Media
    The USDA tweets announcements, events, and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/usda

    Speakers
    Contact the nearest USDA office or county extension agent. In the District of Columbia, contact the Office of

    Communications, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250. Phone,

    202-720-4623.

    http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=OC_MEDIA_COMMS

    Whistleblower Hotline
    To file a complaint of alleged improprieties—employee misconduct, conflicts of interest, criminal activity,

    mismanagement or wasteful use of funds, workplace violence—visit the "OIG Hotline" Web page and use the "Submit

    a Complaint" feature. Or, contact a regional office or the Office of the Inspector General, U.S. Department of

    Agriculture, P.O. Box 23399, Washington, DC 20026. Phone, 800-424-9121 or 202-690-1622. TDD, 202-690-1202. Fax,

    202-690-2474.

    http://www.usda.gov/oig/hotline.htm

    Wood Pellets
    European Union (EU) policies requiring renewable energy sources and energy associated with low greenhouse gas

    emissions are affecting wood products manufacturing and forests in the United States. Wood pellet production is on

    the rise as export to the EU increases. The primary U.S. exporting region is the South. To learn more about this topic,

    see the "Effect of Policies on Pellet Production and Forests in the U.S. South," which was published by the Southern

    Research Station of the U.S. Forest Service in December of 2014.

    https://www.srs.fs.usda.gov/pubs/gtr/gtr_srs202.pdf
    http://www.usda.gov/wps/portal/usda/usdahome?navid=CONTACT_US

        For further information concerning the Department of Agriculture, contact the Office of
        Communications, Department of Agriculture, 1400 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20250.
        Phone, 202-720-4623.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy
Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                             Department of Commerce
                                           Bureau of Industry and Security
                                       Economic Development Administration
                                       Economics and Statistics Administration
                                         International Trade Administration
                                       Minority Business Development Agency
                                 National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
                            National Telecommunications and Information Administration
                                  National Institute of Standards and Technology
                                       National Technical Information Service
                                     United States Patent and Trademark Office




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
Fourteenth Street and Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20230


202-482-2000

http://www.doc.gov




OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY


 SECRETARY OF COMMERCE                                                 Howard Lutnick


 Deputy Secretary                                                      Don Graves

https://www.commerce.gov/about/leadership/gina-m-raimondo



Office Heads Reporting to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary


 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Administration                                                        Wynn W. Coggins, Acting


 Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs                             (vacancy)




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Financial                                                             Wynn W. Coggins, Acting


 Information                                                           (vacancy)




 General Counsel                                                       Leslie Kiernan

https://www.commerce.gov/about/leadership?q=/about/leadership&page=1

 INSPECTOR GENERAL                                                     Peggy E. Gustafson


https://www.commerce.gov/bureaus-and-offices/os/inspector-general



Office Heads Reporting to the Chief of Staff


 CHIEF OF STAFF                                                        Mike Harney
 DIRECTORS OF OFFICES


 Business Liaison                              Laura O'Neill


 Executive Secretariat                         (vacancy)


 Policy and Strategic Planning                 (vacancy)


 Public Affairs                                Gabriela Castillo


 The White House Liaison                       (vacancy)

https://www.commerce.gov/bureaus-and-offices



HEADS OF BUREAUS AND OFFICES


 UNDER SECRETARIES


 Economic Affairs                              Jed Kolko


 Industry and Security                         Alan F. Estevez


 UNDER SECRETARIES OF COMMERCE


 Intellectual Property                         Kathi Vidal


 International Trade                           Marisa Lago


 Oceans and Atmosphere                         Richard W. Spinrad


 Standards and Technology                      Laurie E. Locascio




 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES OF COMMERCE


 Communications and Information                , Acting


 Economic Development                          Alejandra Y. Castillo




 NATIONAL DIRECTOR


 Minority Business Development                 Donald R. Cravins,Jr.
  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Department of Commerce promotes the Nation's domestic and international trade, economic growth, and

technological advancement by fostering free enterprise worldwide, supporting fair trade, compiling social and economic
statistics, protecting Earth's physical resources, granting patents and registering trademarks, and assisting small and

minority-owned businesses.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Department of Commerce was designated as such by act of March 4, 1913 (15 U.S.C. 1501). The act reorganized

the Department of Commerce and Labor, created by act of February 14, 1903 (15 U.S.C. 1501), by transferring labor

activities into a new, separate Department of Labor.


The "2020 Annual Performance Report" and "2022 Annual Performance Plan," which are combined into a single

document, are posted on the DOC website. On page 4 of the introduction, a chart representing the DOC's

organizational structure may be found.

https://www.commerce.gov/files/fy-2022-annual-performance-plan-and-fy-2020-annual-performance-report
The "Bureaus and Offices" web page provides links that lead to the various web pages belonging to those bureaus

and offices.

https://www.commerce.gov/bureaus-and-offices

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORTIES
Rules and regulations that affect commerce and foreign trade and that are associated with the DOC are codified and

have been assigned to 15 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=249848b7d71bf886fd9b4f1823873a43&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title15/15tab_02.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The DOC ensures fair trade, provides data to support commerce and constitutional democracy, and fosters innovation

by setting standards and conducting foundational research and development. The DOC makes helpful tools available

to entrepreneurs who and companies that are based in the United States. Programs, such as the Decennial Census,

the National Weather Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Fisheries, and the Foreign

Commercial Service, are the providers of these tools. The DOC also oversees ocean and coastal navigation,

participates in the negotiation of bilateral trade agreements, and enforces laws that ensure fairness for American

businesses and workers.

https://www.commerce.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The Census Bureau has posted an alphabetical index of its website's content.
https://www.census.gov/about/index.html

Business Opportunities
The industry liaison helps business owners, contractors, and others seeking opportunities to work with the DOC.

https://www.commerce.gov/oam/vendors/vendor-engagement

Career Opportunities
For information on internships and career opportunities throughout the Department, visit the "Career Opportunities

and Internships" Web page.

https://www.commerce.gov/work-with-us/careers
In 2020, the DOC ranked 5th among 17 large Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=CM00

Census
The 2020 Census is a record of every person living in the United States and the five U.S. Territories.

https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/decennial-census/decade/2020/2020-census-main.html

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has the DOC's mailing address and main phone number. It also has links that lead to

additional points of contact and DOC bureaus and agencies.

https://www.commerce.gov/about/contact-us

Data / Reports
The DOC collects, stores, and analyzes a wealth of information, including data on the Nation’s economy, population,

and environment.

https://www.commerce.gov/data-and-reports

Economic Development Information
The Economic Development Administration maintains a clearinghouse for economic development information on its

Web site.

http://www.eda.gov

Environment
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration conducts research and gathers data on the atmosphere,

oceans, space, and Sun, and it applies this knowledge to science and public service: warning of dangerous weather,

charting seas and skies, guiding the use and protection of ocean and coastal resources, and improving stewardship of

the environment. For more information, contact the Office of Communications, National Oceanic and Atmospheric

Administration, Room 6013, Fourteenth Street and Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20230. Phone, 202-482-

6090. Fax, 202-482-3154.

http://www.noaa.gov

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the DOC recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/commerce-department

Inspector General Hotline
The Office of Inspector General promotes economy, efficiency, and effectiveness and prevents and detects fraud,

waste, abuse, and mismanagement in departmental programs and operations. To file a complaint, contact the Hotline,

Inspector General, Complaint Intake Unit, Mail Stop 7886, 1401 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20230.

Phone, 202-482-2495 or 800-424-5197. TTD, 202-482-5923 or 856-860-6950. Fax, 855-569-9235.

http://www.oig.doc.gov | Email: hotline@oig.doc.gov

 The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Bureau of Industry and Security
Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230


202-482-2721

http://www.bis.doc.gov




Industry and Security


 UNDER SECRETARY                                         Jeremy Pelter, Acting


 Deputy Under Secretary                                  Jeremy Pelter




 Chief Counsel                                           Opher Shweiki, Acting

https://www.commerce.gov/about/leadership



Export


 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Administration                                          Matthew S. Borman, Acting


 Enforcement                                             Kevin J. Kurland, Acting

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-bis/organization/senior-management-team



 The above list of key personnel was updated 9–2021.
The Bureau of Industry and Security ensures an effective export control and treaty compliance system and

promotes the Nation's strategic leadership in technology to strengthen national security, advance U.S. foreign

policy, and achieve economic objectives.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Bureau of Export Administration, which was later renamed the Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), was

established within the Department of Commerce on October 1, 1987.


On March 10, 1988, the Department of Commerce issued Department Organization Order 10–16. It set forth the

scope of authority and the functions of the new Under Secretary for Export Administration. A copy of the order

was published in the Federal Register on June 7, 1988 (53 FR 20881).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1988-06-07/pdf/FR-1988-06-07.pdf
The Department of Commerce used an internal organization order to change the name of the Bureau of Export

Administration to the BIS on April 18, 2002. The nomenclature change was published as a final rule in the Federal

Register on April 26, 2002 (67 FR 20630).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2002-04-26/pdf/02-10166.pdf
The BIS posts an organization chart on its website.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-bis/organization

ACTIVITIES
The BIS advances U.S. national security, foreign policy, and economic objectives. The Bureau ensures an effective

export control and treaty compliance system and promotes U.S. leadership in strategic technologies. The BIS

maintains and strengthens adaptable, efficient, and effective export controls and treaty compliance systems. It

also is involved with international export control regimes, often playing a lead role.

https://www.commerce.gov/bureaus-and-offices/bis

Export Administration
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Export Administration is responsible for export licenses, treaty

compliance, treaty obligations relating to weapons of mass destruction, and the defense industrial and

technology base. The Office regulates the export of dual-use items requiring licenses for national security,

nonproliferation, foreign policy, and short supply; ensures that approval or denial of license applications is

consistent with economic and security concerns; promotes an understanding of export control regulations within

the business community; represents the Department in interagency and international forums relating to export

controls, particularly in multilateral regimes; monitors the availability of industrial resources of national defense;

analyzes the impact of export controls on strategic industries; and assesses the security consequences of certain

foreign investments.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/regulations/export-administration-regulations-ear

Export Enforcement
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Export Enforcement enforces dual-use export controls. This enables
exporters to take advantage of legal export opportunities while ensuring that illegal exports will be detected and

either prevented or investigated and sanctioned. The Office also ensures prompt, aggressive action against

restrictive trade practices; and conducts cooperative enforcement activities on an international basis. Export

Enforcement also enforces U.S. antiboycott laws and regulations by advising U.S. exporters on potential

prohibited requests contained in foreign contracts; investigating violations such as the furnishing of boycott-

related information, refusing to deal with blacklisted businesses; and pursuing criminal and administrative

sanctions for violations.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/enforcement



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Additional Programs
The "Add'l Programs" web page provides convenient access to information on technology evaluation, strategic

industries and economic security, chemical weapons, and nuclear fuel cycle-related activities.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/other-areas

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that records of the Bureau

of Export Administration have been assigned to record group 476. The Administration was renamed the BIS in

2002. Record group 476 does not have a description that currently is associated with it.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/401-to-500.html

Boycott Requests
The Office of Antiboycott Compliance posts recent examples of boycott requests that have been reported. The

list of prohibited conditions is illustrative and not exhaustive.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/all-articles/7-enforcement/1755-examples-of-recent-boycott-related-
requests

Career Opportunities
BIS career opportunities are posted on USAJobs, which is a free web-based job board that serves as the Federal

Government's official source of Federal job listings and employment opportunity information.

https://www.usajobs.gov
In 2020, the BIS ranked 136th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=CM67

Commerce Control List
Export control classification numbers are helpful for determining whether or not a Department of Commerce-

issued export license is needed for exporting a particular export item.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/regulations/commerce-control-list-ccl
Commerce Country Chart
The BIS has posted an overview of the commerce control list and the commerce country chart.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/documents/regulations-docs/federal-register-notices/federal-register-
2014/1033-738-supp-1/file

Contact Information
Forms and telephone numbers are available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-bis/contact-bis
Descriptions of BIS activities and contact information for its program offices are available online.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/program-offices

Data
The "BIS Data Portal" web page allows access to datasets that are relevant for analyzing exports and licensing.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/data-portal

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations (e-CFR)
Title 15 of the e-CFR is dedicated to rules and regulations on commerce and foreign trade.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=713f591c01d176fc38d7d3cc23a07ffd&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title15/15tab_02.tpl

Enforcement Resources
Descriptions of the sentinel program and outreach program, as well as links to enforcement resources, are

available online.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/compliance-a-training/export-management-a-compliance/enforcement-
resources

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the BIS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/industry-and-security-bureau

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA is a Federal freedom of information law. It allows a person the right to request access to Federal

agency records that are maintained by agencies within the Government's executive branch. After receiving a

written request, an agency must disclose the requested information; however, some records may be shielded

from disclosure by one or more of nine FOIA exemptions or by one of three special law enforcement record

exclusions.

https://efoia.bis.doc.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The BIS posts answers to a lot of questions on its "FAQs" web page.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/policy-guidance/faqs
Links to Resources
The "Resource Links" web page has contact information for and links to other Government departments and

agencies whose activities include export control. The web page also has links to Federal agencies that offer trade

promotion information and other related services.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-bis/resource-links

Newsroom
The newsroom has information on the Bureau's current activities, as well as historical records and speeches by

and testimony from senior managers.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-bis/newsroom

Press Releases
The BIS posts press releases.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-bis/newsroom/press-releases

Publications
Publications that are available online include the BIS's Annual Report to Congress, the guidance on the

Commerce Department’s Reexport Controls, and the Exporter User Manual and Licensing FAQ.

http://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-bis/newsroom/publications

Regulations
Subscribers to the "Export Administration Regulations" can stay informed of the latest rules. Phone, 301-208-

0700 (ext. 112).

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/regulations/order-a-hard-copy-of-the-ear | Email: pubs@ocr-inc.com
The "Recently Published Regulations" web page contains helpful links to regulatory publications that are

electronic.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/regulations

Social Media
The BIS tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/BISgov

Statistical Reports
The BIS posts statistical reports on its website.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/statistical-reports

  The above Sources of Information were updated 9–2021.




Economic Development Administration
Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230
202-482-5081

http://www.eda.gov


  ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF             COMMERCE       FOR
                                                           Alejandra Y. Castillo
  ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT


  Deputy Assistant Secretary                               Dennis Alvord




  Chief Operating Officer                                  Dennis Alvord


https://eda.gov/about/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 9–2021.



The Economic Development Administration (EDA) was created in 1965 under the Public Works and Economic

Development Act (42 U.S.C. 3121) as part of an effort to target Federal resources to economically distressed

areas and to help develop local economies in the United States. It was mandated to assist rural and urban

communities that were outside the mainstream economy and that lagged in economic development, industrial

growth, and personal income.


EDA provides grants to States, regions, and communities nationwide to generate wealth and minimize poverty

by promoting an attractive business environment for private capital investment and higher skill, higher wage jobs

through capacity building, planning, infrastructure, research grants, and strategic initiatives. Through its grant

program, EDA uses public sector resources to cultivate an environment where the private sector risks capital and

job opportunities are created.

https://www.eda.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Annual Reports
The EDA posts annual reports on its website.

https://eda.gov/annual-reports

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that EDA records have

been assigned to record group 378.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/378.html

Career Opportunities
The EDA posts information on permanent career and term job opportunities on its website.
https://eda.gov/careers/opportunities
In 2020, the EDA ranked 114th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=CM52

Contact Information
Phone numbers for EDA headquarters and its six regional offices are posted online. The Office of Public Affairs

handles media inquiries. Phone, 202-482-4085.

http://www.eda.gov/contact

Disaster Recovery Support
The EDA supports disaster recovery and resiliency efforts. Media posts highlight EDA assistance to communities

that are recovering from years of disasters and EDA efforts to increase the resiliency of those communities.

https://eda.gov/disaster-recovery/clips

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the EDA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/economic-development-administration

Newsroom
The "Newsroom" web page provides convenient access to blog posts, newsletters, press releases, success stories,

Twitter tweets, and the latest news.

https://www.eda.gov/news

Programs / Initiatives
The EDA administrates programs that support the economic development of communities. It also leads

initiatives involving multiple agencies.

https://eda.gov/programs

Resources
The EDA maintains a resources directory on its "Resources" web page.

https://eda.gov/resources

Social Media
The EDA has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/eda.commerce
The EDA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/US_EDA
The EDA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/EDACommerce
 The above Sources of Information were updated 9–2021.




Economics and Statistics Administration
Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230


202-482-3727

http://www.esa.doc.gov


 UNDER SECRETARY FOR ECONOMIC AFFAIRS                     (vacancy)


https://www.commerce.gov/about/leadership



Bureau Directors


 Economic Analysis                                        Mary Bohman, Acting

https://www.commerce.gov/bureaus-and-offices/bea

 U.S. Census                                              Ronald S. Jarmin, Acting


                                                          [Robert Santos—confirmed by Senate; swearing-in
                                                          forthcoming]


https://www.commerce.gov/bureaus-and-offices/census



 The above list of key personnel was updated 11–2021.



The Economics and Statistics Administration (ESA), headed by the Under Secretary for Economic Affairs, has

three principal components: the Office of the Chief Economist, the Bureau of the Census, and the Bureau of

Economic Analysis. ESA develops policy options, analyzes economic developments, manages economic data

systems, and produces a major share of U.S. economic and demographic statistics, including the national

economic indicators. The Under Secretary is the chief economic adviser to the Secretary and provides leadership

and executive management for the Office of the Chief Economist and the Bureaus of Economic Analysis and of

the Census.

http://www.esa.gov/content/about-economics-statistics-administration



BUREAU OF ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
[For the Bureau of Economic Analysis statement of organization, see the Federal Register of Dec. 29, 1980, 45 FR

85496]
The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) provides the most accurate, relevant, and timely economic accounts

data in an objective and cost-effective manner. BEA's economic statistics offer a comprehensive picture of the

U.S. economy. BEA prepares national, regional, industry, and international accounts that present essential

information on such issues in the world economy.


BEA's national economic statistics provide a comprehensive look at U.S. production, consumption, investment,

exports and imports, and income and saving. The international transactions accounts provide information on

trade in goods and services (including the balance of payments and trade), investment income, and government

and private finances. In addition, the accounts measure the value of U.S. international assets and liabilities and

direct investment by multinational companies.


The regional accounts provide data on total and per capita personal income by region, State, metropolitan area,

and county, and on gross State product. The industry economic account provides a detailed view of the

interrelationships between U.S. producers and users and the contribution to production across industries.

http://www.bea.gov | Email: customerservice@bea.gov

  For further information, contact the Public Information Office, Bureau of Economic Analysis,
  Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230. Phone, 202-606-9900. Fax, 202-606-5310.




BUREAU OF THE CENSUS
[For the Bureau of the Census statement of organization, see the Federal Register of Sept. 16, 1975, 40 FR 42765]


The Bureau of the Census was established as a permanent office by act of March 6, 1902 (32 Stat. 51). The major

functions of the Census Bureau are authorized by the Constitution, which provides that a census of population

shall be taken every 10 years, and by laws codified as title 13 of the United States Code. The law also provides

that the information collected by the Census Bureau from individual persons, households, or establishments be

kept strictly confidential and be used only for statistical purposes.


The Census Bureau is responsible for the decennial censuses of population and housing; the quinquennial

censuses of State and local governments, manufacturers, mineral industries, distributive trades, construction

industries, and transportation; current surveys that provide information on many of the subjects covered in the

censuses at monthly, quarterly, annual, or other intervals; compilation of current statistics on U.S. foreign trade,

including data on imports, exports, and shipping; special censuses at the request and expense of State and local

government units; publication of estimates and projections of the population; publication of current data on

population and housing characteristics; and current reports on manufacturing, retail and wholesale trade,

services, construction, imports and exports, State and local government finances and employment, and other

subjects.


The Census Bureau makes available statistical results of its censuses, surveys, and other programs to the public

through the Internet, mobile applications, and other media. The Bureau also prepares special tabulations

sponsored and paid for by data users. It also produces statistical compendia, catalogs, guides, and directories

that are useful in locating information on specific subjects. Upon request, the Bureau makes searches of
decennial census records and furnishes certificates to individuals for use as evidence of age, relationship, or

place of birth. A fee is charged for searches.

http://www.census.gov | Email: PIO@census.gov

  For further information, contact the Public Information Office, Bureau of the Census, Department of
  Commerce, Washington, DC 20233. Phone, 301-763-3030. Fax, 301-763-3762.




OFFICE OF THE CHIEF ECONOMIST
The economists and analysts of the Office of the Chief Economist analyze domestic and international economic

developments and produce in-depth reports, factsheets, briefings, and social media postings. These tools cover

policy issues and current economic events, as well as economic and demographic trends. Department of

Commerce and White House policymakers, American businessmen, State and local governments, and news

organizations worldwide rely on these tools.

http://www.esa.gov/content/chief-economist



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that BEA records have

been assigned to record group 375.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/375.html?
_ga=2.203325393.1312685709.1634330345-1378874314.1634330345
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Census Bureau

records have been assigned to record group 029.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/029.html?
_ga=2.256758347.1312685709.1634330345-1378874314.1634330345

Career Opportunities
Visit the "Working at BEA" web page to learn about a career that involves economic analysis for measuring and

better understanding the U.S. economy.

https://www.bea.gov/about/working-at-bea
Visit the "Census Careers" web page to explore a career with one of the most important statistical organizations

in the world.

http://www.census.gov/about/census-careers.html

Learning Center
The BEA maintains an online learning center.

https://www.bea.gov/resources/learning-center
Library
The Census Bureau collection formats include audio, images, mobile apps, video, and publications.

https://www.census.gov/library.html

  The above Sources of Information were updated 10–2021.




International Trade Administration
Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230


202-482-3917

http://www.trade.gov


  UNDER SECRETARY FOR INTERNATIONAL TRADE                 Diane Farrell, Acting




  ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


  Enforcement and Compliance                              Christian Marsh, Acting


  Global Markets                                          Dale N. Tasharski, Acting


  Industry and Analysis                                   Anne Driscoll, Acting




  DIRECTOR GENERAL


  U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service                     Dale N. Tasharski, Acting




  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2021.


https://www.trade.gov/ita-senior-staff
The International Trade Administration (ITA) was established on January 2, 1980, by the Secretary of Commerce

to promote world trade and to strengthen the international trade and investment position of the United States.


The International Trade Administration's statement of organization was published in the Federal Register on

January 25, 1980 (45 FR 6148).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1980-01-25/pdf/FR-1980-01-25.pdf
The Under Secretary for International Trade heads the ITA, coordinating all issues concerning trade promotion,

international commercial policy, market access, and trade law enforcement. The Administration is responsible for

U.S. Government nonagricultural trade operations, and it supports the U.S. Trade Representative's efforts to
negotiate trade policy.

http://www.trade.gov/about.asp

Enforcement / Compliance
The Office of Enforcement and Compliance defends American industry against injurious and unfair trade

practices by administering U.S. antidumping and countervailing duty trade laws. The Office also ensures the

proper administration of foreign trade zones and advises the Secretary on establishment of new ones; oversees

the administration of the Department's textiles program; and administers programs governing watch assemblies

and other statutory import programs.

http://www.trade.gov/enforcement

Global Markets
The Global Markets unit assists and advocates for U.S. businesses in international markets. Relying on a network

of trade promotion and policy professionals located in over 70 countries and 100 U.S. locations, the unit

promotes U.S. exports, especially those of small and medium-sized enterprises; advances and protects U.S.

commercial interests overseas; and attracts investment from abroad into the United States.

http://www.trade.gov/markets

Industry / Analysis
The Manufacturing and Services unit advises on domestic and international trade and investment policies

affecting the competitiveness of U.S. industry. It also researches and analyzes manufacturing and services. Based

on this analysis and interaction with U.S. industry, the unit Secretary develops strategies, policies, and programs

to strengthen U.S. industry competitiveness domestically and globally. The unit manages an integrated program

that includes industry and economic analysis, trade policy development and multilateral, regional, and bilateral

trade agreements for manufactured goods and services; administers trade arrangements with foreign

governments in product and service areas; and develops and provides business information and assistance to

the United States on its rights and opportunities under multilateral and other agreements.

http://www.trade.gov/industry



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Data
Trade data and export and import statistics are available online.

http://www.trade.gov/data.asp

Employment
For information on career opportunities, visit the "Jobs" Web page.

http://www.trade.gov/jobs

Publications
The ITA has an online bookstore.
http://www.trade.gov/publications
http://www.trade.gov/contact.asp
For further information, contact the International Trade Administration, Department of Commerce, Washington,

DC 20230. Phone, 202-482-3917.



Minority Business Development Agency
Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230


202-482-2332

http://www.mbda.gov


  NATIONAL DIRECTOR                                        Alejandra Y. Castillo


  National Deputy Director                                 Albert K. Shen




  [For the Minority Business Development Agency statement of organization, see the Federal Register
  of Mar. 17, 1972, 37 FR 5650, as amended]



The Minority Business Development Agency was established by Executive order in 1969. The Agency develops

and coordinates a national program for minority business enterprise.


The Agency was created to help minority businesses achieve effective and equitable participation in the
American free enterprise system and overcome social and economic disadvantages that limited past

participation. The Agency provides policies and leadership supporting a partnership of business, industry, and

government with the Nation's minority businesses.


Business development services are provided to the minority business community through three vehicles: the

minority business opportunity committees, which disseminate information on business opportunities; the

minority business development centers, which provide management and technical assistance and other business

development services; and electronic commerce, which includes a Web site that shows how to start a business

and use the service to find contract opportunities.


The Agency promotes and coordinates the efforts of other Federal agencies in assisting or providing market

opportunities for minority business. It coordinates opportunities for minority firms in the private sector. Through

such public and private cooperative activities, the Agency promotes the participation of Federal, State, and local

governments, and business and industry in directing resources for the development of strong minority

businesses.

http://www.mbda.gov/main/who-mbda/about-minority-business-development-agency



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Internships
Information on student eligibility and how to apply is available online.

http://www.mbda.gov/main/intern-program

Library
An online research library serves as a repository for factsheets, reports, statistical data, and other publications.

http://www.mbda.gov/pressroom/research-library

Newsletter
A free, monthly newsletter is accessible online.

http://www.mbda.gov/newsletter

Speakers
For information on scheduling a speaker for an organized event, visit the "Speaker Request Form" Web page.

http://www.mbda.gov/main/mbda-speaker-request-form
http://www.mbda.gov/contact
For further information, contact the Office of the National Director, Minority Business Development Agency,

Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230. Phone, 202-482-2332.



National    Oceanic                                              and                 Atmospheric
Administration
Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230


202-482-2985

http://www.noaa.gov


  ADMINISTRATOR                                              Richard W. Spinrad


  Deputy Administrator                                       Janet L. Coit, Acting




  ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATORS


  National Marine Fisheries Service                          Janet L. Coit


  Oceanic and Atmospheric Research                           (vacancy)


  Satellite and Information Services                         Stephen M. Volz




  Chief Operating Officer                                    Benjamin P. Friedman


  Chief Scientist                                            (vacancy)
  General Counsel                                         Walker B. Smith




  Chief of Staff                                          Karen H. Hyun




  SENIOR ADVISORS                                         Perry F. Brody


                                                          Letise LaFeir


  Climate                                                 Ko Barrett


https://www.noaa.gov/about-our-agency



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration seeks to understand and predict changes in climate and

weather and changes that affect coasts and oceans; shares its knowledge and information with others; and

conserves and manages coastal and marine ecosystems and resources.


Establishment and Organization
On October 3, 1970, Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1970 (5 U.S.C. app.) formed the National Oceanic and

Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).


NOAA posts an organizational chart at the bottom of its "Organization" web page, in Portable Document

Format (PDF), for viewing and downloading.

https://www.noaa.gov/about/organization
NOAA published its statement of functions, organization, and delegation of authority in the Federal Register on

February 13, 1978 (43 FR 6128).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1978-02-13/pdf/FR-1978-02-13.pdf

ACTIVITIES
Science, service, and stewardship characterize NOAA's mission. Its researchers, scientists, and technicians study

the atmosphere, the ocean, and the ecosystems associated with them; they integrate research and analysis; they

observe and monitor; and they use modeling to predict the future state of complex systems. NOAA serves

academic institutions, businesses, communities, and ordinary people by communicating and sharing its data,

information, knowledge, and research. NOAA also applies its institutional know-how and science assets to the

conservation and management of coastal and marine ecosystems and resources. The agency regulates and

sustains marine fisheries and ecosystems, protects endangered species, restores habitats and ecosystems,

conserves marine sanctuaries, responds to environmental emergencies, and assists with disaster recovery.
https://www.noaa.gov/about-our-agency

Marine and Aviation Operations
The Office of Marine and Aviation Operations manages the aviation safety, the small boat, and the NOAA diving

programs. It also operates a fleet of specialized ships and aircraft that collect data and carry out research to

support NOAA's mission, the Global Earth Observation System, and the Integrated Ocean Observing System—

including flying "hurricane hunter" aircraft into the most turbulent storms to collect data critical for research.

http://www.omao.noaa.gov/about.html

  For further information, contact Office of Marine and Aviation Operations, Suite 500, 8403
  Colesville Rd., Silver Spring, MD 20910. Phone, 301-713-7600. Fax, 301-713-1541.



National Coastal Resources
The National Ocean Service helps balance the Nation's use of coastal resources through research, management,

and policy. The Service monitors the health of U.S. coasts by examining how human use and natural events

affect coastal ecosystems. Coastal communities rely on the Service for information on natural hazards so they

can reduce or eliminate destructive effects of coastal hazards. The Service assesses the damage caused by

hazardous material spills and tries to restore or replace the affected coastal resources. The Service also protects

beaches, water quality, wetlands, and wildlife. It provides a wide range of navigational products and data that

help vessels move safely through U.S. waters, and it supplies the basic information for establishing the latitude,

longitude, and elevation framework necessary for the Nation's mapping, navigation, positioning, and surveying

activities.

https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/

  For further information, contact the National Ocean Service, Room 13231, SSMC 4, 1305 East-West
  Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910. Phone, 301-713-3074. Fax, 301-713-4307.



National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information
The National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service operates the Nation's civilian geostationary

and polar-orbiting environmental satellites. It also manages the largest collection of atmospheric, climatic,

geophysical, and oceanographic data in the world. The Service develops and provides, through various media,

environmental data for forecasts, national security, and weather warnings to protect life and property. These

data are also used for energy distribution, global food supplies development, natural resources management,

and rescuing downed pilots and mariners in distress.

https://www.nesdis.noaa.gov/

  For further information, contact the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service,
  1335 East-West Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910-3283. Phone, 301-713-3578. Fax, 301-713-1249.



National Marine Fisheries
The National Marine Fisheries Service supports the management, conservation, and sustainable development of
domestic and international living marine resources and the protection and restoration of ecosystems. The

Service helps assess the stock of the Nation's multi-billion-dollar marine fisheries, protect marine mammals and

threatened species, conserve habitats, assist trade and industry, and conduct fishery enforcement activities.

http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov

  For further information, contact the National Marine Fisheries Service, 1315 East-West Highway,
  Silver Spring, MD 20910. Phone, 301-713-2239. Fax, 301-713-1940.



National Weather
The National Weather Service (NWS) provides weather, water, and climate warnings and forecasts and data for

the United States, its territories, and adjacent waters and ocean areas. Government agencies, the private sector,

the general public, and the global community rely on NWS data and products to protect life and property.

Working with partners in Government, academic and research institutions, and private industry, the Service

responds to the needs of the American public through its products and services. NWS data and information

support aviation, maritime activities, and other sectors of the economy, as well as wildfire suppression. The

Service also helps national security efforts with long- and short-range forecasts, air quality and cloud dispersion

forecasts, and broadcasts of warnings and critical information over the 800-station NOAA Weather Radio

network.

http://www.weather.gov

  For further information, contact the National Weather Service–Executive Affairs, 1325 East-West
  Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910-3283. Phone, 301-713-0675. Fax, 301-713-0049.



Oceanic and Atmospheric Research
The Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research conducts research on air quality and composition, climate

variability and change, weather, and coastal, marine, and Great Lakes ecosystems. The Office uses its own

laboratories and offices to run research programs in atmospheric, coastal, marine, and space sciences, as well as

relying on networks of university-based programs across the country.

http://www.oar.noaa.gov

  For further information, contact the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, Room 11458, 1315
  East-West Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910. Phone, 301-713-2458. Fax, 301-713-0163.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that NOAA records have

been assigned to record group 370.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/370.html
Arctic Report Cards
Every year, NOAA publishes an Arctic Report Card as part of its efforts to track recent environmental changes

relative to historical records. In December of 2021, NOAA released its most up-to-date version of the Arctic

Report Card.

https://www.arctic.noaa.gov/Report-Card/Report-Card-2021
NOAA released a 4-minute video synopsis of the updated report card. The video's narration opens and closes

with these words: "The Arctic, an ancient ecosystem, is disappearing before our eyes. . . . All these disruptions

are the direct result of a climate straining under the heat-trapping burden of greenhouse gas pollution. The time

to face this monumental challenge is now." The 2021 report notes the melting of frozen habitat that supports

iconic animals like the polar bear and the arrival of new species like beavers, whose engineering activities create

wetlands. The report also notes the nearly complete loss of old Arctic sea ice. Without the barricading presence

of thick sea ice, ships and the industrial activities that they support are becoming more common in the Arctic.

The effects include more garbage adrift and more pollution on shore, as well as higher levels of marine noise.

Plastics and toxic chemicals are lethal threats to marine mammals such as seals, walrus, and whales.

Undermining the food security of native communities, marine noise drives these magnificent mammals from

their preferred habitats, which also are traditional hunting areas for indigenous hunters.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_WbWjLUTvZM

Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide
Adding to the data record that C. David Keeling of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography started in 1958,

NOAA continues to measure atmospheric carbon at the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii.

https://gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/trends
The Earth System Research Laboratory's Global Monitoring Division has posted a 4-minute video showing

800,000 years of atmospheric carbon dioxide history.

https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/history.html

Atmospheric Methane
The Earth System Research Laboratory's Global Monitoring Division has been measuring methane since 1983 at

a globally distributed network of air sampling sites.

https://esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends_ch4
On April 7, 2022, the Global Monitoring Laboratory posted the news item "Increase in Atmospheric Methane Set

Another Record During 2021—Carbon Dioxide Levels Also Record a Big Jump." According to the news item, "For

the second year in a row, NOAA scientists observed a record annual increase in atmospheric levels of methane,

a powerful, heat-trapping greenhouse gas that’s the second biggest contributor to human-caused global

warming after carbon dioxide." It also addressed increases in atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide: "Levels of

carbon dioxide also continue to increase at historically high rates. The global surface average for carbon dioxide

during 2021 was 414.7 parts per million (ppm), which is an increase of 2.66 ppm over the 2020 average. This

marks the 10th consecutive year that carbon dioxide increased by more than 2 parts per million, which

represents the fastest sustained rate of increase in the 63 years since monitoring began." Summing up the recent

research data, NOAA Administrator Richard W. Spinrad commented: “Our data show that global emissions
continue to move in the wrong direction at a rapid pace. The evidence is consistent, alarming and undeniable.

We need to build a Climate Ready Nation to adapt for what’s already here and prepare for what’s to come. At

the same time, we can no longer afford to delay urgent and effective action needed to address the cause of the

problem—greenhouse gas pollution.

https://www.noaa.gov/news-release/increase-in-atmospheric-methane-set-another-record-during-
2021#:~:text=NOAA's%20preliminary%20analysis%20showed%20the,during%202020%20was%2015.3%20ppb.

Career Opportunities
A career at NOAA is a mission-oriented experience that centers on protecting natural resources, safeguarding

the public, and strengthening the economy.

https://www.noaa.gov/work-with-us
In 2020, NOAA ranked 111th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/CM54

Climate Change
The Carbon Cycle Greenhouse Gases research area operates the global greenhouse gas reference network.

Researchers measure the atmospheric distribution and trends of the main causes of climate change: carbon

dioxide (CO2); methane (CH4); nitrous oxide (N2O); and carbon monoxide (CO) because it is an indicator of air

pollution.

https://gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/
"The Power of Greenhouse Gases" web page presents examples of the excess heat that the Earth system is

retaining. The amount of excess heat is sufficiently large to force climate change on a regional and global scale.

https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/ghgpower

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has contact information and other frequently requested resources.

https://www.noaa.gov/contact-us

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that NOAA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/national-oceanic-and-atmospheric-administration

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Any person has a right to obtain access to Federal agency records; however, some records, or portions of them,

may be shielded from disclosure by one of nine FOIA exemptions or by one of three special law enforcement

exclusions.

https://www.noaa.gov/information-technology/foia
Before submitting a FOIA request, an information seeker should search the electronic reading room to

determine if the desired information is in the public domain.
https://www.noaa.gov/organization/information-technology/foia-reading-room

Maritime Archaeology
Visit the "Maritime Archaeology" web page to learn about discovering shipwrecks and safeguarding them.

https://www.noaa.gov/topic-tags/maritime-archaeology

Monthly Climate Report
The report of August 13, 2021, carried the headline "It's official: July was Earth's hottest month on record."

https://www.noaa.gov/topic-tags/monthly-climate-report

Nautical Charts
NOAA has posted the entire suite of U.S. coastal and Great Lakes charts on its "Charting" page for download.

https://www.noaa.gov/charting

News
The Global Monitoring Laboratory (GML) conducts research that addresses three important areas of concern:

greenhouse gas and carbon cycle feedbacks; changes in aerosols, clouds, and surface radiation; and recovery of

stratospheric ozone. The GML posts news items that cover recent developments in these areas.

https://gml.noaa.gov/news

NOAA Nationwide
NOAA facilities—as well as personnel and the activities and programs they manage—are located throughout

the Nation in various States and Territories.

https://www.noaa.gov/legislative-and-intergovernmental-affairs/noaa-in-your-state-territory

Podcast
The NOAA Ocean podcast explores topics ranging from coastal science to coral reefs with ocean experts.

https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/podcast

Sea Level Rise
In February of 2022, the Sea Level Rise and Coastal Flood Hazard and Tools Interagency Task Force released its

technical report "Global and Regional Sea Level Rise Scenarios for the United States." Twenty-three coauthors—

experts and scientists from academic institutions and Government agencies—contributed to the report.

https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/hazards/sealevelrise/sealevelrise-tech-report.html

Social Media
NOAA relies on social media to share information and to promote understanding of its science, service, and

stewardship-oriented mission.

https://www.noaa.gov/stay-connected

Staff Directory
The NOAA staff directory is available online.

https://nsd.rdc.noaa.gov
Weather
The NOAA Weather Radio All Hazards network broadcasts continuous weather information nationwide from the

nearest National Weather Service office. The network broadcasts official Weather Service forecasts, warnings,

watches, and other hazard information around the clock every day.

https://www.weather.gov/nwr

  NOAA's Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




National      Telecommunications                                                                   and
Information Administration
Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230


202-428-1840

http://www.ntia.doc.gov


  ASSISTANT SECRETARY, COMMUNICATIONS AND
                                          Lawrence E. Strickling
  INFORMATION / ADMINISTRATOR


  Deputy Assistant Secretary, Communications and
                                                 Angela Simpson
  Information




  [For the National Telecommunications and Information Administration statement of organization,
  see the Federal Register of June 5, 1978, 43 FR 24348]



The National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) was established in 1978 by

Reorganization Plan No. 1 of 1977 (5 U.S.C. app.) and Executive Order 12046 of March 27, 1978 (3 CFR, 1978

Comp., p. 158), by combining the Office of Telecommunications Policy of the Executive Office of the President

and the Office of Telecommunications of the Department of Commerce to form a new agency reporting to the

Secretary of Commerce. NTIA operates under the authority of the National Telecommunications and Information

Administration Organization Act (47 U.S.C. 901).


NTIA serves as the principal executive branch adviser to the President on telecommunications and information

policy; develops and presents U.S. plans and policies at international communications conferences and related

meetings; prescribes policies for and manages Federal use of the radio frequency spectrum; serves as the

principal   Federal   telecommunications    research   and   engineering   laboratory—NTIA's   Institute   for

Telecommunication Sciences; promotes broadband deployment and adoption through BroadbandUSA

(www2.ntia.doc.gov); and assists the First Responder Network Authority (www.firstnet.gov) develop and operate

a nationwide broadband network dedicated to public safety.

https://www.ntia.doc.gov/about
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
To see current NTIA career opportunities on USAJobs, click on the link below, scroll down, and select "NTIA

Jobs."

https://www.ntia.doc.gov/about

Publications
Since 1954, NTIA and its predecessors have published several hundred technical reports and memoranda,

special publications, contractor reports, and other information products. For more information, call the Office of

Spectrum Management in Washington, DC, at 202-482-1850. Or, contact the publications officer at the Institute

for Telecommunication Sciences–Department of Commerce, 325 Broadway, MC ITS.D, Boulder, CO 80305.

Phone, 303-497-3572.

https://www.ntia.doc.gov/publications

Speakers
A speaker request form is available online.

https://www.ntia.doc.gov/webform/speaker-request

Telecommunications Research
For information on telecommunications research and engineering services, visit the "Institute for

Telecommunication Sciences" Web page. Phone, 303-497-3571.

http://www.its.bldrdoc.gov | Email: info@its.bldrdoc.gov
https://www.ntia.doc.gov/contact
For further information, contact the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, Department

of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230. Phone, 202-482-1551.



National Institute                                         of          Standards                        and
Technology
100 Bureau Drive, Gaithersburg, MD 20899


301-975-2000

http://www.nist.gov


  UNDER    SECRETARY,              STANDARDS       AND
                                                           Willie E. May
  TECHNOLOGY / DIRECTOR



The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) operates under the authority of the National Institute

of Standards and Technology Act (15 U.S.C. 271), which amends the Organic Act of March 3, 1901 (ch. 872),

which created the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) in 1901. In 1988, the Congress renamed NBS as NIST and

expanded its activities and responsibilities.
http://www.nist.gov/timeline.cfm
NIST is a nonregulatory Federal agency within the Department of Commerce. To carry out its mission, NIST relies

on research laboratories, user facilities, innovative manufacturing programs, and its participation in collaborative

institutes and centers. NIST research laboratories conduct world-class research to advance the Nation's

technological infrastructure and help U.S. companies improve products and services. The Baldrige Performance

Excellence Program (www.nist.gov/baldrige) also helps them and other organizations increase operational

performance and quality. NIST user facilities include the Center for Nanoscale Science and Technology

(www.nist.gov/cnst) and NIST Center for Neutron Research (www.ncnr.nist.gov).

http://www.nist.gov/programs-projects.cfm



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
For information on career opportunities, visit the "Careers at NIST" Web page.

http://www.nist.gov/ohrm/careers.cfm

Publications
The "Journal of Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology" and other publications are

available online.

http://www.nist.gov/nvl/nist_publications.cfm
http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/contact.cfm | Email: inquiries@nist.gov
For further information, contact the National Institute of Standards and Technology, 100 Bureau Drive, Mail Stop

1070, Gaithersburg, MD 20899-1070. Phone, 301-975-6478. Fax, 301-926-1630.



National Technical Information Service
5301 Shawnee Road, Alexandria, VA 22312


703-605-6050

888-584-8332

http://www.ntis.gov


  DIRECTOR                                                  Avi Bender



The National Technical Information Service (NTIS) is the largest central resource for business-related,

engineering, Government-funded, scientific, and technical information available. For more than 60 years, the

Service has assured businesses, Government, universities, and the public timely access to approximately 3 million

publications covering over 350 subject areas. The Service supports the Department of Commerce's mission by

providing access to information that stimulates innovation and discovery. The Service receives no appropriations

and recovers its costs through fees charged for products and services.
The NTIS promotes economic growth, progress, and science and information. On behalf of the Secretary of

Commerce, the Service operates a permanent clearinghouse of scientific and technical information and makes it

readily available to industry, business, and the general public—codified as chapter 23 of Title 15 of the United

States Code (15 U.S.C. 1151-1157). The Service collects scientific and technical information; catalogs, abstracts,

indexes, and permanently archives the information; disseminates information through electronic and other

media; and provides information processing services to other Federal agencies.


NTIS also provides information management services to other Federal agencies to help them interact with and

better serve the information needs of their own constituents. It develops, plans, evaluates, and implements

business strategies for information management and dissemination services and Internet-based service business

opportunities for Federal agencies; uses new and existing technologies to ensure optimal access to Government

online information services; and manages service projects using in-house capabilities and through joint public-

private partnerships. NTIS provides eTraining and Knowledge Management, Web services and cloud computing,

distribution and fulfillment, digitization and scanning services for Federal Government agencies.

http://www.ntis.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
Approximately 150 NTIS employees work in Northern Virginia. The Service hires professionals with skills in

administration, information technology, and program management.

https://www.usajobs.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The Office of Director handles Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests. The FOIA contact reviews,

coordinates, and responds to requests within 20 days under the requirements of the Freedom of Information

Act.

http://www.ntis.gov/about/FOIA

Products
For general information or to place a telephone order, call the Customer Contact Center, 8 a.m.–6 p.m., eastern

standard time. Phone, 800-553-6847. TDD, 703-487-4639. Fax, 703-605-6900.

http://www.ntis.gov/products | Email: info@ntis.gov

Services
To learn more about NTIS information services for Federal agencies, call the Office of Federal Services at 703-

605-6800.

http://www.ntis.gov/services | Email: obdinfo@ntis.gov
http://www.ntis.gov/about/contact
For further information, contact the National Technical Information Service, 5301 Shawnee Road, Alexandria, VA

22312. Phone, 703-605-6000 or 800-553-6847.
United States Patent and Trademark Office
600 Dulany Street, Alexandria, VA 22314


571-272-8700

http://www.uspto.gov


  UNDER SECRETARY, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY /
                                           Michelle K. Lee
  DIRECTOR


  Deputy Under Secretary, Intellectual Property /
                                                  Russell D. Slifer
  Deputy Director




  [For the Patent and Trademark Office statement of organization, see the Federal Register of Apr. 14,
  1975, 40 FR 16707]



The United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) was established by the act of July 19, 1952 (35 U.S.C. 1)

"to promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the
exclusive right to their respective writings and discoveries" (U.S. Constitution Art. I, sec. 8). The commerce clause

provides the constitutional basis for the registration of trademarks.


USPTO examines and issues patents. There are three major patent categories: utility patents, design patents, and

plant patents. USPTO also issues statutory invention registrations and processes international patent applications.


Through the registration of trademarks, USPTO assists businessmen and women in protecting their investments,

promoting goods and services, and safeguarding consumers against confusion and deception in the

marketplace. A trademark includes any distinctive word, name, symbol, device, or any combination thereof

adopted and used or intended to be used by a manufacturer or merchant to identify his or her goods or

services and distinguish them from those manufactured or sold by others. Trademarks are examined by the

Office for compliance with various statutory requirements to prevent unfair competition and consumer

deception.


In addition to the examination of patent and trademark applications, issuance of patents, and registration of

trademarks, USPTO advises and assists government agencies and officials in matters involving all domestic and

global aspects of intellectual property. USPTO also promotes an understanding of intellectual property

protection.


USPTO provides public access to patent, trademark, and related scientific and technical information. Patents and

trademarks may be reviewed and searched online or at designated Patent and Trademark Depository Libraries.

There are 80 Patent and Trademark Depository Libraries located within the United States and Puerto Rico.

Additionally, USPTO's Scientific and Technical Information Center in Alexandria, VA, houses over 120,000

volumes of scientific and technical books in various languages; 90,000 bound volumes of periodicals devoted to

science and technology; the official journals of 77 foreign patent organizations; and over 40 million foreign

patents on paper, microfilm, microfiche, and CD–ROM.
    http://www.uspto.gov/about-us



    SOURCES OF INFORMATION

    Data
    Monthly summaries for patents data and quarterly summaries for trademark data are available online.

    http://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/statistics

    Employment
    Information on employment opportunities is available on the "Careers" Web page.

    http://careers.uspto.gov

    Patents
    Information on getting started and applying for and maintaining a patent is available online.

    http://www.uspto.gov/patent

    Publications
    The "Official Gazette" journal, "Inventors Eye" newsletter, and other publications are accessible online.

    http://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/official-gazette
    http://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/newsletter-archives
    http://www.uspto.gov/about-us/news-updates

    Speakers
    A speaker request form is available online.

    http://www.uspto.gov/about-us/organizational-offices/office-chief-communications-officer/speaker-request-
    form

    Trademarks
    Information on getting started and applying for and maintaining a trademark is available online.

    http://www.uspto.gov/trademark
    http://www.uspto.gov/about-us/organizational-offices/office-chief-communications-officer
    For further information, contact the Office of the Chief Communications Officer, United States Patent and

    Trademark Office, 600 Dulany Street, Alexandria, VA 22314. Phone, 571-272-8400.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                              Bureau of Industry and Security




The United States Government Manual




     BUREAU OF INDUSTRY AND SECURITY
    Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230


    202-482-2721

    http://www.bis.doc.gov




    Industry and Security
  UNDER SECRETARY                                                                      Jeremy Pelter, Acting


  Deputy Under Secretary                                                               Jeremy Pelter




  Chief Counsel                                                                        Opher Shweiki, Acting

https://www.commerce.gov/about/leadership



Export


  ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


  Administration                                                                       Matthew S. Borman, Acting


  Enforcement                                                                          Kevin J. Kurland, Acting

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-bis/organization/senior-management-team



  The above list of key personnel was updated 9–2021.



The Bureau of Industry and Security ensures an effective export control and treaty compliance system and promotes the

Nation's strategic leadership in technology to strengthen national security, advance U.S. foreign policy, and achieve

economic objectives.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Bureau of Export Administration, which was later renamed the Bureau of Industry and Security (BIS), was

established within the Department of Commerce on October 1, 1987.


On March 10, 1988, the Department of Commerce issued Department Organization Order 10–16. It set forth the scope

of authority and the functions of the new Under Secretary for Export Administration. A copy of the order was

published in the Federal Register on June 7, 1988 (53 FR 20881).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1988-06-07/pdf/FR-1988-06-07.pdf
The Department of Commerce used an internal organization order to change the name of the Bureau of Export

Administration to the BIS on April 18, 2002. The nomenclature change was published as a final rule in the Federal

Register on April 26, 2002 (67 FR 20630).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2002-04-26/pdf/02-10166.pdf
The BIS posts an organization chart on its website.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-bis/organization

ACTIVITIES
The BIS advances U.S. national security, foreign policy, and economic objectives. The Bureau ensures an effective
export control and treaty compliance system and promotes U.S. leadership in strategic technologies. The BIS maintains

and strengthens adaptable, efficient, and effective export controls and treaty compliance systems. It also is involved

with international export control regimes, often playing a lead role.

https://www.commerce.gov/bureaus-and-offices/bis

Export Administration
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Export Administration is responsible for export licenses, treaty compliance,

treaty obligations relating to weapons of mass destruction, and the defense industrial and technology base. The Office

regulates the export of dual-use items requiring licenses for national security, nonproliferation, foreign policy, and

short supply; ensures that approval or denial of license applications is consistent with economic and security concerns;

promotes an understanding of export control regulations within the business community; represents the Department

in interagency and international forums relating to export controls, particularly in multilateral regimes; monitors the

availability of industrial resources of national defense; analyzes the impact of export controls on strategic industries;

and assesses the security consequences of certain foreign investments.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/regulations/export-administration-regulations-ear

Export Enforcement
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Export Enforcement enforces dual-use export controls. This enables exporters

to take advantage of legal export opportunities while ensuring that illegal exports will be detected and either

prevented or investigated and sanctioned. The Office also ensures prompt, aggressive action against restrictive trade

practices; and conducts cooperative enforcement activities on an international basis. Export Enforcement also enforces

U.S. antiboycott laws and regulations by advising U.S. exporters on potential prohibited requests contained in foreign

contracts; investigating violations such as the furnishing of boycott-related information, refusing to deal with

blacklisted businesses; and pursuing criminal and administrative sanctions for violations.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/enforcement



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Additional Programs
The "Add'l Programs" web page provides convenient access to information on technology evaluation, strategic

industries and economic security, chemical weapons, and nuclear fuel cycle-related activities.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/other-areas

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that records of the Bureau of

Export Administration have been assigned to record group 476. The Administration was renamed the BIS in 2002.

Record group 476 does not have a description that currently is associated with it.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/401-to-500.html

Boycott Requests
The Office of Antiboycott Compliance posts recent examples of boycott requests that have been reported. The list of
prohibited conditions is illustrative and not exhaustive.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/all-articles/7-enforcement/1755-examples-of-recent-boycott-related-requests

Career Opportunities
BIS career opportunities are posted on USAJobs, which is a free web-based job board that serves as the Federal

Government's official source of Federal job listings and employment opportunity information.

https://www.usajobs.gov
In 2020, the BIS ranked 136th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=CM67

Commerce Control List
Export control classification numbers are helpful for determining whether or not a Department of Commerce-issued

export license is needed for exporting a particular export item.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/regulations/commerce-control-list-ccl

Commerce Country Chart
The BIS has posted an overview of the commerce control list and the commerce country chart.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/documents/regulations-docs/federal-register-notices/federal-register-2014/1033-
738-supp-1/file

Contact Information
Forms and telephone numbers are available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-bis/contact-bis
Descriptions of BIS activities and contact information for its program offices are available online.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/program-offices

Data
The "BIS Data Portal" web page allows access to datasets that are relevant for analyzing exports and licensing.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/data-portal

Electronic Code of Federal Regulations (e-CFR)
Title 15 of the e-CFR is dedicated to rules and regulations on commerce and foreign trade.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=713f591c01d176fc38d7d3cc23a07ffd&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title15/15tab_02.tpl

Enforcement Resources
Descriptions of the sentinel program and outreach program, as well as links to enforcement resources, are available

online.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/compliance-a-training/export-management-a-compliance/enforcement-resources

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the BIS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/industry-and-security-bureau

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA is a Federal freedom of information law. It allows a person the right to request access to Federal agency

records that are maintained by agencies within the Government's executive branch. After receiving a written request,

an agency must disclose the requested information; however, some records may be shielded from disclosure by one

or more of nine FOIA exemptions or by one of three special law enforcement record exclusions.

https://efoia.bis.doc.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The BIS posts answers to a lot of questions on its "FAQs" web page.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/policy-guidance/faqs

Links to Resources
The "Resource Links" web page has contact information for and links to other Government departments and agencies

whose activities include export control. The web page also has links to Federal agencies that offer trade promotion

information and other related services.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-bis/resource-links

Newsroom
The newsroom has information on the Bureau's current activities, as well as historical records and speeches by and

testimony from senior managers.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-bis/newsroom

Press Releases
The BIS posts press releases.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-bis/newsroom/press-releases

Publications
Publications that are available online include the BIS's Annual Report to Congress, the guidance on the Commerce

Department’s Reexport Controls, and the Exporter User Manual and Licensing FAQ.

http://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/about-bis/newsroom/publications

Regulations
Subscribers to the "Export Administration Regulations" can stay informed of the latest rules. Phone, 301-208-0700 (ext.

112).

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/regulations/order-a-hard-copy-of-the-ear | Email: pubs@ocr-inc.com
The "Recently Published Regulations" web page contains helpful links to regulatory publications that are electronic.

https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/regulations

Social Media
     The BIS tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/BISgov

     Statistical Reports
     The BIS posts statistical reports on its website.

     https://www.bis.doc.gov/index.php/statistical-reports

        The above Sources of Information were updated 9–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                            Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                   Search                                                    Search
                                                                                             Search




                                             Economic Development Administration




The United States Government Manual




     ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ADMINISTRATION
    Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230


    202-482-5081

    http://www.eda.gov


      ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF COMMERCE FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT                                 Alejandra Y. Castillo


      Deputy Assistant Secretary                                                               Dennis Alvord
  Chief Operating Officer                                                                Dennis Alvord


https://eda.gov/about/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 9–2021.



The Economic Development Administration (EDA) was created in 1965 under the Public Works and Economic

Development Act (42 U.S.C. 3121) as part of an effort to target Federal resources to economically distressed areas and

to help develop local economies in the United States. It was mandated to assist rural and urban communities that were

outside the mainstream economy and that lagged in economic development, industrial growth, and personal income.


EDA provides grants to States, regions, and communities nationwide to generate wealth and minimize poverty by

promoting an attractive business environment for private capital investment and higher skill, higher wage jobs through

capacity building, planning, infrastructure, research grants, and strategic initiatives. Through its grant program, EDA

uses public sector resources to cultivate an environment where the private sector risks capital and job opportunities

are created.

https://www.eda.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Annual Reports
The EDA posts annual reports on its website.

https://eda.gov/annual-reports

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that EDA records have been

assigned to record group 378.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/378.html

Career Opportunities
The EDA posts information on permanent career and term job opportunities on its website.

https://eda.gov/careers/opportunities
In 2020, the EDA ranked 114th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=CM52

Contact Information
Phone numbers for EDA headquarters and its six regional offices are posted online. The Office of Public Affairs handles

media inquiries. Phone, 202-482-4085.
    http://www.eda.gov/contact

    Disaster Recovery Support
    The EDA supports disaster recovery and resiliency efforts. Media posts highlight EDA assistance to communities that

    are recovering from years of disasters and EDA efforts to increase the resiliency of those communities.

    https://eda.gov/disaster-recovery/clips

    Federal Register
    Significant documents and documents that the EDA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

    https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/economic-development-administration

    Newsroom
    The "Newsroom" web page provides convenient access to blog posts, newsletters, press releases, success stories,

    Twitter tweets, and the latest news.

    https://www.eda.gov/news

    Programs / Initiatives
    The EDA administrates programs that support the economic development of communities. It also leads initiatives

    involving multiple agencies.

    https://eda.gov/programs

    Resources
    The EDA maintains a resources directory on its "Resources" web page.

    https://eda.gov/resources

    Social Media
    The EDA has a Facebook account.

    https://www.facebook.com/eda.commerce
    The EDA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/US_EDA
    The EDA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/user/EDACommerce

        The above Sources of Information were updated 9–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                          Economics and Statistics Administration




The United States Government Manual




     ECONOMICS AND STATISTICS ADMINISTRATION
    Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230


    202-482-3727

    http://www.esa.doc.gov


      UNDER SECRETARY FOR ECONOMIC AFFAIRS                                                  (vacancy)


    https://www.commerce.gov/about/leadership
Bureau Directors


 Economic Analysis                                                                       Mary Bohman, Acting

https://www.commerce.gov/bureaus-and-offices/bea

 U.S. Census                                                                             Ronald S. Jarmin, Acting


                                                                                         [Robert Santos—confirmed
                                                                                         by Senate; swearing-in
                                                                                         forthcoming]


https://www.commerce.gov/bureaus-and-offices/census



 The above list of key personnel was updated 11–2021.



The Economics and Statistics Administration (ESA), headed by the Under Secretary for Economic Affairs, has three

principal components: the Office of the Chief Economist, the Bureau of the Census, and the Bureau of Economic

Analysis. ESA develops policy options, analyzes economic developments, manages economic data systems, and

produces a major share of U.S. economic and demographic statistics, including the national economic indicators. The

Under Secretary is the chief economic adviser to the Secretary and provides leadership and executive management for

the Office of the Chief Economist and the Bureaus of Economic Analysis and of the Census.

http://www.esa.gov/content/about-economics-statistics-administration



BUREAU OF ECONOMIC ANALYSIS
[For the Bureau of Economic Analysis statement of organization, see the Federal Register of Dec. 29, 1980, 45 FR

85496]


The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) provides the most accurate, relevant, and timely economic accounts data in an

objective and cost-effective manner. BEA's economic statistics offer a comprehensive picture of the U.S. economy. BEA

prepares national, regional, industry, and international accounts that present essential information on such issues in

the world economy.


BEA's national economic statistics provide a comprehensive look at U.S. production, consumption, investment, exports

and imports, and income and saving. The international transactions accounts provide information on trade in goods

and services (including the balance of payments and trade), investment income, and government and private finances.

In addition, the accounts measure the value of U.S. international assets and liabilities and direct investment by

multinational companies.


The regional accounts provide data on total and per capita personal income by region, State, metropolitan area, and

county, and on gross State product. The industry economic account provides a detailed view of the interrelationships

between U.S. producers and users and the contribution to production across industries.
http://www.bea.gov | Email: customerservice@bea.gov

  For further information, contact the Public Information Office, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Department
  of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230. Phone, 202-606-9900. Fax, 202-606-5310.




BUREAU OF THE CENSUS
[For the Bureau of the Census statement of organization, see the Federal Register of Sept. 16, 1975, 40 FR 42765]


The Bureau of the Census was established as a permanent office by act of March 6, 1902 (32 Stat. 51). The major

functions of the Census Bureau are authorized by the Constitution, which provides that a census of population shall be

taken every 10 years, and by laws codified as title 13 of the United States Code. The law also provides that the

information collected by the Census Bureau from individual persons, households, or establishments be kept strictly

confidential and be used only for statistical purposes.


The Census Bureau is responsible for the decennial censuses of population and housing; the quinquennial censuses of

State and local governments, manufacturers, mineral industries, distributive trades, construction industries, and

transportation; current surveys that provide information on many of the subjects covered in the censuses at monthly,

quarterly, annual, or other intervals; compilation of current statistics on U.S. foreign trade, including data on imports,

exports, and shipping; special censuses at the request and expense of State and local government units; publication of

estimates and projections of the population; publication of current data on population and housing characteristics; and

current reports on manufacturing, retail and wholesale trade, services, construction, imports and exports, State and

local government finances and employment, and other subjects.


The Census Bureau makes available statistical results of its censuses, surveys, and other programs to the public

through the Internet, mobile applications, and other media. The Bureau also prepares special tabulations sponsored

and paid for by data users. It also produces statistical compendia, catalogs, guides, and directories that are useful in

locating information on specific subjects. Upon request, the Bureau makes searches of decennial census records and

furnishes certificates to individuals for use as evidence of age, relationship, or place of birth. A fee is charged for

searches.

http://www.census.gov | Email: PIO@census.gov

  For further information, contact the Public Information Office, Bureau of the Census, Department of
  Commerce, Washington, DC 20233. Phone, 301-763-3030. Fax, 301-763-3762.




OFFICE OF THE CHIEF ECONOMIST
The economists and analysts of the Office of the Chief Economist analyze domestic and international economic

developments and produce in-depth reports, factsheets, briefings, and social media postings. These tools cover policy

issues and current economic events, as well as economic and demographic trends. Department of Commerce and

White House policymakers, American businessmen, State and local governments, and news organizations worldwide
    rely on these tools.

    http://www.esa.gov/content/chief-economist



    SOURCES OF INFORMATION

    Archived Records
    The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that BEA records have been

    assigned to record group 375.

    https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/375.html?_ga=2.203325393.1312685709.1634330345-
    1378874314.1634330345
    The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Census Bureau records

    have been assigned to record group 029.

    https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/029.html?_ga=2.256758347.1312685709.1634330345-
    1378874314.1634330345

    Career Opportunities
    Visit the "Working at BEA" web page to learn about a career that involves economic analysis for measuring and better

    understanding the U.S. economy.

    https://www.bea.gov/about/working-at-bea
    Visit the "Census Careers" web page to explore a career with one of the most important statistical organizations in the

    world.

    http://www.census.gov/about/census-careers.html

    Learning Center
    The BEA maintains an online learning center.

    https://www.bea.gov/resources/learning-center

    Library
    The Census Bureau collection formats include audio, images, mobile apps, video, and publications.

    https://www.census.gov/library.html

        The above Sources of Information were updated 10–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                             International Trade Administration




The United States Government Manual




     INTERNATIONAL TRADE ADMINISTRATION
    Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230


    202-482-3917

    http://www.trade.gov


      UNDER SECRETARY FOR INTERNATIONAL TRADE                                               Diane Farrell, Acting




      ASSISTANT SECRETARIES
  Enforcement and Compliance                                                            Christian Marsh, Acting


  Global Markets                                                                        Dale N. Tasharski, Acting


  Industry and Analysis                                                                 Anne Driscoll, Acting




  DIRECTOR GENERAL


  U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service                                                   Dale N. Tasharski, Acting




  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2021.


https://www.trade.gov/ita-senior-staff
The International Trade Administration (ITA) was established on January 2, 1980, by the Secretary of Commerce to

promote world trade and to strengthen the international trade and investment position of the United States.


The International Trade Administration's statement of organization was published in the Federal Register on January

25, 1980 (45 FR 6148).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1980-01-25/pdf/FR-1980-01-25.pdf
The Under Secretary for International Trade heads the ITA, coordinating all issues concerning trade promotion,

international commercial policy, market access, and trade law enforcement. The Administration is responsible for U.S.

Government nonagricultural trade operations, and it supports the U.S. Trade Representative's efforts to negotiate

trade policy.

http://www.trade.gov/about.asp

Enforcement / Compliance
The Office of Enforcement and Compliance defends American industry against injurious and unfair trade practices by

administering U.S. antidumping and countervailing duty trade laws. The Office also ensures the proper administration

of foreign trade zones and advises the Secretary on establishment of new ones; oversees the administration of the

Department's textiles program; and administers programs governing watch assemblies and other statutory import

programs.

http://www.trade.gov/enforcement

Global Markets
The Global Markets unit assists and advocates for U.S. businesses in international markets. Relying on a network of

trade promotion and policy professionals located in over 70 countries and 100 U.S. locations, the unit promotes U.S.

exports, especially those of small and medium-sized enterprises; advances and protects U.S. commercial interests

overseas; and attracts investment from abroad into the United States.
     http://www.trade.gov/markets

     Industry / Analysis
     The Manufacturing and Services unit advises on domestic and international trade and investment policies affecting the

     competitiveness of U.S. industry. It also researches and analyzes manufacturing and services. Based on this analysis

     and interaction with U.S. industry, the unit Secretary develops strategies, policies, and programs to strengthen U.S.

     industry competitiveness domestically and globally. The unit manages an integrated program that includes industry

     and economic analysis, trade policy development and multilateral, regional, and bilateral trade agreements for

     manufactured goods and services; administers trade arrangements with foreign governments in product and service

     areas; and develops and provides business information and assistance to the United States on its rights and

     opportunities under multilateral and other agreements.

     http://www.trade.gov/industry



     SOURCES OF INFORMATION

     Data
     Trade data and export and import statistics are available online.

     http://www.trade.gov/data.asp

     Employment
     For information on career opportunities, visit the "Jobs" Web page.

     http://www.trade.gov/jobs

     Publications
     The ITA has an online bookstore.

     http://www.trade.gov/publications
     http://www.trade.gov/contact.asp

        For further information, contact the International Trade Administration, Department of Commerce,
        Washington, DC 20230. Phone, 202-482-3917.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility
Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                           Minority Business Development Agency




The United States Government Manual




     MINORITY BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT AGENCY
    Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230


    202-482-2332

    http://www.mbda.gov


      NATIONAL DIRECTOR                                                                      Alejandra Y. Castillo


      National Deputy Director                                                               Albert K. Shen
  [For the Minority Business Development Agency statement of organization, see the Federal Register of
  Mar. 17, 1972, 37 FR 5650, as amended]



The Minority Business Development Agency was established by Executive order in 1969. The Agency develops and
coordinates a national program for minority business enterprise.


The Agency was created to help minority businesses achieve effective and equitable participation in the American free

enterprise system and overcome social and economic disadvantages that limited past participation. The Agency

provides policies and leadership supporting a partnership of business, industry, and government with the Nation's

minority businesses.


Business development services are provided to the minority business community through three vehicles: the minority

business opportunity committees, which disseminate information on business opportunities; the minority business

development centers, which provide management and technical assistance and other business development services;

and electronic commerce, which includes a Web site that shows how to start a business and use the service to find

contract opportunities.


The Agency promotes and coordinates the efforts of other Federal agencies in assisting or providing market

opportunities for minority business. It coordinates opportunities for minority firms in the private sector. Through such

public and private cooperative activities, the Agency promotes the participation of Federal, State, and local

governments, and business and industry in directing resources for the development of strong minority businesses.

http://www.mbda.gov/main/who-mbda/about-minority-business-development-agency



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Internships
Information on student eligibility and how to apply is available online.

http://www.mbda.gov/main/intern-program

Library
An online research library serves as a repository for factsheets, reports, statistical data, and other publications.

http://www.mbda.gov/pressroom/research-library

Newsletter
A free, monthly newsletter is accessible online.

http://www.mbda.gov/newsletter

Speakers
For information on scheduling a speaker for an organized event, visit the "Speaker Request Form" Web page.

http://www.mbda.gov/main/mbda-speaker-request-form
http://www.mbda.gov/contact
        For further information, contact the Office of the National Director, Minority Business Development
        Agency, Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230. Phone, 202-482-2332.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                  National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC ADMINISTRATION
    Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230


    202-482-2985

    http://www.noaa.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         Richard W. Spinrad


      Deputy Administrator                                                                  Janet L. Coit, Acting
 ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATORS


 National Marine Fisheries Service                                                   Janet L. Coit


 Oceanic and Atmospheric Research                                                    (vacancy)


 Satellite and Information Services                                                  Stephen M. Volz




 Chief Operating Officer                                                             Benjamin P. Friedman


 Chief Scientist                                                                     (vacancy)


 General Counsel                                                                     Walker B. Smith




 Chief of Staff                                                                      Karen H. Hyun




 SENIOR ADVISORS                                                                     Perry F. Brody


                                                                                     Letise LaFeir


 Climate                                                                             Ko Barrett


https://www.noaa.gov/about-our-agency



 The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration seeks to understand and predict changes in climate and weather

and changes that affect coasts and oceans; shares its knowledge and information with others; and conserves and

manages coastal and marine ecosystems and resources.


Establishment and Organization
On October 3, 1970, Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1970 (5 U.S.C. app.) formed the National Oceanic and Atmospheric

Administration (NOAA).


NOAA posts an organizational chart at the bottom of its "Organization" web page, in Portable Document Format

(PDF), for viewing and downloading.

https://www.noaa.gov/about/organization
NOAA published its statement of functions, organization, and delegation of authority in the Federal Register on
February 13, 1978 (43 FR 6128).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1978-02-13/pdf/FR-1978-02-13.pdf

ACTIVITIES
Science, service, and stewardship characterize NOAA's mission. Its researchers, scientists, and technicians study the

atmosphere, the ocean, and the ecosystems associated with them; they integrate research and analysis; they observe

and monitor; and they use modeling to predict the future state of complex systems. NOAA serves academic

institutions, businesses, communities, and ordinary people by communicating and sharing its data, information,

knowledge, and research. NOAA also applies its institutional know-how and science assets to the conservation and

management of coastal and marine ecosystems and resources. The agency regulates and sustains marine fisheries and

ecosystems, protects endangered species, restores habitats and ecosystems, conserves marine sanctuaries, responds

to environmental emergencies, and assists with disaster recovery.

https://www.noaa.gov/about-our-agency

Marine and Aviation Operations
The Office of Marine and Aviation Operations manages the aviation safety, the small boat, and the NOAA diving

programs. It also operates a fleet of specialized ships and aircraft that collect data and carry out research to support

NOAA's mission, the Global Earth Observation System, and the Integrated Ocean Observing System—including flying

"hurricane hunter" aircraft into the most turbulent storms to collect data critical for research.

http://www.omao.noaa.gov/about.html

  For further information, contact Office of Marine and Aviation Operations, Suite 500, 8403 Colesville Rd.,
  Silver Spring, MD 20910. Phone, 301-713-7600. Fax, 301-713-1541.



National Coastal Resources
The National Ocean Service helps balance the Nation's use of coastal resources through research, management, and

policy. The Service monitors the health of U.S. coasts by examining how human use and natural events affect coastal

ecosystems. Coastal communities rely on the Service for information on natural hazards so they can reduce or

eliminate destructive effects of coastal hazards. The Service assesses the damage caused by hazardous material spills

and tries to restore or replace the affected coastal resources. The Service also protects beaches, water quality,

wetlands, and wildlife. It provides a wide range of navigational products and data that help vessels move safely

through U.S. waters, and it supplies the basic information for establishing the latitude, longitude, and elevation

framework necessary for the Nation's mapping, navigation, positioning, and surveying activities.

https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/

  For further information, contact the National Ocean Service, Room 13231, SSMC 4, 1305 East-West
  Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910. Phone, 301-713-3074. Fax, 301-713-4307.



National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information
The National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service operates the Nation's civilian geostationary and

polar-orbiting environmental satellites. It also manages the largest collection of atmospheric, climatic, geophysical, and
oceanographic data in the world. The Service develops and provides, through various media, environmental data for

forecasts, national security, and weather warnings to protect life and property. These data are also used for energy

distribution, global food supplies development, natural resources management, and rescuing downed pilots and

mariners in distress.

https://www.nesdis.noaa.gov/

  For further information, contact the National Environmental Satellite, Data, and Information Service, 1335
  East-West Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910-3283. Phone, 301-713-3578. Fax, 301-713-1249.



National Marine Fisheries
The National Marine Fisheries Service supports the management, conservation, and sustainable development of

domestic and international living marine resources and the protection and restoration of ecosystems. The Service

helps assess the stock of the Nation's multi-billion-dollar marine fisheries, protect marine mammals and threatened

species, conserve habitats, assist trade and industry, and conduct fishery enforcement activities.

http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov

  For further information, contact the National Marine Fisheries Service, 1315 East-West Highway, Silver
  Spring, MD 20910. Phone, 301-713-2239. Fax, 301-713-1940.



National Weather
The National Weather Service (NWS) provides weather, water, and climate warnings and forecasts and data for the

United States, its territories, and adjacent waters and ocean areas. Government agencies, the private sector, the

general public, and the global community rely on NWS data and products to protect life and property. Working with

partners in Government, academic and research institutions, and private industry, the Service responds to the needs of

the American public through its products and services. NWS data and information support aviation, maritime activities,

and other sectors of the economy, as well as wildfire suppression. The Service also helps national security efforts with

long- and short-range forecasts, air quality and cloud dispersion forecasts, and broadcasts of warnings and critical

information over the 800-station NOAA Weather Radio network.

http://www.weather.gov

  For further information, contact the National Weather Service–Executive Affairs, 1325 East-West Highway,
  Silver Spring, MD 20910-3283. Phone, 301-713-0675. Fax, 301-713-0049.



Oceanic and Atmospheric Research
The Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research conducts research on air quality and composition, climate variability

and change, weather, and coastal, marine, and Great Lakes ecosystems. The Office uses its own laboratories and

offices to run research programs in atmospheric, coastal, marine, and space sciences, as well as relying on networks of

university-based programs across the country.

http://www.oar.noaa.gov

  For further information, contact the Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research, Room 11458, 1315 East-
  West Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910. Phone, 301-713-2458. Fax, 301-713-0163.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that NOAA records have been

assigned to record group 370.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/370.html

Arctic Report Cards
Every year, NOAA publishes an Arctic Report Card as part of its efforts to track recent environmental changes relative

to historical records. In December of 2021, NOAA released its most up-to-date version of the Arctic Report Card.

https://www.arctic.noaa.gov/Report-Card/Report-Card-2021
NOAA released a 4-minute video synopsis of the updated report card. The video's narration opens and closes with

these words: "The Arctic, an ancient ecosystem, is disappearing before our eyes. . . . All these disruptions are the direct

result of a climate straining under the heat-trapping burden of greenhouse gas pollution. The time to face this

monumental challenge is now." The 2021 report notes the melting of frozen habitat that supports iconic animals like

the polar bear and the arrival of new species like beavers, whose engineering activities create wetlands. The report also

notes the nearly complete loss of old Arctic sea ice. Without the barricading presence of thick sea ice, ships and the

industrial activities that they support are becoming more common in the Arctic. The effects include more garbage

adrift and more pollution on shore, as well as higher levels of marine noise. Plastics and toxic chemicals are lethal

threats to marine mammals such as seals, walrus, and whales. Undermining the food security of native communities,

marine noise drives these magnificent mammals from their preferred habitats, which also are traditional hunting areas

for indigenous hunters.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_WbWjLUTvZM

Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide
Adding to the data record that C. David Keeling of the Scripps Institution of Oceanography started in 1958, NOAA

continues to measure atmospheric carbon at the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii.

https://gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/trends
The Earth System Research Laboratory's Global Monitoring Division has posted a 4-minute video showing 800,000

years of atmospheric carbon dioxide history.

https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/history.html

Atmospheric Methane
The Earth System Research Laboratory's Global Monitoring Division has been measuring methane since 1983 at a

globally distributed network of air sampling sites.

https://esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends_ch4
On April 7, 2022, the Global Monitoring Laboratory posted the news item "Increase in Atmospheric Methane Set
Another Record During 2021—Carbon Dioxide Levels Also Record a Big Jump." According to the news item, "For the

second year in a row, NOAA scientists observed a record annual increase in atmospheric levels of methane, a

powerful, heat-trapping greenhouse gas that’s the second biggest contributor to human-caused global warming after

carbon dioxide." It also addressed increases in atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide: "Levels of carbon dioxide also

continue to increase at historically high rates. The global surface average for carbon dioxide during 2021 was 414.7

parts per million (ppm), which is an increase of 2.66 ppm over the 2020 average. This marks the 10th consecutive year

that carbon dioxide increased by more than 2 parts per million, which represents the fastest sustained rate of increase

in the 63 years since monitoring began." Summing up the recent research data, NOAA Administrator Richard W.

Spinrad commented: “Our data show that global emissions continue to move in the wrong direction at a rapid pace.

The evidence is consistent, alarming and undeniable. We need to build a Climate Ready Nation to adapt for what’s

already here and prepare for what’s to come. At the same time, we can no longer afford to delay urgent and effective

action needed to address the cause of the problem—greenhouse gas pollution.

https://www.noaa.gov/news-release/increase-in-atmospheric-methane-set-another-record-during-
2021#:~:text=NOAA's%20preliminary%20analysis%20showed%20the,during%202020%20was%2015.3%20ppb.

Career Opportunities
A career at NOAA is a mission-oriented experience that centers on protecting natural resources, safeguarding the

public, and strengthening the economy.

https://www.noaa.gov/work-with-us
In 2020, NOAA ranked 111th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/CM54

Climate Change
The Carbon Cycle Greenhouse Gases research area operates the global greenhouse gas reference network.

Researchers measure the atmospheric distribution and trends of the main causes of climate change: carbon dioxide

(CO2); methane (CH4); nitrous oxide (N2O); and carbon monoxide (CO) because it is an indicator of air pollution.

https://gml.noaa.gov/ccgg/
"The Power of Greenhouse Gases" web page presents examples of the excess heat that the Earth system is retaining.

The amount of excess heat is sufficiently large to force climate change on a regional and global scale.

https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/ghgpower

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has contact information and other frequently requested resources.

https://www.noaa.gov/contact-us

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that NOAA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/national-oceanic-and-atmospheric-administration

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Any person has a right to obtain access to Federal agency records; however, some records, or portions of them, may

be shielded from disclosure by one of nine FOIA exemptions or by one of three special law enforcement exclusions.

https://www.noaa.gov/information-technology/foia
Before submitting a FOIA request, an information seeker should search the electronic reading room to determine if the

desired information is in the public domain.

https://www.noaa.gov/organization/information-technology/foia-reading-room

Maritime Archaeology
Visit the "Maritime Archaeology" web page to learn about discovering shipwrecks and safeguarding them.

https://www.noaa.gov/topic-tags/maritime-archaeology

Monthly Climate Report
The report of August 13, 2021, carried the headline "It's official: July was Earth's hottest month on record."

https://www.noaa.gov/topic-tags/monthly-climate-report

Nautical Charts
NOAA has posted the entire suite of U.S. coastal and Great Lakes charts on its "Charting" page for download.

https://www.noaa.gov/charting

News
The Global Monitoring Laboratory (GML) conducts research that addresses three important areas of concern:

greenhouse gas and carbon cycle feedbacks; changes in aerosols, clouds, and surface radiation; and recovery of

stratospheric ozone. The GML posts news items that cover recent developments in these areas.

https://gml.noaa.gov/news

NOAA Nationwide
NOAA facilities—as well as personnel and the activities and programs they manage—are located throughout the

Nation in various States and Territories.

https://www.noaa.gov/legislative-and-intergovernmental-affairs/noaa-in-your-state-territory

Podcast
The NOAA Ocean podcast explores topics ranging from coastal science to coral reefs with ocean experts.

https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/podcast

Sea Level Rise
In February of 2022, the Sea Level Rise and Coastal Flood Hazard and Tools Interagency Task Force released its

technical report "Global and Regional Sea Level Rise Scenarios for the United States." Twenty-three coauthors—

experts and scientists from academic institutions and Government agencies—contributed to the report.

https://oceanservice.noaa.gov/hazards/sealevelrise/sealevelrise-tech-report.html

Social Media
NOAA relies on social media to share information and to promote understanding of its science, service, and
     stewardship-oriented mission.

     https://www.noaa.gov/stay-connected

     Staff Directory
     The NOAA staff directory is available online.

     https://nsd.rdc.noaa.gov

     Weather
     The NOAA Weather Radio All Hazards network broadcasts continuous weather information nationwide from the

     nearest National Weather Service office. The network broadcasts official Weather Service forecasts, warnings, watches,

     and other hazard information around the clock every day.

     https://www.weather.gov/nwr

        NOAA's Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                              National Telecommunications and Information Administration




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION ADMINISTRATION
    Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230


    202-428-1840

    http://www.ntia.doc.gov


      ASSISTANT SECRETARY, COMMUNICATIONS AND INFORMATION /
                                                                                             Lawrence E. Strickling
      ADMINISTRATOR


      Deputy Assistant Secretary, Communications and Information                             Angela Simpson
  [For the National Telecommunications and Information Administration statement of organization, see
  the Federal Register of June 5, 1978, 43 FR 24348]



The National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) was established in 1978 by Reorganization
Plan No. 1 of 1977 (5 U.S.C. app.) and Executive Order 12046 of March 27, 1978 (3 CFR, 1978 Comp., p. 158), by

combining the Office of Telecommunications Policy of the Executive Office of the President and the Office of

Telecommunications of the Department of Commerce to form a new agency reporting to the Secretary of Commerce.

NTIA operates under the authority of the National Telecommunications and Information Administration Organization

Act (47 U.S.C. 901).


NTIA serves as the principal executive branch adviser to the President on telecommunications and information policy;

develops and presents U.S. plans and policies at international communications conferences and related meetings;

prescribes policies for and manages Federal use of the radio frequency spectrum; serves as the principal Federal

telecommunications research and engineering laboratory—NTIA's Institute for Telecommunication Sciences; promotes

broadband deployment and adoption through BroadbandUSA (www2.ntia.doc.gov); and assists the First Responder

Network Authority (www.firstnet.gov) develop and operate a nationwide broadband network dedicated to public

safety.

https://www.ntia.doc.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
To see current NTIA career opportunities on USAJobs, click on the link below, scroll down, and select "NTIA Jobs."

https://www.ntia.doc.gov/about

Publications
Since 1954, NTIA and its predecessors have published several hundred technical reports and memoranda, special

publications, contractor reports, and other information products. For more information, call the Office of Spectrum

Management in Washington, DC, at 202-482-1850. Or, contact the publications officer at the Institute for

Telecommunication Sciences–Department of Commerce, 325 Broadway, MC ITS.D, Boulder, CO 80305. Phone, 303-

497-3572.

https://www.ntia.doc.gov/publications

Speakers
A speaker request form is available online.

https://www.ntia.doc.gov/webform/speaker-request

Telecommunications Research
For information on telecommunications research and engineering services, visit the "Institute for Telecommunication

Sciences" Web page. Phone, 303-497-3571.
     http://www.its.bldrdoc.gov | Email: info@its.bldrdoc.gov
     https://www.ntia.doc.gov/contact

        For further information, contact the National Telecommunications and Information Administration,
        Department of Commerce, Washington, DC 20230. Phone, 202-482-1551.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                    National Institute of Standards and Technology




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
    100 Bureau Drive, Gaithersburg, MD 20899


    301-975-2000

    http://www.nist.gov


      UNDER SECRETARY, STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY / DIRECTOR                                  Willie E. May



    The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) operates under the authority of the National Institute of

    Standards and Technology Act (15 U.S.C. 271), which amends the Organic Act of March 3, 1901 (ch. 872), which created
     the National Bureau of Standards (NBS) in 1901. In 1988, the Congress renamed NBS as NIST and expanded its

     activities and responsibilities.

     http://www.nist.gov/timeline.cfm
     NIST is a nonregulatory Federal agency within the Department of Commerce. To carry out its mission, NIST relies on

     research laboratories, user facilities, innovative manufacturing programs, and its participation in collaborative institutes

     and centers. NIST research laboratories conduct world-class research to advance the Nation's technological

     infrastructure and help U.S. companies improve products and services. The Baldrige Performance Excellence Program

     (www.nist.gov/baldrige) also helps them and other organizations increase operational performance and quality. NIST

     user facilities include the Center for Nanoscale Science and Technology (www.nist.gov/cnst) and NIST Center for

     Neutron Research (www.ncnr.nist.gov).

     http://www.nist.gov/programs-projects.cfm



     SOURCES OF INFORMATION

     Employment
     For information on career opportunities, visit the "Careers at NIST" Web page.

     http://www.nist.gov/ohrm/careers.cfm

     Publications
     The "Journal of Research of the National Institute of Standards and Technology" and other publications are available

     online.

     http://www.nist.gov/nvl/nist_publications.cfm
     http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/contact.cfm | Email: inquiries@nist.gov

        For further information, contact the National Institute of Standards and Technology, 100 Bureau Drive,
        Mail Stop 1070, Gaithersburg, MD 20899-1070. Phone, 301-975-6478. Fax, 301-926-1630.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                           National Technical Information Service




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL TECHNICAL INFORMATION SERVICE
    5301 Shawnee Road, Alexandria, VA 22312


    703-605-6050

    888-584-8332

    http://www.ntis.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Avi Bender



    The National Technical Information Service (NTIS) is the largest central resource for business-related, engineering,
Government-funded, scientific, and technical information available. For more than 60 years, the Service has assured

businesses, Government, universities, and the public timely access to approximately 3 million publications covering

over 350 subject areas. The Service supports the Department of Commerce's mission by providing access to

information that stimulates innovation and discovery. The Service receives no appropriations and recovers its costs

through fees charged for products and services.


The NTIS promotes economic growth, progress, and science and information. On behalf of the Secretary of

Commerce, the Service operates a permanent clearinghouse of scientific and technical information and makes it

readily available to industry, business, and the general public—codified as chapter 23 of Title 15 of the United States

Code (15 U.S.C. 1151-1157). The Service collects scientific and technical information; catalogs, abstracts, indexes, and

permanently archives the information; disseminates information through electronic and other media; and provides

information processing services to other Federal agencies.


NTIS also provides information management services to other Federal agencies to help them interact with and better

serve the information needs of their own constituents. It develops, plans, evaluates, and implements business

strategies for information management and dissemination services and Internet-based service business opportunities

for Federal agencies; uses new and existing technologies to ensure optimal access to Government online information

services; and manages service projects using in-house capabilities and through joint public-private partnerships. NTIS

provides eTraining and Knowledge Management, Web services and cloud computing, distribution and fulfillment,

digitization and scanning services for Federal Government agencies.

http://www.ntis.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
Approximately 150 NTIS employees work in Northern Virginia. The Service hires professionals with skills in

administration, information technology, and program management.

https://www.usajobs.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The Office of Director handles Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) requests. The FOIA contact reviews, coordinates,

and responds to requests within 20 days under the requirements of the Freedom of Information Act.

http://www.ntis.gov/about/FOIA

Products
For general information or to place a telephone order, call the Customer Contact Center, 8 a.m.–6 p.m., eastern

standard time. Phone, 800-553-6847. TDD, 703-487-4639. Fax, 703-605-6900.

http://www.ntis.gov/products | Email: info@ntis.gov

Services
To learn more about NTIS information services for Federal agencies, call the Office of Federal Services at 703-605-
     6800.

     http://www.ntis.gov/services | Email: obdinfo@ntis.gov
     http://www.ntis.gov/about/contact

        For further information, contact the National Technical Information Service, 5301 Shawnee Road,
        Alexandria, VA 22312. Phone, 703-605-6000 or 800-553-6847.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                         United States Patent and Trademark Office




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES PATENT AND TRADEMARK OFFICE
    600 Dulany Street, Alexandria, VA 22314


    571-272-8700

    http://www.uspto.gov


      UNDER SECRETARY, INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY / DIRECTOR                                     Michelle K. Lee


      Deputy Under Secretary, Intellectual Property / Deputy Director                       Russell D. Slifer
  [For the Patent and Trademark Office statement of organization, see the Federal Register of Apr. 14, 1975,
  40 FR 16707]



The United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) was established by the act of July 19, 1952 (35 U.S.C. 1) "to
promote the progress of science and useful arts, by securing for limited times to authors and inventors the exclusive

right to their respective writings and discoveries" (U.S. Constitution Art. I, sec. 8). The commerce clause provides the

constitutional basis for the registration of trademarks.


USPTO examines and issues patents. There are three major patent categories: utility patents, design patents, and plant

patents. USPTO also issues statutory invention registrations and processes international patent applications.


Through the registration of trademarks, USPTO assists businessmen and women in protecting their investments,

promoting goods and services, and safeguarding consumers against confusion and deception in the marketplace. A

trademark includes any distinctive word, name, symbol, device, or any combination thereof adopted and used or

intended to be used by a manufacturer or merchant to identify his or her goods or services and distinguish them from

those manufactured or sold by others. Trademarks are examined by the Office for compliance with various statutory

requirements to prevent unfair competition and consumer deception.


In addition to the examination of patent and trademark applications, issuance of patents, and registration of

trademarks, USPTO advises and assists government agencies and officials in matters involving all domestic and global

aspects of intellectual property. USPTO also promotes an understanding of intellectual property protection.


USPTO provides public access to patent, trademark, and related scientific and technical information. Patents and

trademarks may be reviewed and searched online or at designated Patent and Trademark Depository Libraries. There

are 80 Patent and Trademark Depository Libraries located within the United States and Puerto Rico. Additionally,

USPTO's Scientific and Technical Information Center in Alexandria, VA, houses over 120,000 volumes of scientific and

technical books in various languages; 90,000 bound volumes of periodicals devoted to science and technology; the

official journals of 77 foreign patent organizations; and over 40 million foreign patents on paper, microfilm, microfiche,

and CD–ROM.

http://www.uspto.gov/about-us



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Data
Monthly summaries for patents data and quarterly summaries for trademark data are available online.

http://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/statistics

Employment
Information on employment opportunities is available on the "Careers" Web page.

http://careers.uspto.gov

Patents
     Information on getting started and applying for and maintaining a patent is available online.

     http://www.uspto.gov/patent

     Publications
     The "Official Gazette" journal, "Inventors Eye" newsletter, and other publications are accessible online.

     http://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/official-gazette
     http://www.uspto.gov/learning-and-resources/newsletter-archives
     http://www.uspto.gov/about-us/news-updates

     Speakers
     A speaker request form is available online.

     http://www.uspto.gov/about-us/organizational-offices/office-chief-communications-officer/speaker-request-form

     Trademarks
     Information on getting started and applying for and maintaining a trademark is available online.

     http://www.uspto.gov/trademark
     http://www.uspto.gov/about-us/organizational-offices/office-chief-communications-officer

        For further information, contact the Office of the Chief Communications Officer, United States Patent and
        Trademark Office, 600 Dulany Street, Alexandria, VA 22314. Phone, 571-272-8400.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                Department of Defense
                                             Department of the Air Force
                                               Department of the Army
                                               Department of the Navy
                                              United States Marine Corps
                                            United States Naval Academy
                                                   Defense Agencies
                                    Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
                                             Defense Commissary Agency
                                           Defense Contract Audit Agency
                                       Defense Contract Management Agency
                                       Defense Finance and Accounting Service
                                        Defense Information Systems Agency
                                             Defense Intelligence Agency
                                            Defense Legal Services Agency
                                               Defense Logistics Agency
                                        Defense Security Cooperation Agency
                                  Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency
                                          Defense Threat Reduction Agency
                                                Missile Defense Agency
                                       National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
                                  National Security Agency / Central Security Service
                                         Pentagon Force Protection Agency
                                                 Joint Service Schools
                                            Defense Acquisition University
                                            National Intelligence University
                                              National Defense University
                                 Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
The United States Government Manual




    DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE
   Office of the Secretary, The Pentagon, Washington, DC 20301-1155


   703-545-6700

   http://www.defense.gov


    SECRETARY OF DEFENSE                                                            Pete Hegseth


    Deputy Secretary of Defense                                                     Kathleen H. Hicks




    Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics            James MacStravic, Acting


    Under Secretary of Defense Comptroller / Chief Financial Officer                David L. Norquist


    Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence                                     Kari Bingen, Acting


    Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness                          Anthony M. Kurta, Acting


    Under Secretary of Defense for Policy                                           Sasha Baker, Acting




    Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense Comptroller / DOD Chief Financial
                                                                                    John Zangardi, Acting
    Officer


    Principal Deputy Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and
                                                                                    (vacancy)
    Logistics


    Principal Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence                           Ronald S. Moultrie
Principal Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness               (vacancy)


Principal Under Secretary of Defense for Policy                                Theresa Whelan, Acting




Assistant Secretary of Defense for Acquisition                                 Dyke Weatherington, Acting


Assistant Secretary of Defense for Asian and Pacific Security Affairs          David Helvy, Acting


Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs                              Lester Martinez-Lopez


Assistant Secretary of Defense for Homeland Defense and Global Security        Kenneth Rapuano


Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs              Robert Karem


Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs                         Pete Giambastiani, Acting


Assistant Secretary of Defense for Logistics and Materiel Readiness            Kristin French, Acting


Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower and Reserve Affairs                Stephanie Barna, Acting


Assistant Secretary of Defense for Nuclear, Chemical, and Biological Defense
                                                                               Tom Hopkins, Acting
Programs


                                                                               Thomas E. Morehouse,
Assistant Secretary of Defense for Operational Energy Plans and Programs
                                                                               Acting


Assistant Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness                     Elizabeth Van Winkle, Acting


Assistant Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering                    Mary Miller, Acting


Assistant Secretary of Defense for Special Operations/Low-Intensity Conflict   Caryn Hollis, Acting




Chief Information Officer                                                      John A. Zangardi, Acting


Chief Operating Officer                                                        Steven L. Schleien




Director, Administration and Management                                        Michael L. Rhodes


Director, Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation                               Scott Comes, Acting


Director, Operational Test and Evaluation                                      David Duma, Acting
  General Counsel                                                                      Paul S. Koffsky, Acting


  Inspector General                                                                    Glenn A. Fine, Acting




  Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs                             Dana W. White


  Deputy Chief Management Officer                                                      David Tillotson III, Acting




JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF


                                                                                       Gen. Joseph F. Dunford, Jr.,
  CHAIR
                                                                                       USMC


  Vice Chair                                                                           Gen. Paul J. Selva, USAF


  Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chair                                                 CSM John W. Troxwell, USMC




  Chief of Naval Operations                                                            Adm. John Richardson, USN


  Chief of Staff, Air Force                                                            Gen. David L. Goldfein, USAF


  Chief of Staff, Army                                                                 Gen. Mark A. Milley, USA


  Chief of the National Guard Bureau                                                   Gen. Joseph L. Lengyel, USAF


  Commandant of the Marine Corps                                                       Gen. Robert B. Neller, USMC


  [For the Department of Defense statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 32,
  Chapter I, Subchapter R]



The Department of Defense provides the military forces needed to deter war and protect national security. Under the

President, the Secretary of Defense directs and exercises authority and control over the separately organized

Departments of the Air Force, the Army, and the Navy; over the Joint Chiefs of Staff; over the combatant commands;

and over defense agencies and field activities.

Organizational Chart
The National Security Act Amendments of 1949 redesignated the National Military Establishment as the Department of

Defense (DOD) and established it as an executive department (10 U.S.C. 111) headed by the Secretary of Defense.


Structure
The Department of Defense is composed of the Office of the Secretary of Defense; the military departments and the

military services within those departments; the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Joint Staff; the combatant

commands; the defense agencies; DOD field activities; and such other offices, agencies, activities, and commands as

may be established or designated by law or by the President or the Secretary of Defense.


Each military department is separately organized under its own Secretary and functions under the authority, direction,

and control of the Secretary of Defense. The Secretary of each military department is responsible to the Secretary of

Defense for the operation and efficiency of his department. Orders to the military departments are issued through the

Secretaries of these departments or their designees, by the Secretary of Defense, or under authority specifically

delegated in writing by the Secretary of Defense or provided by law.


The commanders of the combatant commands are responsible to the President and the Secretary of Defense for

accomplishing the military missions assigned to them and exercising command authority over forces assigned to them.

The operational chain of command runs from the President to the Secretary of Defense, to the commanders of the

combatant commands. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff functions within the chain of command by

transmitting the orders of the President or the Secretary of Defense to the commanders of the combatant commands.




OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE

Secretary of Defense
The Secretary of Defense is the principal defense policy adviser to the President and is responsible for the formulation

of general defense policy and policy related to DOD and for the execution of approved policy. Under the direction of

the President, the Secretary exercises authority, direction, and control over the Department of Defense.

http://www.defense.gov/osd

Acquisition, Technology and Logistics
The Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics is the principal staff assistant and adviser to

the Secretary of Defense for all matters relating to the DOD Acquisition System; research and development; modeling

and simulation; systems engineering; advanced technology; developmental test and evaluation; production; systems

integration; logistics; installation management; military construction; procurement; environment, safety, and

occupational health management; utilities and energy management; business management modernization; document

services; and nuclear, chemical, and biological defense programs.

http://www.acq.osd.mil

Intelligence
The Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence is the principal staff assistant and adviser to the Secretary and Deputy

Secretary of Defense for intelligence, intelligence-related matters, counterintelligence, and security. The Under

Secretary of Defense for Intelligence supervises all intelligence and intelligence-related affairs of DOD.


Networks and Information Integration
The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Networks and Information Integration is the principal staff assistant and adviser
to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense for achieving and maintaining information superiority in support of

DOD missions, while exploiting or denying an adversary's ability to do the same. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for

Networks and Information Integration also serves as the Chief Information Officer.

http://dodcio.defense.gov

Personnel and Readiness
The Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness is the principal staff assistant and adviser to the Secretary

of Defense for policy matters relating to the structure and readiness of the total force. Functional areas include

readiness; civilian and military personnel policies, programs, and systems; civilian and military equal opportunity

programs; health policies, programs, and activities; Reserve component programs, policies, and activities; family policy,

dependents' education, and personnel support programs; mobilization planning and requirements; language

capabilities and programs; and the Federal Voting Assistance Program. The Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel

and Readiness also serves as the Chief Human Capital Officer.

http://prhome.defense.gov

Policy
The Under Secretary of Defense for Policy is the principal staff assistant and adviser to the Secretary of Defense for

policy matters relating to overall international security policy and political-military affairs and represents the

Department at the National Security Council and other external agencies involved with national security policy. The

Under Secretary's areas of activity include homeland defense; NATO affairs; foreign military sales; arms limitation

agreements; international trade and technology security; regional security affairs; special operations and low-intensity

conflict; stability operations; integration of departmental plans and policies with overall national security objectives;

drug control policy, requirements, priorities, systems, resources, and programs; and issuance of policy guidance

affecting departmental programs.

http://policy.defense.gov

Special Staff
A special staff assists the Secretary and Deputy Secretary of Defense. This special staff of assistants includes the

Assistant Secretaries of Defense for Legislative Affairs and for Public Affairs; the Under Secretary of Defense

(Comptroller), who also functions as the Chief Financial Officer; the General Counsel; the Inspector General; the

Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Intelligence Oversight; the Directors of Administration and Management, of

Operational Test and Evaluation, of Business Transformation, of Net Assessment, of Program Analysis and Evaluation;

and other officers whom the Secretary of Defense determines are necessary to help carry out his or her duties and

responsibilities.

http://www.defense.gov/About-DoD/Leaders



JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF
The Joint Chiefs of Staff consist of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman, the Chief of Staff of the Army, the Chief of Naval

Operations, the Chief of Staff of the Air Force, and the Commandant of the Marine Corps. The Chairman of the Joint

Chiefs of Staff is the principal military adviser to the President, the National Security Council, and the Secretary of
Defense. The other members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff are military advisers who may provide additional information

upon request from the President, the National Security Council, or the Secretary of Defense. They may also submit

their advice when it does not agree with that of the Chairman. Subject to the authority of the President and the

Secretary of Defense, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff is responsible for assisting the President and the

Secretary of Defense in providing strategic direction and planning for the Armed Forces; making recommendations for

the assignment of responsibilities within the Armed Forces; comparing the capabilities of American and allied Armed

Forces with those of potential adversaries; preparing and reviewing contingency plans that conform to policy

guidance; preparing joint logistic and mobility plans; and recommending assignment of logistic and mobility

responsibilities.


The Chairman, while so serving, holds the grade of general or admiral and outranks all other officers of the Armed

Forces.


The Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs performs duties assigned by the Chairman, with the approval of the Secretary of

Defense. The Vice Chairman acts as Chairman when there is a vacancy in the office of the Chairman or in the absence

or disability of the Chairman. The Vice Chairman, while so serving, holds the grade of general or admiral and outranks

all other officers of the Armed Forces except the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

http://www.jcs.mil

Joint Staff
The Joint Staff, under the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, assists the Chairman and the other members of the

Joint Chiefs of Staff in carrying out their responsibilities.


The Joint Staff is headed by a Director who is selected by the Chairman in consultation with the other members of the

Joint Chiefs of Staff and with the approval of the Secretary of Defense. Officers assigned to serve on the Joint Staff are

selected by the Chairman in approximately equal numbers from the Army, Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force.

http://www.jcs.mil/About.aspx



COMBATANT COMMANDS
The combatant commands are military commands with broad continuing missions maintaining the security and

defense of the United States against attack; supporting and advancing the national policies and interests of the United

States and discharging U.S. military responsibilities in their assigned areas; and preparing plans, conducting operations,

and coordinating activities of the forces assigned to them in accordance with the directives of higher authority. The

operational chain of command runs from the President to the Secretary of Defense, to the commanders of the

combatant commands. The Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff serves as the spokesman for the commanders of the

combatant commands, especially on the administrative requirements of their commands.

http://www.defense.gov/Sites/Unified-Combatant-Commands



FIELD ACTIVITIES
Counterintelligence Field Activity
The DOD Counterintelligence Field Activity was established in 2002 to build a Defense counterintelligence (CI) system

that is informed by national goals and objectives and supports the protection of DOD personnel and critical assets

from foreign intelligence services, foreign terrorists, and other clandestine or covert threats. The desired end is a

transformed Defense CI system that integrates and synchronizes the counterintelligence activities of the military

departments, defense agencies, Joint Staff, and combatant commands.


Defense Health Agency
The Defense Health Agency (DHA) manages the activities of the Military Health System. It is also the market manager

for the National Capital Region enhanced Multi-Service Market, which includes Walter Reed National Military Medical

Center and Fort Belvoir Community Hospital.

http://www.dha.mil

Defense Media Activity
Defense Media Activity (DMA) gathers Defense news and information from all departmental levels and reports that

news and information to DOD audiences worldwide through American Forces Network online, radio, television, and

through publications. DMA reports news on individual airmen, marines, sailors, soldiers, and DOD civilian employees

to the American public through the Hometown News Service. DMA provides World Wide Web infrastructure and

services for DOD organizations. It collects, processes, and stores DOD imagery products created by the Department

and makes them available to the American public. It trains the Department's public affairs and visual information

military and civilian professionals. DMA also operates Stars and Stripes, a news and information organization, free of

Government editorial control and censorship, for military audiences overseas.

http://www.dma.mil

Defense Prisoner of War / Missing in Action Accounting Agency
The Defense POW / MIA Accounting Agency (DPAA) provides centralized management of prisoner of war and missing

personnel affairs within the DOD. DPAA's primary responsibilities include leadership for and policy oversight over all

efforts to account for Americans still missing from past conflicts and the recovery of and accounting for those who

may become isolated in hostile territory in future conflicts. DPAA also provides administrative and logistical support to

the U.S.-Russia Joint Commission on POW / MIAs, conducts research and analysis to help resolve cases of those

unaccounted for, examines DOD documents for possible public disclosure, and maintains viable channels of

communications on POW / MIA matters between the DOD and Congress, the families of the missing, and the

American public.

http://www.dpaa.mil

Defense Technical Information Center
The Defense Technical Information Center (DTIC) is a field activity in the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for

Acquisition, Technology and Logistics. It operates under the authority, direction, and control of the Director of Defense

Research and Engineering. DTIC provides defense scientific and technical information, offers controlled access to

defense information, and designs and hosts more than 100 DOD Web sites. DTIC's collections include technical

reports, summaries of research in progress, independent research and development material, defense technology
transfer agreements, and DOD planning documents.

http://www.dtic.mil/dtic/about/about.html

Defense Technology Security Administration
The Defense Technology Security Administration (DTSA) is the central DOD point of contact for development and

implementation of technology security policies governing defense articles and services and dual-use commodities.

DTSA administers the development and implementation of DOD technology security policies on international transfers

of defense-related goods, services, and technologies. It does so to ensure that critical U.S. military technological

advantages are preserved, transfers that could prove detrimental to U.S. security interests are controlled and limited,

weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery do not proliferate, diversion of defense-related goods to

terrorists is prevented, legitimate defense cooperation with foreign friends and allies is supported, and the health of

the defense industrial base is assured.

http://www.dtsa.mil/SitePages/default.aspx

Education Activity
The Department of Defense Education Activity (DODEA) was established in 1992. It consists of two subordinate

organizational entities: the Department of Defense Dependents Schools (DODDS) and the Department of Defense

Domestic Dependent Elementary and Secondary Schools (DDESS). DODEA formulates, develops, and implements

policies, technical guidance, and standards for the effective management of Defense dependents education activities

and programs. It also plans, directs, coordinates, and manages the education programs for eligible dependents of U.S.

military and civilian personnel stationed overseas and stateside; evaluates the programmatic and operational policies

and procedures for DODDS and DDESS; and provides education activity representation at meetings and deliberations

of educational panels and advisory groups.

http://www.dodea.edu/Americas

Human Resources Field Activity
The Department of Defense Human Resources Activity (DODHRA) enhances the operational effectiveness and

efficiency of a host of dynamic and diverse programs supporting the Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for

Personnel and Readiness. The Field Activity supports policy development, performs cutting-edge research and expert

analysis, supports readiness and reengineering efforts, manages the largest automated personnel data repositories in

the world, prepares tomorrow's leaders through robust developmental programs, supports recruiting and retaining

the best and brightest, and delivers both benefits and critical services to warfighters and their families.

http://www.dhra.mil/website/index.shtml

Office of Economic Adjustment
The Office of Economic Adjustment (OEA) assists communities that are adversely affected by base closures,

expansions, or realignments and Defense contract or program cancellations. OEA provides technical and financial

assistance to those communities and coordinates other Federal agencies' involvement through the Defense Economic

Adjustment Program.

http://www.oea.gov

Test Resource Management
The Test Resource Management Center (TRMC) is a DOD Field Activity under the authority, direction, and control of

the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and Logistics. The Center develops policy, plans for, and

assesses the adequacy of the major range and test facility base to provide adequate testing in support of

development, acquisition, fielding, and sustainment of defense systems. TRMC develops and maintains the test and

evaluation resources strategic plan, reviews the proposed DOD test and evaluation budgets, and certifies the

adequacy of the proposed budgets and whether they provide balanced support of the strategic plan. TRMC manages

the Central Test and Evaluation Investment Program, the Test and Evaluation Science and Technology Program, and

the Joint Mission Environment Test Capability Program.

http://www.acq.osd.mil/dte-trmc

Washington Headquarters Services
Washington Headquarters Services (WHS), established as a DOD Field Activity on October 1, 1977, is under the

authority and control of the Deputy Chief Management Officer. WHS provides a range of administrative and

operational services to the Office of the Secretary of Defense, specified DOD components, the general public, and for

Federal Government activities. WHS services include contracting and procurement; data systems and information

technology support; Defense facilities, directives and records, and financial management; enterprise information

technology infrastructure, human resource, legal, library, and personnel security services; evaluation and planning

functions; Pentagon renovation and construction; and support for advisory boards and commissions.

http://www.whs.mil



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Budget Data
The Defense Technical Information Center (DTIC) sponsors a Web site that features congressional budget data

pertaining to the DOD. The DTIC posts data from each budget report once it is filed and made available on the Library

of Congress' Web site. The data are accessible in Portable Document Format (PDF) and Excel spreadsheet format.

http://www.dtic.mil/congressional_budget

Business Opportunities
Information on and resources for acquisition, business, contracting, and subcontracting opportunities are available on

the DOD's Web site.

http://www.defense.gov/Resources/Contract-Resources
The Office of Small Business Programs supports the participation of small businesses in the acquisition of goods and

services for the DOD.

http://www.acq.osd.mil/osbp

Career Opportunities
The DOD employs over 718,000 civilian personnel. For additional information on applying for DOD job opportunities,

contact Washington Headquarters Services–Human Resources Servicing Team. Phone, 614-692-0252.

https://dod.usajobs.gov
Dictionary
The Defense Technical Information Center's Web site features the "DOD Dictionary of Military and Associated Terms,"

which is commonly called the "DOD Dictionary." The dictionary facilitates communication and mutual understanding

within the DOD, with external Federal agencies, and between the United States and its international partners by

standardizing military and associated terminology.

http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/dod_dictionary

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Approved by President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1966, the statute generally provides that any person has the right to

request access to Federal agency information or records. Upon receiving a written request, the Federal agency holding

the desired document or record must disclose it. Some records, however, are shielded from disclosure by one of the

FOIA's nine exemptions or three exclusions.

http://open.defense.gov/Transparency/FOIA.aspx

History
A short history of the Pentagon, from construction to completion, is available on the Pentagon Tours Office's Web site.

https://pentagontours.osd.mil/Tours/construction.jsp

Joint Chiefs of Staff
The Joint Chiefs of Staff maintain a Web site.

http://www.jcs.mil

News
The DOD posts news releases on its Web site.

http://www.defense.gov/News/News-Releases

Plain Language
The DOD aims to write documents in readable English by adhering to Federal plain language guidelines.

http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/plainlanguage.html

Popular Resources
A page of popular DOD resources is available on the DOD Web site.

http://www.defense.gov/Resources

Social Media
The DOD tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/DeptofDefense
The DOD has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/DeptofDefense
The DOD posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/DODvClips/featured
Site Index
The Web site index allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

http://www.defense.gov/Site-Index

Speakers
Civilian and military officials from the DOD are available to speak to public and private sector groups interested in

defense-related topics, including the global war on terrorism. Requests for speakers should be addressed to the

Director for Community Relations and Public Liaison, 1400 Defense Pentagon, Room 2C546, Washington, DC 20310-

1400.


Today in the DOD
The "Today in the Department of Defense" Web page features contracts, news and casualty releases, photos, press

advisories, speeches, and transcripts on a daily basis.

http://www.defense.gov/Today-in-DoD

Tours
For information on guided tours of the Pentagon, contact the Pentagon Tours Office. Phone, 703-697-1776.

http://pentagontours.osd.mil | Email: osd.pentagon.pa.mbx.pentagon-tours-schedule@mail.mil

Web Sites
A list of DOD Web site links is available online.

http://www.defense.gov/Military-Services/DoD-Websites
An A–Z list of DOD Web site links is available online.

http://www.defense.gov/Military-Services/A-Z-List
http://www.defense.gov/Contact
For further information concerning the Department of Defense, contact the Director, Directorate for Public Inquiry and

Analysis, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs, 1400 Defense Pentagon, Washington, DC

20301-1400. Phone, 703- 697-9312.



Department of the Air Force
1690 Air Force Pentagon, Washington, DC 20330-1670


703-697-6061

http://www.af.mil




AIR FORCE SECRETARIAT


  SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE                                 Dr. Heather A. Wilson
 Under Secretary of the Air Force                          Lisa S. Disbrow




 Administrative Assistant                                  Patricia J. Zarodkiewicz


 Auditor General                                           Daniel F. McMillin


 General Counsel                                           Joseph M. McDade, Jr.


 Information Dominance and Chief Information Officer
                                                     Lt. Gen. William J. Bender
 (A6)


 Inspector General                                         Lt. Gen. Anthony J. Rock


 Legislative Liaison                                       Maj. Gen. Steven L. Basham




 Assistant Secretary, Acquisition                          Darlene Costello


 Assistant Secretary,       Financial   Management   and
                                                           Doug Bennett
 Comptroller


 Assistant Secretary, Installations, Environment, and
                                                      Richard K. Hartley
 Energy


 Assistant Secretary, Manpower and Reserve Affairs         Daniel R. Sitterly




 Deputy Under Secretary for Management                     Marilyn M. Thomas


 Deputy Under Secretary, International Affairs             Heidi H. Grant


 Deputy Under Secretary, Space                             Winston Beauchamp


 Director, Air Force Small Business Programs               Mark S. Teskey


 Director, Public Affairs                                  Brig. Gen. Edward W. Thomas, Jr.




AIR STAFF


 Chief of Staff                                            Gen. David L. Goldfein


 Vice Chief of Staff                                       Gen. Stephen W. Wilson
Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force                 CMSAF Kaleth O. Wright




Assistant Vice Chief of Staff                          Lt. Gen. Stayce D. Harris


Judge Advocate General                                 Lt. Gen. Christopher F. Burne


Surgeon General                                        Lt. Gen. Mark A. Ediger




Chief of Air Force Reserve                             Lt. Gen. Maryanne Miller


Chief of Chaplains                                     Maj. Gen. Dondi Constin


Chief of Safety                                        Maj. Gen. Andrew Mueller


Chief of Staff, Strategic Deterrence and Nuclear
                                                 Lt. Gen. Jack Weinstein
Integration (A10)


Chief Scientist                                        Greg L. Zacharias




Deputy Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Surveillance and
                                                      Lt. Gen. VeraLinn Jamieson
Reconnaissance (A2)


Deputy Chief of Staff, Logistics, Engineering and Force
                                                        Lt. Gen. John B. Cooper
Protection (A4)


Deputy Chief of Staff, Manpower, Personnel and
                                               Lt. Gen. Gina Grosso
Services (A1)


Deputy Chief of Staff, Operations, Plans and
                                             Lt. Gen. Mark C. Nowland
Requirements (A3)


Deputy Chief of Staff, Strategic Plans and Programs
                                                    Lt. Gen. Jerry D. Harris, Jr.
(A5/8)




Director, Air Force Sexual Assault Prevention and
                                                       Maj. Gen. James C. Johnson
Response


Director, Air National Guard                           Lt. Gen. L. Scott Rice


Director, History and Museums Policies and Programs    Walter A. Grudzinskas


Director, Studies and Analyses, Assessments (A9)       Kevin E. Williams
  Director, Test and Evaluation                              Devin Cate




MAJOR COMMANDS


  Air Combat Command                                         Gen. James M. Holmes


  Air Education and Training Command                         Lt. Gen. Darryl L. Roberson


  Air Force Global Strike Command                            Gen. Robin Rand


  Air Force Materiel Command                                 Gen. Ellen M. Pawlikowski


  Air Force Reserve Command                                  Lt. Gen. Maryanne Miller


  Air Force Space Command                                    Gen. John W. Raymond


  Air Force Special Operations Command                       Lt. Gen. Marshall B. Webb


  Air Mobility Command                                       Gen. Carlton D. Everhart II


  Pacific Air Forces                                         Gen. Terrence J. O'Shaughnessy


  U.S. Air Forces in Europe                                  Gen. Tod D. Wolters

The Department of the Air Force defends the United States by providing air, space, and cyberspace capabilities.

Organizational Chart
The Department of the Air Force (USAF) was established as part of the National Military Establishment by the

National Security Act of 1947 (61 Stat. 502) and came into being on September 18, 1947. The National Security

Act Amendments of 1949 redesignated the National Military Establishment as the Department of Defense,

established it as an executive department, and made the Department of the Air Force a military department

within the Department of Defense (63 Stat. 578). The Department of the Air Force is separately organized under

the Secretary of the Air Force. It operates under the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary of Defense

(10 U.S.C. 8010). The Department comprises the Office of the Secretary of the Air Force, the Air Staff, and field

organizations.


Secretary
The Secretary and Secretariat Staff oversee matters of organization, training, logistical support, maintenance,

welfare of personnel, administrative, recruiting, research and development, and other activities that the President

or Secretary of Defense prescribes.

http://www.af.mil/AboutUs/AirForceSeniorLeaders/SECAF.aspx

Air Staff
The Air Staff assists the Secretary, the Under Secretary, the Assistant Secretaries, and the Chief of Staff in carrying
out their responsibilities.


Field Organizations
The major commands, field operating agencies, and direct reporting units constitute the field organizations of

the Air Force. They are organized primarily on a functional basis in the United States and on a geographic basis

overseas. These commands are responsible for accomplishing certain phases of the Air Force's worldwide

activities. They also organize, administer, equip, and train subordinate elements to accomplish assigned

missions.




MAJOR COMMANDS: CONTINENTAL U.S. COMMANDS

Air Combat Command
The Air Combat Command operates CONUS-based, combat-coded fighter and attack aircraft. It organizes,

trains, equips, and maintains combat-ready forces for rapid deployment and employment while ensuring

strategic air defense forces are ready to meet the challenges of peacetime air sovereignty and wartime air

defense.

http://www.acc.af.mil

Air Education and Training Command
The Air Education and Training Command recruits, assesses, commissions, educates, and trains Air Force enlisted

and officer personnel. It provides basic military training, initial and advanced technical training, flying training,

and professional military and post-secondary education. The Command also conducts Air Force security

assistance, joint, medical service, and readiness training.

http://www.aetc.af.mil

Air Force Global Strike Command
The Air Force Global Strike Command is responsible for the Nation's three intercontinental ballistic missile wings;

the Air Force's bomber force, including the B–1, B–2, and B–52 wings; the Long Range Strike Bomber program;

and operational and maintenance support to organizations within the nuclear enterprise.

http://www.afgsc.af.mil

Air Force Materiel Command
The Air Force Materiel Command delivers expeditionary capabilities through research, development, test,

evaluation, acquisition, modernization, and sustainment of aerospace weapon systems throughout their life

cycles. Those weapon systems include Air Force fighter, bomber, cargo, and attack fleets and armament. They

also include net-centric command and control assets; intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance assets; and

combat support information systems. The command oversees basic research and development that support air,

space, and cyberspace capabilities. The command relies on an integrated, efficient life cycle management

approach to ensure the best possible support to warfighters.

http://www.afmc.af.mil
Air Force Reserve Command
The Air Force Reserve Command provides the Air Force with approximately 14 percent of the total force and

approximately 4 percent of the manpower budget. Reservists support air, space, and cyberspace superiority;

command and control; global integrated intelligence surveillance reconnaissance; global precision attack;

nuclear deterrence operations; special operations; rapid global mobility; and personnel recovery. They also

perform aircraft flight testing, space operations, and aerial port operations, as well as communications, civil

engineer, military training, mobility support, security forces, services, and transportation missions.

http://www.afrc.af.mil

Air Force Space Command
The Air Force Space Command provides space and cyberspace capabilities such as missile warning, space

control, spacelift, satellite operations, and designated cyberspace activities.

http://www.afspc.af.mil

Air Force Special Operations Command
The Air Force Special Operations Command provides the air component of U.S. Special Operations Command.

The command deploys specialized air power and delivers special operations combat power wherever and

whenever needed. It provides agile combat support, combat search and rescue, information warfare, precision

aerospace fires, psychological operations, and specialized aerospace mobility and refueling to unified

commands.

http://www.afsoc.af.mil

Air Mobility Command
The Air Mobility Command provides airlift, air refueling, special air missions, and aeromedical evacuation for U.S.

forces. It also airlifts forces to theater commands to support wartime tasking.

http://www.amc.af.mil



MAJOR COMMANDS: OVERSEAS COMMANDS

Pacific Air Forces
The Pacific Air Forces deliver rapid and precise air, space, and cyberspace capabilities to protect the United

States, its territories, and its allies and partners; provide integrated air and missile warning and defense; promote

interoperability throughout the Pacific area of responsibility; maintain strategic access and freedom of

movement across all domains; and posture to respond across the full spectrum of military contingencies to

restore regional security.

http://www.pacaf.af.mil

U.S. Air Forces in Europe
The U.S. Air Forces in Europe (USAFE) execute the Air Force, European Command, and Africa Command

missions with forward-based air power and infrastructure to conduct and enable theater and global operations.
The USAFE direct air operations in a theater that spans three continents, covers more than 19 million square

miles, contains 104 independent states, produces more than a quarter of the world's gross domestic product,

and comprises more than a quarter of Earth's population.

http://www.usafe.af.mil



FIELD OPERATING AGENCIES

Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation
The Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation provides seamless integration of cross-functional live, virtual,

and constructive operational training environments that allow war fighters to maximize performance and

optimize decisionmaking. The agency works with combatant commands, major commands, the Air Force

Reserve Command, the Air National Guard, the Air Force headquarters, direct reporting units, and field

operating agencies to provide the necessary development and implementation standards for common access

and interoperability within the live, virtual, and constructive domains for efficient and secure global operations.

http://www.afams.af.mil

Air Force Audit Agency
The Air Force Audit Agency provides all levels of Air Force management with independent, objective, and quality

audit services by reviewing and promoting operational economy, effectiveness, and efficiency; evaluating

programs and activities to achieve intended results; and assessing and improving financial reporting.

http://www.afaa.af.mil

Air Force Cost Analysis Agency
The Air Force Cost Analysis Agency performs nonadvocate cost analyses for major space, aircraft, and

information system programs. The agency supports the departmentwide cost analysis program by developing

and maintaining cost-estimating tools, techniques, and infrastructure. It provides guidance, analytical support,

quantitative risk analyses, and special studies to improve long-range planning, force structure, analysis of

alternatives, and lifecycle cost analyses.


Air Force Flight Standards Agency
The Air Force Flight Standards Agency performs worldwide inspection of airfields, navigation systems, and

instrument approaches. It provides flight standards to develop Air Force instrument requirements and certifies

procedures and directives for cockpit display and navigation systems. It also provides air traffic control and airlift

procedures and evaluates air traffic control systems and airspace management procedures.


Air Force Historical Research Agency
The Air Force Historical Research Agency serves as a repository for Air Force historical records and maintains

research facilities for scholars and the general public.

http://www.afhra.af.mil/index.asp

Air Force Inspection Agency
The Air Force Inspection Agency provides independent inspection, evaluation, oversight, training and analysis to

improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the Air Force.

http://www.af.mil/AboutUs/FactSheets/Display/tabid/224/Article/104564/air-force-inspection-agency.aspx

Air Force Legal Operations Agency
The Air Force Legal Operations Agency includes all senior defense, senior trial, appellate defense, and

Government counsel in the Air Force, as well as all Air Force civil litigators who defend the Air Force against civil

lawsuits that claim damages and seek other remedies in contracts, environmental, labor, and tort litigation.


Air Force Manpower Analysis Agency
The Air Force Manpower Analysis Agency provides analysis and develops tools for helping Air Force and

Department of Defense senior leaders make decisions affecting total force manpower requirements. The agency

supports the Under Secretary of the Air Force for Management's efforts to improve processes and carries out

departmentwide transformation initiatives. It also oversees human capital planning and training to develop and

sustain manpower-specific capabilities at adequate levels.

http://www.af.mil/AboutUs/FactSheets/Display/tabid/224/Article/104598/air-force-manpower-agency.aspx

Air Force Medical Operations Agency
The Air Force Medical Operations Agency assists the Air Force Surgeon General in developing plans, programs,

and policies for aerospace medicine, bioenvironmental engineering, clinical investigations, family advocacy,

health promotion, military public health, quality assurance, radioactive material management, and the medical

service.

http://www.airforcemedicine.af.mil/afmoa

Air Force Medical Support Agency
The Air Force Medical Support Agency provides consultative support and policy development for the Air Force

Surgeon General in medical force management. It also supports ground and air expeditionary medical

capabilities used in global, homeland security, and force health protection, as well as all aspects of medical and

dental services, aerospace medicine operations, and medical support functions.


Air Force Mortuary Affairs Operations
The Air Force Mortuary Affairs Operations, a field operating agency of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Manpower,

Personnel and Services, works to support the entire Department of Defense and other Federal entities ensuring

dignity, honor and respect to the fallen, and care, service, and support to their families.

http://www.mortuary.af.mil

Air Force Office of Special Investigations
The Air Force Office of Special Investigations identifies, exploits, and neutralizes criminal, terrorist, and

intelligence threats to the U.S. Air Force, Department of Defense, and U.S. Government. Its primary

responsibilities are criminal investigations and counterintelligence services. It also protects critical technologies

and information, detects and mitigates threats, provides global specialized services, conducts major criminal
investigations, and offensively engages foreign adversaries and threats.

http://www.osi.af.mil

Air Force Operations Group
The Air Force Operations Group collects, processes, analyzes, and communicates information, enabling

situational awareness of USAF operations worldwide. This awareness facilitates timely, responsive, and effective

decisionmaking by senior USAF leaders and combatant commanders.


Air Force Personnel Center
The Air Force Personnel Center ensures that commanders around the world have enough skilled Air Force

personnel to carry out the mission. The center also runs programs affecting the entire life cycle of military and

civilian Air Force personnel from accession through retirement.

http://www.af.mil/AboutUs/FactSheets/Display/tabid/224/Article/104554/air-force-personnel-center.aspx

Air Force Program Executive Offices
The Air Force Program Executive Offices (PEOs) oversee the execution of a program throughout its entire

lifecycle. While the PEOs are not part of USAF headquarters, they report on acquisition and program-specific

issues directly to the Air Force Service Acquisition Executive and the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for

Acquisition. Air Force PEOs are currently responsible for diverse programs in a range of areas: aircraft, command

and control and combat support systems, Joint Strike Fighter, and weapons.

http://ww3.safaq.hq.af.mil/organizations/index.asp

Air Force Public Affairs Agency
The Air Force Public Affairs Agency manages the Air Force media center. The center collects, archives, and

distributes Air Force imagery; manages licensing and branding of Air Force trademarks; provides policy guidance

and oversight for the Air Force's Web site and social media programs; operates the Air Force's official social

media program; composes original musical arrangements for Air Force regional bands; and develops training

curricula and requirements for the Air Force's nearly 6,000 public affairs practitioners.

http://www.publicaffairs.af.mil

Air Force Review Boards Agency
The Air Force Review Boards Agency manages various military and civilian appellate processes for the Secretary

of the Air Force.

http://www.af.mil/AboutUs/FactSheets/Display/tabid/224/Article/104511/air-force-review-boards-agency.aspx

Air Force Safety Center
The Air Force Safety Center promotes safety to reduce the number and severity of mishaps. It also supports

combat readiness by developing, implementing, executing, and evaluating Air Force aviation, ground, weapons,

nuclear surety, space, and system programs.

http://www.safety.af.mil

Air National Guard Readiness Center
The Air National Guard Readiness Center performs the operational and technical tasks associated with manning,

equipping, and training Air National Guard units to meet required readiness levels.

http://www.angrc.ang.af.mil

National Air and Space Intelligence Center
The National Air and Space Intelligence Center (NASIC) assesses foreign air and space threats. It creates

integrated, predictive intelligence in the domains of air, space, and cyberspace to support military operations,

force modernization, and policymaking. NASIC analyzes data on foreign aerospace forces and weapons systems

to determine performance characteristics, capabilities, vulnerabilities, and intentions. These assessments are used

to shape national security and defense policies. NASIC personnel also play a role in weapons treaty negotiations

and verification.

http://www.nasic.af.mil



DIRECT REPORTING UNITS

Air Force District of Washington
The Air Force District of Washington supports Headquarters Air Force and other Air Force units in the National

Capital Region.

http://www.afdw.af.mil

Air Force Operational Test and Evaluation Center
The Air Force Operational Test and Evaluation Center plans and conducts test and evaluation procedures to

determine operational effectiveness and suitability of new or modified USAF systems and their capacity to meet

mission needs.

http://www.afotec.af.mil

U.S. Air Force Academy
The U.S. Air Force Academy provides academic and military instruction and experience to prepare future USAF

career officers. The Academy offers Bachelor of Science degrees in 31 academic majors, and upon completion,

graduates receive commissions as second lieutenants.

http://www.usafa.af.mil



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
Members of the Air Force civilian service work side by side with active duty airmen. They are a diverse group of

professionals: contract specialists, engineers, human resources specialists, intelligence experts, mechanics,

scientists, teachers, and more.

https://afciviliancareers.com/content/home-air-force-civilian-service
Factsheets
Factsheets contain current information and statistics on Air Force careers, organizations, inventory, and

equipment—including aircraft and weapons.

http://www.af.mil/AboutUs/FactSheets.aspx | Email: DMAPublicAffairs@mail.mil

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The Freedom of Information and Privacy Act Office manages the policy and procedural guidance for the

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA), Privacy Act (PA) and Quality of Information (QIP) programs in accordance

with applicable laws.

http://www.foia.af.mil/Welcome.aspx
Links to FOIA requester service centers are available online. The service centers are grouped, by base and by

command, in two lists.

http://www.foia.af.mil/Offices

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Air Force provides answers to FAQs on its web-site.

http://www.af.mil/Questions.aspx

History
For over a century, the Air Force has relied on the bravery and skill of American airmen to protect the United

States in the air, space, and cyberspace. An overview of that history is available online.

https://www.airforce.com/mission/history

Inspector General (IG)
The IG receives and investigates complaints of abuse, fraud, and waste involving Air Force personnel or

programs.

http://www.af.mil/InspectorGeneralComplaints.aspx | Email: usaf.ighotline@mail.mil

Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR)
The Air Force's web-site features a section dedicated to ISR activities and news.

http://www.af.mil/ISR.aspx

Joining the Air Force
To learn about its mission, how to join, and about educational, training, and career opportunities that enlistment

offers, visit the Air Force's recruitment Web site.

https://www.airforce.com/how-to-join

Medal of Honor
Members of the Air Force and its predecessor organizations have earned Medals of Honor. The medal is

awarded for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of life above and beyond the call of duty.

http://www.af.mil/MedalofHonor.aspx
News
The Air Force posts announcements, art, commentaries, news items, and photos on its Web site. Air Force TV

and radio news are also accessible online.

http://www.af.mil/News.aspx | Email: DMAPublicAffairs@mail.mil
"Air Force Magazine" is posted online. Beginning in January 2013, full issues are available. Beginning in

November 2015, HTML5 versions are available .

http://www.airforcemag.com/MagazineArchive/Pages/default.aspx

Reading List
The Air Force Chief of Staff's annual reading list (2016) is available on the Department's Web site. An archives of

the reading list, starting with the year 2007, is also available online.

http://static.dma.mil/usaf/csafreadinglist/01_books.html

Sexual Assault
The "Sexual Assault Prevention and Response" (SAPR) Web page has information, policies, and reports on sexual

assault, as well as links leading to additional resources within the Department of Defense (DOD) community and

to external resources.

http://www.af.mil/SAPR.aspx
The "SAPR" Web page also provides access to the Safe Helpline—an anonymous, confidential, and free crisis

support service for DOD community members who have been affected by sexual assault. Phone, 877-995-5247.

https://www.safehelpline.org/about-dod-safe-helpline

Social Media
The Air Force has a blog and maintains a social media presence on Facebook, Flickr, Instagram, Twitter, and

YouTube. The Web site provides shortcuts to the different platforms as well as social media resources.

http://www.af.mil/AFSites/SocialMediaSites.aspx

Strategic Documents
The site contains various “CSAF Focus Area", and other strategic documents in Portable Document Format (PDF).

http://www.af.mil/Airpower4America.aspx

Suicide Prevention
The "Suicide Prevention" Web page promotes resources like the ACE (Ask, Care, and Escort) Card and provides

access, by phone or confidential online chat, to the Military Crisis Line. Phone, 800-273-8255.

http://www.af.mil/SuicidePrevention.aspx

Web sites
A directory of all registered Air Force Web sites is available online.

http://www.af.mil/ContactUs.aspx
For further information concerning the Department of the Air Force, contact the Office of the Director of Public

Affairs, Department of the Air Force, 1690 Air Force Pentagon, Washington, DC 20330-1670. Phone, 703-697-
6061.

http://www.af.mil/ContactUs.aspx
For further information concerning the Department of the Air Force, contact the Office of the Director of Public

Affairs, Department of the Air Force, 1690 Air Force Pentagon, Washington, DC 20330-1670. Phone, 703-697-

6061.



Department of the Army
The Pentagon, Washington, DC 20310


703-695-6518

http://www.army.mil




EXECUTIVE OFFICE


 SECRETARY OF THE ARMY                                      Daniel Driscoll


 Under Secretary of the Army                                Karl F. Schneider, Acting




 Administrative Assistant to the Secretary of the Army      Gerald B. O'Keefe


 Auditor General                                            Anne L. Richards


 Deputy Under Secretary of the Army                         Thomas E. Hawley


 Director, Small Business Programs                          Tommy L. Marks


 Executive Director, Army National Military Cemeteries      Patrick K. Hallinan


 General Counsel                                            (vacancy)


 Inspector General                                          Lt. Gen. David E. Quantock




 Assistant Secretary of the Army, Acquisition, Logistics
                                                         Steffanie Easter
 and Technology


 Assistant Secretary of the Army, Civil Works               Jo-Ellen Darcy


 Assistant Secretary of the           Army,     Financial
                                                            Robert M. Speer
 Management / Comptroller


 Assistant Secretary of the Army, Installations, Energy
                                                     Katherine G. Hammack
 and Environment


 Assistant Secretary of the Army, Manpower and
                                                     Debra S. Wada
 Reserve Affairs




 Chief Information Officer (G–6)                     Maj. Gen. Bruce T. Crawford


 Chief of Legislative Liaison                        Maj. Gen. Laura E. Richardson


 Chief of Public Affairs                             Brig. Gen. Omar J. Jones IV




OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF STAFF


 Chief of Staff of the Army                          Gen. Mark A. Milley


 Vice Chief of Staff of the Army                     Gen. Daniel B. Allyn




 Director of the Army Staff                          Lt. Gen. Gary H. Cheek


 Vice Director of the Army Staff                     Steven J. Redmann




ARMY STAFF


 Sergeant Major of the Army                          SMA Daniel A. Dailey


 Chief of the National Guard Bureau                  Gen. Joseph Lengyel




 Assistant Chief of Staff, Installation Management   Lt. Gen. Gwen Bingham


 Chief of Army Reserve                               Lt. Gen. Charles D. Luckey


 Chief of Chaplains                                  Maj. Gen. Paul K. Hurley


 Chief of Engineers                                  Lt. Gen. Todd T. Semonite


 Director, Army National Guard                       Lt. Gen. Timothy J. Kadavy


 Judge Advocate General                              Lt. Gen. Flora D. Darpino
Provost Marshal General                           Maj. Gen. Mark S. Inch


Surgeon General                                   Lt. Gen. Nadja Y. West




DEPUTY CHIEFS OF STAFF


Financial Management (G–8)                        Lt. Gen. John M. Murray


Intelligence (G–2)                                Lt. Gen. Robert P. Ashley, Jr.


Logistics (G–4)                                   Lt. Gen. Gustave F. Perna


Operations (G–3/5/7)                              Lt. Gen. Joseph Anderson


Personnel (G–1)                                   Lt. Gen. James C. McConville




COMMANDS


COMMANDING GENERALS


U.S. Army Forces Command                          Gen. Robert B. Abrams


U.S. Army Materiel Command                        Gen. Gustave F. Perna


U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command           Gen. David G. Perkins




ARMY SERVICE COMPONENT COMMANDS


COMMANDING GENERALS


U.S. Army Africa / Southern European Task Force   Maj. Gen. Joseph P. Harrington


U.S. Army Central                                 Lt. Gen. Michael X. Garrett


U.S. Army Europe                                  Lt. Gen. Ben Hodges


U.S. Army North                                   Lt. Gen. Jeffrey S. Buchanan


U.S. Army Pacific                                 Gen. Robert B. Brown


U.S. Army South                                   Maj. Gen. Clarence K.K. Chinn
  U.S. Army Military Surface          Deployment      and
                                                             Maj. Gen. Susan A. Davidson
  Distribution Command


  U.S. Army    Space     and  Missile             Defense
                                                             Lt. Gen. David L. Mann
  Command/Army Strategic Command


  U.S. Army Special Operations Command                       Lt. Gen. Kenneth E. Tovo




DIRECT REPORTING UNITS


  Commandant, U.S. Army War College                          Maj. Gen. William E. Rapp


  Commander, Second Army                                     Lt. Gen. Edward C. Cardon


  Commander, U.S. Army Accessions Support Brigade            Col. Janet R. Holliday


  Director, U.S. Army Acquisition Support Center             Craig A. Spisak


  Executive Director, Arlington National Cemetery            Patrick K. Hallinan


  Superintendent, U.S. Military Academy                      Lt. Gen. Robert L. Caslen, Jr.




  COMMANDING GENERALS


  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers                               Lt. Gen. Todd T. Semonite


  U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Command                   Maj. Gen. Mark S. Inch


  U.S. Army Installation Management Command                  Lt. Gen. Kenneth R. Dahl


  U.S. Army Intelligence and Security Command                Maj. Gen. Christopher S. Ballard


  U.S. Army Medical Command                                  Lt. Gen. Nadja Y. West


  U.S. Army Military District of Washington                  Maj. Gen. Bradley A. Becker


  U.S. Army Reserve Command                                  Lt. Gen. Charles D. Luckey


  U.S. Army Test and Evaluation Command                      Maj. Gen. Daniel L. Karbler

The Department of the Army equips, organizes, and trains active duty and reserve forces to maintain peace and

security and to defend the Nation; administers programs to mitigate erosion and flooding, to develop water

resources, to improve waterway navigation, and to protect the environment; and provides military and natural

disaster relief assistance to Federal, State, and local government agencies.
Organizational Chart
The Continental Congress established the American Continental Army, now called the United States Army, on

June 14, 1775, more than a year before the Declaration of Independence. The Department of War was

established as an executive department at the seat of Government by act approved August 7, 1789 (1 Stat. 49).

The Secretary of War was established as its head. The National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 401) created the

National Military Establishment, and the Department of War was designated the Department of the Army. The

title of its Secretary became Secretary of the Army (5 U.S.C. 171). The National Security Act Amendments of 1949

(63 Stat. 578) provided that the Department of the Army be a military department within the Department of

Defense.




SECRETARY
The Secretary of the Army is the senior official of the Department of the Army. Subject to the direction, authority,

and control of the President as Commander in Chief and of the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Army

is responsible for and has the authority to conduct all affairs of the Department of the Army, including its

organization, administration, operation, efficiency, and such other activities as may be prescribed by the

President or the Secretary of Defense as authorized by law.

https://www.army.mil/leaders/sa

  For further information, call 703-695-2422.




ARMY STAFF
The Army Staff is the Secretary of the Army's military staff. It makes preparations for deploying the Army,

including recruiting, organizing, supplying, equipping, training, mobilizing, and demobilizing it, to support the

Secretary or the Chief of Staff in his or her executive capacity; investigates and reports on the efficiency of the

Army and its preparation for military operations; acts as the agent of the Secretary of the Army and the Chief of

Staff in coordinating the action of all organizations of the Department of the Army; and performs other

nonstatutory duties that the Secretary of the Army may prescribe.




PROGRAM AREAS

Civil Functions
Civil functions of the Department of the Army include the administration of Arlington and the U.S. Soldiers' and

Airmen's Home National Cemeteries and the Civil Works Program—the Nation's principal Federal water

resources development activity involving dams, reservoirs, levees, harbors, waterways, locks, and other

engineering structures.

http://www.army.mil/asacw
History
This area includes advisory and coordination service provided to the Army Secretariat and staff on all historical

matters: the formulation and execution of the Army historical program, the maintenance of the organizational

history of Army units, the preparation and publication of histories that the Army requires, and historical

properties.

http://www.history.army.mil | Email: usarmy.mcnair.cmh.mbx.answers@mail.mil

Installations
This area consists of policies, procedures, and resources for the management of installations to ensure the

availability of efficient and affordable base services and infrastructure in support of military missions. It includes

the identification and validation of resource requirements, the review of facilities requirements and stationing,

and program and budget development and justification. Other activities include support for base operations;

base realignment and closure; competitive sourcing; energy security and sustainability; environmental programs;

housing; military construction; morale, recreation, and welfare; and real property maintenance and repair.

https://www.army.mil/info/organization/unitsandcommands/commandstructure/imcom

Intelligence
This area includes management of Army intelligence with responsibility for policy formulation, planning,

programming, budgeting, evaluation, and oversight of intelligence activities. The Army Staff is responsible for

monitoring relevant foreign intelligence developments and foreign disclosure; imagery, signals, human, open-

source, measurement, and signatures intelligence; counterintelligence; threat models and simulations; and

security countermeasures.

https://www.army.mil/inscom/?from=org

Medical
This area includes management of health services for the Army and as directed for other services, agencies, and

organizations; health standards for Army personnel; health professional education and training; career

management authority over commissioned and warrant officer personnel of the Army Medical Department;

medical research, materiel development, testing, and evaluation; policies concerning health aspects of Army

environmental programs and prevention of disease; and planning, programming, and budgeting for Armywide

health services.

https://www.army.mil/armymedicine/?from=org

Military Operations and Plans
This includes Army forces strategy formation; mid-range, long-range, and regional strategy application; arms

control, negotiation, and disarmament; national security affairs; joint service matters; net assessment; politico-

military affairs; force mobilization, demobilization, and planning; programming structuring, development,

analysis, requirements, and management; operational readiness; overall roles and missions; collective security;

individual and unit training; psychological operations; information operations; unconventional warfare;

counterterrorism; operations security; signal security; special plans; equipment development and approval;

nuclear and chemical matters; civil affairs; military support of civil defense; civil disturbance; domestic actions;
command and control; automation and communications programs and activities; management of the program

for law enforcement, correction, and crime prevention for military members of the Army; special operations

forces; foreign language and distance learning; and physical security.


Reserve Components
This area includes management of individual and unit readiness and mobilization for Reserve Components,

which consist of the Army National Guard and U.S. Army Reserve.

https://www.army.mil/reserve/?from=org

Religious
This area includes departmentwide management of religious and moral leadership and chaplain support

activities; religious ministrations, religious education, pastoral care, and counseling for Army military personnel;

liaison with ecclesiastical agencies; chapel construction requirements and design approval; and career

management of clergymen serving in the Chaplains Corps.

http://www.army.mil/chaplaincorps



ARMY COMMANDS

U.S. Army Forces Command
Headquartered at Fort Bragg, NC, U.S. Army Forces Command (FORSCOM) prepares conventional forces to

provide a sustained flow of trained and ready land power to combatant commanders in defense of the Nation at

home and abroad.

https://www.army.mil/info/organization/unitsandcommands/commandstructure/forscom/?from=org

  For further information, contact the FORSCOM Public Affairs Office. Phone, 910-570-7200.



U.S. Army Materiel Command
U.S. Army Materiel Command (AMC) is the Army's premier provider of materiel readiness—technology,

acquisition support, materiel development, logistics power projection, and sustainment—to the total force across

the spectrum of joint military operations. Headquartered at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, AMC's missions include

the development of weapon systems, advanced research on future technologies, and maintenance and

distribution of spare parts and equipment. AMC works closely with program executive offices, industry,

academia, and other Military Services and Government agencies to develop, test, and acquire equipment that

soldiers and units need to accomplish their missions.

https://www.army.mil/info/organization/unitsandcommands/commandstructure/amc/?from=org

  For further information, contact the AMC Public Affairs Office. Phone, 256-450-7978.



U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command
Headquartered in Fort Eustis, VA, U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) develops, educates,

and trains soldiers, civilians, and leaders; supports unit training; and designs, builds, and integrates a versatile mix

of capabilities, formations, and equipment to strengthen the U.S. Army as a force of decisive action.

https://www.army.mil/tradoc/?from=org

  For further information, contact the TRADOC Public Affairs Office. Phone, 757-501-5876.




ARMY SERVICE COMPONENT COMMANDS

U.S. Army Africa / Southern European Task Force
U.S. Army Africa (USARAF) / Southern European Task Force (SETAF) is the Army service component command

for U.S. Africa Command. It supports U.S. Africa Command operations, employs Army forces as partners, builds

sustainable capacity, and supports the joint force to disrupt transnational threats and promote regional security

in Africa.

http://www.usaraf.army.mil

  For further information, contact the USARAF / SETAF Public Affairs Office. Phone, 011-39-0444-71-
  8341 or 8342.



U.S. Army Central
U.S. Army Central (ARCENT) shapes the U.S. Central Command area of responsibility in 20 countries through

forward land power presence and security cooperation engagements that ensure access, build partner capacity,

and develop relationships. ARCENT also provides flexible options and strategic depth to the U.S. combatant

commander and sets the conditions for improved regional security and stability.

http://www.arcent.army.mil | Email: usarmy.shaw.usarcent.mbx.public-affairs@mail.mil

  For further information, contact the USARCENT Public Affairs Office. Phone, 803-885-8266.



U.S. Army Europe
U.S. Army Europe (USAREUR) provides the principal land component for U.S. European Command throughout a

51-country area. As the U.S. Army’s largest forward-deployed expeditionary force, USAREUR supports NATO and

U.S. bilateral, multinational, and unilateral objectives. It supports U.S. Army forces in the European Command

area; receives and assists in the reception, staging, and onward movement and integration of U.S. forces;

establishes, operates, and expands operational lines of communication; ensures regional security, access, and

stability through presence and security cooperation; and supports U.S. combatant commanders and joint and

combined commanders.

http://www.eur.army.mil

  For further information, contact the USAREUR Public Affairs Office. Phone, 011-49-611-143-537-0005
  or 0006.



U.S. Army North
U.S. Army North (USARNORTH) supports U.S. Northern Command, the unified command responsible for

defending the U.S. homeland and coordinating defense support of civil authorities. USARNORTH helps maintain

readiness to support homeland defense, civil support operations, and theater security cooperation activities.

http://www.arnorth.army.mil | Email: usarmy.jbsa.arnorth.list.pao-owner@mail.mil

  For further information, contact the USARNORTH Public Affairs Office. Phone, 210-221-0015.



U.S. Army South
U.S. Army South (ARSOUTH) is the Army service component command of U.S. Southern Command. ARSOUTH

conducts security cooperation and responds to contingencies as part of a whole-of-government approach in

conjunction with partner national armies in the U.S. Southern Command area of responsibility, which

encompasses 31 countries and 15 areas of special sovereignty in Central and South America and the Caribbean.

These activities counter transnational threats and strengthen regional security in defense of the homeland.

ARSOUTH maintains a deployable headquarters at Fort Sam Houston, Texas, where it conducts strategic and

operational planning.

http://www.arsouth.army.mil | Email: usarmy.jbsa.arsouth.mbx.pao@mail.mil

  For further information, contact the ARSOUTH Public Affairs Office. Phone, 210-295-6739.



U.S. Army Pacific
U.S. Army Pacific (USARPAC) prepares the force for unified land operations, responds to threats, sustains and

protects the force, and builds military relationships that develop partner defense capacity to contribute to the

stability and security of the U.S. Pacific Command area of responsibility. USARPAC commands soldiers in an area

spanning from the Northwest Coast and Alaska to the Asia-Pacific region, including Japan. Since September 11,

2001, USARPAC soldiers have played a vital role in homeland defense for Alaska and Hawaii, Guam, and Japan,

as well as in supporting operations with our allies elsewhere in the region.

https://www.army.mil/info/organization/unitsandcommands/commandstructure/usarpac/?from=org

  For further information, contact USARPAC Public Affairs. Phone, 808-438-9761.



U.S. Army Military Surface Deployment and Distribution Command
U.S. Army Military Surface Deployment and Distribution Command (SDDC) delivers world-class, origin-to-

destination distribution. It is the Army service component command of the U.S. Transportation Command and a

subordinate command to the Army Materiel Command. This relationship links the Transportation Command's

joint deployment and distribution enterprise with the Army Materiel Command's materiel enterprise. The SDDC

also partners with the commercial transportation industry as the coordinating link between Department of
Defense surface transportation requirements and the capability industry provides.

http://www.sddc.army.mil

 For further information, contact the SDDC Public Affairs Office. Phone, 618-220-6284.



U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense Command / Army Strategic Command
U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense Command (SMDC / ARSTRAT) conducts space and missile defense

operations and provides planning, integration, control, and coordination of Army forces and capabilities in

support of U.S. Strategic Command missions. SMDC / ARSTRAT also supports space, high-altitude, and global

missile defense modernization efforts; serves as the Army operational integrator for global missile defense; and

conducts mission-related research and development to support the Army's statutory responsibilities.

http://www.army.mil/info/organization/unitsandcommands/commandstructure/smdc

 For further information, contact the SMDC Public Affairs Office. Phone, 256-955-3887.



U.S. Army Special Operations Command
U.S. Army Special Operations Command (USASOC) administers, deploys, educates, equips, funds, mans,

mobilizes, organizes, sustains, and trains Army special operations forces to carry out missions worldwide, as

directed. These special and diverse military operations support regional combatant commanders, American

ambassadors, and other agencies.

https://www.army.mil/usasoc/?from=orghttp://www.soc.mil | Email: pao@soc.mil

 For further information, contact the USASOC Public Affairs Office. Phone, 910-432-6005.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
For information on contract procurement policies and procedures, contact the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the

Army, Procurement. Phone, 703-695-2488.

http://www.micc.army.mil/contracting-offices.asp
Assistance for small businesses and minority educational institutions to increase participation in the Army

contracting program is available through the Office of Small Business Programs. Phone, 703-697-2868. Fax, 703-

693-3898.

http://www.micc.army.mil/small-business.asp

Cemeteries
Arlington National Cemetery is one of the two national military cemeteries that the Army maintains. This

cemetery is the final resting place for more than 400,000 active duty servicemembers, veterans, and their
families. For more information, visit its Web site or contact the cemetery. Phone, 877-907-8585.

http://www.arlingtoncemetery.mil
The U.S. Soldiers’ and Airmen’s Home National Cemetery is one of the two national military cemeteries that the

Army maintains. This cemetery is the final resting place for more than 14,000 veterans, including those that

fought in the Civil War. For more information, visit its Web site or contact the Superintendent. Phone, 877-907-

8585.

http://www.nps.gov/nr/travel/national_cemeteries/district_of_columbia/us_soldiers_and_airmens_home_national_
cemetery.html

Environment
Information is available from the U.S. Army Environmental Command.

https://aec.army.mil
Information is also available from the Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army for Environment,

Safety and Occupational Health.

http://www.asaie.army.mil/Public/ESOH
The Army Environmental Policy Institute posts publications on its Web site. "Army Water Security Strategy" (DEC

2011), the results of the first comprehensive study of Army water security management, is available in Portable

Document Format (PDF). "Quantifying the Army Supply Chain Water Bootprint" (DEC 2011), an initial step to

quantify the amount of water used by suppliers to produce the goods and services that the Army procures

through the supply chain, is also available in PDF.

http://www.aepi.army.mil

Employment
More than 330,000 Army civilians work in a wide range of diverse professions. These professionals are not active

duty military, but serve as an integral part of the Army team to support the defense of the Nation.

http://armycivilianservice.com

Films
Address loan requests for Army-produced films to the Visual Information Support Centers of Army installations.

Unclassified Army productions are available for sale from the National Audiovisual Center, National Technical

Information Service, 5301 Shawnee Road, Alexandria, VA 22312. Phone, 800-553-6847.

http://www.ntis.gov/Index.aspx | Email: orders@ntis.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Contact the appropriate information management officer associated with the Army installation or activity

managing the desired information. Information is also available on the Records Management and

Declassification Agency's Web site.

https://www.rmda.army.mil

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Army posts answers to FAQs on its Web site.
https://www.army.mil/faq

Gold Star Survivors
All Gold Star family members have made a sacrifice to the Nation. The Army recognizes that no one gives more

for the Nation than a family member of the fallen. Gold Star Mother’s and Family’s Day is the last Sunday of

September, and Gold Star Spouses Day is April 5.

https://www.army.mil/goldstar

History
"Army History" magazine, the professional bulletin of Army history, is available online in Portable Document

Format (PDF).

http://www.history.army.mil/news/2016/160900a_armyHistoryMag.html
A directory of Army museums is available on the Center of Military History's Web site.

http://www.history.army.mil/museums/directory.html
The Office of Historic Properties and Partnerships raises awareness of and explores and tests creative uses for

the Army's historic buildings. Its staff also promotes partnerships between the Army and nonprofit organizations,

public or private, to preserve, renovate, and restore.

http://www.asaie.army.mil/Public/IH/OHP/ohp.htm

Joining the Army
Information on Army life, assignments, benefits, pay, and enlisting or joining in other capacities is available

online. Phone, 888-550-2769.

http://www.goarmy.com

National Guard
The National Guard responds to domestic emergencies, counterdrug efforts, overseas combat missions,

reconstruction missions, and more. The President or a State governor can call on the Guard in a moment’s

notice. Guard soldiers hold civilian jobs or attend college while maintaining their military training on a part-time

basis, and their primary area of operation is their home state.

https://www.nationalguard.com

Public Affairs / Community Relations
For official Army and community relations information, contact the Office of the Chief of Public Affairs. Phone,

703-695-0616. Automated assistance is available after normal work hours. Phone, 201-590-6575.

http://www.army.mil/info/institution/publicAffairs

Publications
To request a publication, contact either the proponent listed on the title page of the document or the

information management officer of the Army activity that publishes the desired publication. If the requester does

not know which Army activity published the document, contact the Publishing Division, Army Publishing

Directorate. Phone, 703-693-1557.
http://www.army.mil/media/publications
Official texts published by Headquarters, Department of the Army, are available from the National Technical

Information Service. Phone, 888-584-8332.

http://www.ntis.gov

Ranks
Descriptions of officer, warrant officer, and enlisted ranks are available on the Army Web site.

https://www.army.mil/symbols/armyranks.html

Reading List
The U.S. Army Chief of Staff's professional reading list comprises three categories—Armies at war: battles and

campaigns; the Army profession; and strategy and the strategic environment—and is accessible online.

http://www.history.army.mil/html/books/105/105-1-1/index.html

Research
The Research, Development and Engineering Command is the Army's technology leader and largest technology

developer. Its Web site features news on and resources related to long-range research and development plans

for materiel requirements and objectives. Phone, 443-395-4006 (Public Affairs) or 3922 (Media Relations).

http://www.army.mil/info/organization/unitsandcommands/commandstructure/rdecom

Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC)
Available at over 1,100 colleges and universities nationwide, the ROTC offers merit-based scholarships that can

cover the full cost of tuition and open educational opportunities.

http://www.goarmy.com/rotc.html

Site Index
The Army's Web site features an A–Z index.

https://www.army.mil/info/a-z

Specialized Careers
Information on how to become an Army chaplain, the chaplain candidate program, and chaplain corps careers

and jobs is available online and from the U.S. Army Recruiting Command. Phone, 877-437-6572.

http://www.goarmy.com/chaplain
Health care professionals serving as officers in the Army's medical department benefit from a wide range of

opportunities and financial incentives.

http://www.goarmy.com/amedd.html
Members of the Army Judge Advocate General's corps often represent soldiers during courts-martial; however,

they also engage in a wider range of legal activities that include civil litigation, international law, labor law, and

tort claims. For more information, contact the Army Judge Advocate Recruiting Office. Phone, 866-276-9524.

http://www.goarmy.com/jag
The Army relies on talented musicians to assist with military ceremonies, boost morale, and provide
entertainment.

http://www.goarmy.com/band.html

Speakers
The Public Affairs Office nearest the event can help provide local Army speakers. The Office of the Chief of

Public Affairs can assist with scheduling a general officer to address Army matters at public forums. To request a

general officer speaker, writer to the Office of the Chief of Public Affairs, ATTN: Community Relations, Division

(Speaker Request), 1500 Army Pentagon, Washington, DC 20310-1500. A lead time of at least 60–90 days is

required. Phone, 703-614-1107.

http://www.army.mil/comrel/assetrequests

U. S. Military Academy
West Point has been educating, training, and inspiring U.S. Army leaders for more than 200 years. The academy

offers a 47-month leader-development program of academic rigor, military discipline, and physical challenges

with adherence to a code of honor.

http://www.usma.edu | Email: admissions-info@usma.edu
http://www.army.mil/info/institution/publicAffairs
For further information concerning the Department of the Army, contact U.S. Army Public Affairs, Community

Relations Division, Office of the Chief of Public Affairs, 1500 Army Pentagon, Washington, DC 20310-1500.



Department of the Navy
The Pentagon, Washington, DC 20350


703-697-7391

http://www.navy.mil


  SECRETARY OF THE NAVY                                    Sean J. Stackley, Acting


  Under Secretary of the Navy                              Thomas P. Dee, Acting




  ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


  Energy, Installations and Environment                    Steven R. Iselin, Acting


  Financial Management / Comptroller                       Joseph B. Marshall Jr., Acting


  Manpower and Reserve Affairs                             Robert L. Woods, Acting


  Research, Development and Acquisition                    Allison F. Stiller




  Auditor General                                          Donjette L. Gilmore, Acting
Chief Information Officer                           Robert Foster


Chief of Information                                Rear Adm. Dawn Cutler, Acting


Chief of Legislative Affairs                        Rear Adm. Craig S. Faller


Chief of Naval Research                             Rear Adm. David J. Hahn


Director, Naval Criminal Investigative Service      Andrew L. Traver


General Counsel                                     Anne M. Brennan, Acting


Judge Advocate General                              Vice Adm. James W. Crawford III


Naval Inspector General                             Vice Adm. Herman Shelanski


Deputy Under Secretary of the Navy (Management)     Scott W. Lutterloh


Director, Sexual Assault Prevention and Response
                                                 Jill Vines Loftus
Office


Chief of Naval Operations                           Admiral John M. Richardson


Vice Chief of Naval Operations                      Admiral Bill Moran


Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy              Steven S. Giordano




NAVAL OPERATIONS


Chief of Naval Operations                           Adm. John M. Richardson


Vice Chief of Naval Operations                      Adm. William F. Moran




DEPUTY CHIEFS OF NAVAL OPERATIONS


Fleet Readiness and Logistics                       Vice Adm. Dixon Smith


Information Dominance                               Vice Adm. Jan Tighe


Integration of Capabilities and Resources           Vice Adm. William Lescher


Manpower, Personnel, Training Education             Vice Adm. Robert P. Burke
 Operations, Plans and Strategy                      Vice Adm. John C. Aquilino




 DIRECTORS


 Naval Intelligence                                  Vice Adm. Jan Tighe


 Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program                    Adm. James F. Caldwell


 Navy Staff                                          Vice Adm. James G. Foggo


 Test and Evaluation and Technology Requirements /
                                                   Rear Adm. David J. Hahn
 Chief of Naval Research




 Chief of Chaplains of the Navy                      Rear Adm. Margaret G. Kibben


 Chief of Naval Reserve                              Vice Adm. Luke McCollum


 Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy              Steven Giordano


 Oceanographer of the Navy / Navigator of the Navy   Rear Adm. Timothy C. Gallaudet


 Surgeon General of the Navy                         Vice Adm. C. Forrest Faison III




SHORE ESTABLISHMENT


 Chief of Naval Operations                           Adm. John M. Richardson




 COMMANDERS


 Naval Air Systems Command                           Vice Adm. Paul Grosklags


 Naval Education and Training Command                Rear Adm. Michael S. White


 Naval Facilities Engineering Command                Rear Adm. Kate L. Gregory


 Naval Legal Service Command                         Rear Adm. John G. Hannink


 Naval Meteorology and Oceanography                  Rear Adm. Timothy C. Galludet


 Naval Network Warfare Command                       Capt. John W. Chandler
 Naval Sea Systems Command                             Vice Adm. Thomas Moore


 Naval Supply Systems Command                          Rear Adm. Jonathan A. Yuen


 Naval Warfare Development Command                     Rear Adm. Bret C. Batchelder


 Navy Installations Command                            Vice Adm. Dixon Smith


 Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command               Rear Adm. David H. Lewis




 Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery                 Vice Adm. C. Forrest Faison III


 Chief, Naval Personnel                                Vice Adm. Robert P. Burke


 Director, National Maritime Intelligence-Integration
                                                      Rear Adm. Elizabeth L. Train
 Office / Commander, Office of Naval Intelligence


 Director, Strategic Systems Program                   Rear Adm. Terry J. Benedict


 Superintendent, U.S. Naval Academy                    Vice Adm. Walter E. Carter, Jr.




OPERATING FORCES


 COMMANDERS


 U.S. Fleet Forces Command                             Adm. Philip S. Davidson




 Pacific Fleet                                         Adm. Scott H. Swift


 Military Sealift Command                              Rear Adm. Dee L. Mewbourne


 Naval Forces Central Command                          Vice Adm. Kevin M. Donegan


 Naval Forces Europe                                   Adm. Michelle J. Howard


 Naval Reserve Forces Command                          Rear Adm. Thomas W. Luscher


 Naval Special Warfare Command                         Rear Adm. Timothy Szymanski


 Operational Test and Evaluation Force                 Rear Adm. Jeffrey R. Penfield


 [For the Department of the Navy statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations,
 Title 32, Part 700]
The Department of the Navy protects the United States and its interests by the prosecution of war at sea, including

the seizure or defense of advanced naval bases with the assistance of its Marine Corps component; supports the

forces of all military departments of the United States; and safeguards freedom of the seas.

Organizational Chart
The United States Navy was founded on October 13, 1775, when Congress enacted the first legislation creating

the Continental Navy of the American Revolution. The Department of the Navy and the Office of Secretary of

the Navy were established by act of April 30, 1798 (10 U.S.C. 5011, 5031). For 9 years prior to that date, by act of

August 7, 1789 (1 Stat. 49), the Secretary of War oversaw the conduct of naval affairs.


The National Security Act Amendments of 1949 provided that the Department of the Navy be a military

department within the Department of Defense (63 Stat. 578).


The President appoints the Secretary of the Navy as the head of the Department of the Navy. The Secretary is

responsible to the Secretary of Defense for the operation and efficiency of the Navy (10 U.S.C. 5031). The

Department of the Navy includes the U.S. Coast Guard when it is operating as a Service in the Navy.


Secretary
The Secretary of the Navy is the head of the Department of the Navy, responsible for the policies and control of

the Department of the Navy, including its organization, administration, functioning, and efficiency. The members

of the Secretary's executive administration assist in the discharge of the responsibilities of the Secretary of the

Navy.

http://www.navy.mil/secnav

Legal
The Office of the Judge Advocate General provides all legal advice and related services throughout the

Department of the Navy, except for the advice and services provided by the General Counsel. It also provides

legal and policy advice to the Secretary of the Navy on military justice, ethics, administrative law, claims,

environmental law, operational and international law and treaty interpretation, and litigation involving these

issues. The Judge Advocate General provides technical supervision for the Naval Justice School at Newport, RI.

http://www.navy.mil/local/jag/index.asp

  For further information, contact the Office of the Judge Advocate General, Department of the Navy,
  Washington Navy Yard, Suite 3000, 1322 Patterson Avenue SE., Washington Navy Yard, DC 20374-
  5066. Phone, 202-685-5190.



Criminal Investigations
The Naval Criminal Investigative Service investigates and neutralizes criminal, terrorist, and foreign intelligence

threats to the United States Navy and Marine Corps. To carry out its mission, the Service relies on the

professionalism and law enforcement expertise of administrative support personnel, forensic specialists,

intelligence analysts, investigators, military personnel, security specialists, special agents, and technical

investigative specialists.
http://www.ncis.navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Naval Criminal Investigative Service, 27130 Telegraph Road,
  Quantico, VA 22134. Phone, 877-579-3648.



Research
The Office of Naval Research initiates, coordinates, plans, and promotes naval research, including the

coordination of research and development conducted by other agencies and offices in the Department of the

Navy. The Office researches, develops, and delivers decisive naval capabilities by investing in a balanced

portfolio of promising scientific research, innovative technology, and talent. It also manages and controls

activities within the Department concerning copyrights, inventions, manufacturing technology, patents, royalty

payments, small businesses, and trademarks.

http://www.onr.navy.mil | Email: onrpublicaffairs@navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Office of Naval Research, One Liberty
  Center, 875 North Randolph Street, Arlington, VA 22203-1995. Phone, 703-696-5031.



Operating Forces
Operating forces carry out operations that enable the Navy to meet its responsibility to uphold and advance the

national policies and interests of the United States. These forces include the several fleets; seagoing, fleet marine,

and other assigned Marine Corps forces; the Military Sealift Command; Naval Reserve forces; and other forces

and activities that the President or the Secretary of the Navy may assign. The Chief of Naval Operations

administers and commands the operating forces of the Navy.


The Atlantic Fleet is composed of ships, submarines, and aircraft that operate throughout the Atlantic Ocean and

Mediterranean Sea.


The Naval Forces Europe includes forces assigned by the Chief of Naval Operations or made available from

either the Pacific or Atlantic Fleet to operate in the European theater.


The Pacific Fleet is composed of ships, submarines, and aircraft operating throughout the Pacific and Indian

Oceans.


The Military Sealift Command provides ocean transportation for personnel and cargo of all components of the

Department of Defense and, as authorized, for other Federal agencies; operates and maintains underway

replenishment ships and other vessels providing mobile logistic support to elements of the combatant fleets; and

operates ships in support of scientific projects and other programs for Federal agencies.


Other major commands of the operating forces of the Navy are the Naval Forces Central Command,

Operational Test and Evaluation Force, Naval Special Warfare Command, and Naval Reserve Force.

http://www.navy.mil/navydata/organization/orgopfor.asp



ACTIVITIES
Air Systems
The Naval Air Systems Command provides full life-cycle support of naval aviation aircraft, weapons, and systems

operated by Sailors and Marines. This support includes research, design, development, and systems engineering;

acquisition; test and evaluation; training facilities and equipment; repair and modification; and in-service

engineering and logistics support. The Command comprises eight "competencies" or communities of practice:

program management, contracts, research and engineering, test and evaluation, logistics and industrial

operations, corporate operations, comptroller, and counsel. The Command also supports the affiliated naval

aviation program executive officer and the assigned program managers, who are responsible for meeting the

cost, schedule, and performance requirements of their assigned programs. It is the principal provider for the

Naval Aviation Enterprise, while contributing to every warfare enterprise in the interest of national security.

http://www.navair.navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Commander, Naval Air Systems Command, 47123 Buse Road,
  Building 2272, Suite 540, Patuxent River, MD 20670-1547. Phone, 301-757-7825.



Coast Guard
The Commandant of the Coast Guard reports to the Secretary of the Navy and the Chief of Naval Operations

when the Coast Guard is operating as a service in the Navy and represents the Coast Guard before the Joint

Chiefs of Staff. During such service, Coast Guard operations are integrated and uniform with Department of the

Navy operations to the maximum extent possible. The Commandant of the Coast Guard organizes, trains,

prepares, and maintains the readiness of the Coast Guard for the performance of national defense missions as

directed. The Commandant also maintains a security capability; enforces Federal laws and regulations on and

under the high seas and waters subject to the jurisdiction of the United States; and develops, establishes,

maintains, and operates aids to maritime navigation, as well as ice-breaking and rescue facilities, with due regard

to the requirements of national defense.

http://www.uscg.mil

Computers and Telecommunications
Naval Network Warfare Command operates the Navy's networks to achieve effective command and control

through optimal alignment, common architecture, mature processes, and functions and standard terminology.

The command enhances the Navy's network security posture and improves IT services through standardized

enterprise-level management, network information assurance compliance, enterprise management, and root

cause and trend analysis. Naval Network Warfare Command also delivers enhanced space products to operating

forces by leveraging Department of Defense, national, commercial, and international space capabilities. The

command serves as the Navy's commercial satellite operations manager; it executes tactical-level command and

control of Navy networks and leverages Joint Space capabilities for Navy and Joint Operations.

http://www.public.navy.mil/fcc-c10f/nnwc/Pages/default.aspx

  For further information, contact Public Affairs, Naval Network Warfare Command, 112 Lake View
  Parkway, Suffolk, VA 23435. Phone, 757-203-0205.
Education and Training
The Naval Education and Training Command provides shore-based education and training for Navy, certain

Marine Corps, and other personnel; develops specifically designated education and training afloat programs for

the fleet; provides voluntary and dependents education; and participates with research and development

activities in the development and implementation of the most effective teaching and training systems and

devices for optimal education and training.

http://www.navy.mil/local/cnet/ | Email: pnsc.netc.pao@navy.mil

  For further information, contact the NETC Office of Public Affairs, 250 Dallas Street, Pensacola, FL
  32508-5220. Phone, 850-452-4858.



Facilities
The Naval Facilities Engineering Command provides material and technical support to the Navy and Marine

Corps for shore facilities, real property and utilities, fixed ocean systems and structures, transportation and

construction equipment, energy, environmental and natural resources management, and support of the naval

construction forces.

http://www.navy.mil/local/navfachq

  For further information, contact the Commander, Naval Facilities Engineering Command and Chief
  of Civil Engineers, Washington Navy Yard, 1322 Patterson Avenue SE., Suite 1000, Washington, DC
  20374-5065. Phone, 202-685-1423.



Intelligence
The Office of Naval Intelligence ensures the fulfillment of the intelligence requirements and responsibilities of the

Department of the Navy.

http://www.oni.navy.mil | Email: pao@nmic.navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Office of Public Affairs, Office of Naval Intelligence,
  Department of the Navy, 4251 Suitland Road, Washington, DC 20395-5720. Phone, 301-669-5670.



Manpower
The Bureau of Naval Personnel directs the procurement, distribution, administration, and career motivation of

the military personnel of the regular and reserve components of the U.S. Navy to meet the quantitative and

qualitative manpower requirements determined by the Chief of Naval Operations.

http://www.navy.mil/cnp/index.asp

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Naval Personnel, Department of the Navy, Federal
  Office Building 2, Washington, DC 20370-5000.



Medicine
The Bureau of Medicine and Surgery directs the medical and dental services for Navy and Marine Corps

personnel and their dependents; administers the implementation of contingency support plans and programs to

effect medical and dental readiness capability; provides medical and dental services to the fleet, fleet marine

force, and shore activities of the Navy; and ensures cooperation with civil authorities in matters of public health

disasters and other emergencies.

http://www.med.navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, Department of the Navy, 2300
  E Street NW., Washington, DC 20373-5300. Phone, 202-762-3211.



Oceanography
The Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command and the Naval Observatory are responsible for the

science, technology, and engineering operations that are essential to explore the ocean and the atmosphere

and to provide astronomical data and time for naval and related national objectives. To that end, the naval

oceanographic program studies astrometry, hydrography, meteorology, oceanography, and precise time.

http://www.usno.navy.mil/USNO

  For further information, contact the Commander, Naval Meteorology and Oceanography
  Command, 1100 Balch Boulevard, Stennis Space Center, MS 39529-5005. Phone, 228-688-4384.
  Internet, http://www.navmetoccom.navy.mil. Or, contact the Oceanographer of the Navy, U.S. Naval
  Observatory, 3450 Massachusetts Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20392-1800. Phone, 202-762-1026.



Sea Systems
The Naval Sea Systems Command provides material support to the Navy and Marine Corps and to the

Departments of Defense and Transportation for ships, submarines, and other sea platforms, shipboard combat

systems and components, other surface and undersea warfare and weapons systems, and ordnance

expendables not specifically assigned to other system commands.

http://www.navsea.navy.mil | Email: nssc_public_affairs@navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Office of Public Affairs, Naval Sea Systems Command, 1333
  Isaac Hull Avenue SE., Washington Navy Yard, DC 20376-1010. Phone, 202-781-4123.



Space and Naval Warfare
The Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command develops, delivers, and sustains advanced cyber capabilities

for naval warfighters. It helps provide the hardware and software needed to executive Navy missions. With nearly

10,000 active military and civilian professionals worldwide, the Command is at the forefront of research,

engineering, and acquisition relevant for keeping U.S. military forces connected around the globe.

http://www.spawar.navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Commander, Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command,
  4301 Pacific Highway, San Diego, CA 92110-3127. Phone, 619-524-3428.
Strategic Systems
The Office of Strategic Systems Programs provides development, production, and material support to the Navy

for fleet ballistic missile and strategic weapons systems, security, training of personnel, and the installation and

direction of necessary supporting facilities.

http://www.ssp.navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Director, Strategic Systems Programs, Department of the Navy,
  Nebraska Avenue Complex, 287 Somers Court NW., Suite 10041, Washington, DC 20393-5446.
  Phone, 202-764-1608.



Supply Systems
The Naval Supply Systems Command provides supply management policies and methods and administers

related support service systems for the Navy and Marine Corps.

http://www.navy.mil/local/navsup | Email: navsuphqQuestions@navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Commander, Naval Supply Systems Command, 5450 Carlisle
  Pike, P.O. Box 2050, Mechanicsburg, PA 17055-0791. Phone, 717-605-3565.



Warfare Development
The Navy Warfare Development Command plans and coordinates experiments employing emerging operational

concepts; represents the Department of the Navy in joint and other service laboratories and facilities and tactical

development commands; and publishes and disseminates naval doctrine.

http://www.navy.mil/local/nwdc

  For further information, contact the Commander, Navy Warfare Development Command, 686
  Cushing Road, Sims Hall, Newport, RI 02841. Phone, 401-841-2833.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
"Open for Business," a short video that gives an overview of the Navy's buying activities and small business

programs, is available online. For more information, contact the Office of Small Business Programs. Phone, 202-

685-6485.

http://www.secnav.navy.mil/smallbusiness/Pages/video-openforbusiness.aspx | Email: osbp.info@navy.mil

Civilian Employment
The possibilities of a civilian career at the Department of the Navy are many and diverse. They include a full

range of occupations: from aircraft mechanic to pipefitter, from electrician to engineer, from zoologist to

physician, and more. The Navy offers hundreds of different occupations nationwide and around the world.

http://www.secnav.navy.mil/donhr/Pages/Default.aspx | Email: donhrfaq@navy.mil
Environment
For information on Navy and Marine Corps environmental protection and natural resources management

programs, contact the Deputy Assistant Secretary–Environment, 1000 Navy Pentagon, Room 4A674,

Washington, DC 20350-1000. Phone, 703-614-5493.

http://www.secnav.navy.mil/eie/Pages/Environment.aspx
The "U.S. Navy Climate Change Roadmap" (April 2010) is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) online.

http://www.navy.mil/navydata/documents/CCR.pdf
The Navy has posted its environmental goals and descriptions of its strategies to achieve them.

http://greenfleet.dodlive.mil/environment

Glossary
The origins of Navy terminology section explains nautical terminology that has become a part of everyday

English.

http://www.navy.mil/navydata/traditions/html/navyterm.html

Joining the Navy
Unparalleled opportunities, challenges, and experiences motivate bright and skilled people to join. America's

Navy offers careers and jobs that match many backgrounds and interests. Hundreds of distinct roles in dozens

of professional fields are part of what the Navy has to offer.

http://www.navy.com/joining.html

Naval Oceanography Portal
The U.S. Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command provides information from the ocean depths to the

distant reaches of space to meet the needs of civilian and the military and scientific communities.

http://www.usno.navy.mil
The U.S. Naval Observatory offers a wide range of astronomical data and products, and it serves as the official

source of time for the Department of Defense and as the official source of a standard of time for the entire

United States.

http://www.usno.navy.mil/USNO
"The Sky This Week" is a weekly set of pictures and descriptions of the planets, sky, and stars.

http://www.usno.navy.mil/USNO/tours-events/sky-this-week/the-sky-this-week

News
The Navy posts recent headline news stories on its Web site.

http://www.navy.mil/listStories.asp?x=2
An online subscription form is available to sign up for updates from the Navy news service.

https://service.govdelivery.com/accounts/USNAVYDMA/subscriber/new
"All Hands" magazine is an electronic publication for sailors by sailors. It features articles, imagery, information,

and videos that are relevant to sailors and their families.
http://www.navy.mil/ah_online

Research Programs
Research programs of the Office of Naval Research cover a broad spectrum of scientific fields. The research is

primarily for the needs of the Navy and Marine Corps, but some of these programs conduct research that has

relevance for the general public. For information on specific research programs, contact the Office of Naval

Research–Public Affairs, One Liberty Center 875 N. Randolph Street, Arlington, VA 22203-1995. Phone, 703-696-

5031.

http://www.onr.navy.mil

Ships
The Navy operates and relies on many types of ships to carry out its mission. Descriptions of these different ships

—aircraft carriers, amphibious assault ships, cruisers, destroyers, littoral combat ships, and submarines—are

available online.

http://www.navy.mil/navydata/our_ships.asp

Site Index
An A–Z information index is available on the Navy's Web site.

http://www.navy.mil/navydata/infoIndex.asp?id=A
http://www.navy.mil/submit/contacts.asp
For further information concerning the Navy, contact the Office of Information, Department of the Navy, 1200

Navy Pentagon, Washington, DC 20350-1200. For press inquiries, phone 703-697-7391 or 703-697-5342.



United States Marine Corps
Commandant of the Marine Corps, Headquarters, U.S. Marine Corps, 3000 Pentagon, Washington, DC

20380-1775


703-614-2500

http://www.marines.mil


  COMMANDANT OF THE MARINE CORPS                          Gen. Robert B. Neller


  Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps                Gen. Glenn M. Walters


  Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps                      Sgt. Maj. Ronald L. Green



The Continental Congress established the United States Marine Corps by resolution on November 10, 1775.

Marine Corps composition and functions are detailed in 10 U.S.C. 5063.


The Marine Corps, which is part of the Department of the Navy, is the smallest of the Nation's combat

forces. It also is the only service that the Congress has tasked specifically to be able to fight in the air, on

land, and at sea. Although Marines fight in each of these dimensions, they are primarily a maritime force

linked with the Navy, moving from the sea to fight on land.
The Marine Corps conducts entry-level training for its enlisted marines at two bases: Marine Corps Recruit

Depot, Parris Island, SC; and Marine Corps Recruit Depot, San Diego, CA. Officer candidates are evaluated

at Officer Candidate School, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, Quantico, VA. Marines train

to be first on the scene to respond to attacks on the United States or its interests and to acts of political

violence against Americans abroad, to provide disaster relief and humanitarian assistance, and to evacuate

Americans from foreign countries.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

DSTRESS Line
The DSTRESS Line offers an around-the-clock anonymous phone, live chat, and referral service. The call

center is staffed with veteran Marines, Fleet Marine Force Navy Corpsmen who were previously attached

to the Marine Corps, Marine spouses and other family members, and licensed behavioral health

counselors trained in Marine Corps culture. DSTRESS Line is designed to help callers improve overall

fitness and to develop the necessary skills for coping with the challenges of life in the Marine Corps.

Phone, 877-476-7734.

http://www.usmc-mccs.org/index.cfm/services/support/dstress-line | Email: dstressline@usmc.mil

Electronic Publications
Authentic and current digital versions of publications issued by Headquarters Marine Corps staff agencies,

major commands, and other Department of Defense and Federal agencies are available online.

http://www.marines.mil/News/Publications

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Procedures for requesting records that the U.S. Marine Corps controls are available online. Phone, 703-

614-4008.

http://www.hqmc.marines.mil/Agencies/USMC-FOIA | Email: hqmcfoia@usmc.mil

Marine Corps Bands
Marine Corps bands perform at ceremonies, concerts, festivals, parades, professional sporting events, and

other public events. Marine Corps bands perform six types of ensembles: brass/woodwind quintet, bugler,

ceremonial band, concert band, jazz combo, and jazz/show band. Phone, 504-697-8184.

http://www.marines.mil/Community-Relations/Asset-Requests/Band                       |                 Email:
smb.mfr.pao.comrel@usmc.mil

News
The Marine Corps posts press releases on its Web site.

http://www.marines.mil/News/Press-Releases
Marines TV is accessible via the Marine Corps Web site.

http://www.marines.mil/News/Marines-TV
Reading List
The Commandant's professional reading list is available online.

http://guides.grc.usmcu.edu/content.php?pid=408059&sid=3340387 | Email: Reading@usmc.mil

Sexual Assault
The Marine Corps' Sexual Assault Prevention and Response program lowers the incidence of sexual assault

through preventative strategies and provides care to victims of the crime.

http://www.usmc-mccs.org/index.cfm/services/support/sexual-assault-prevention
The Safe Helpline provides anonymous and confidential support for sexual assault survivors in the military.

Phone, 877-995-5247.

https://safehelpline.org

Silent Drill Platoon
The Marine Corps Silent Drill Platoon is a 24-Marine rifle platoon that performs a precision drill exhibition.

This disciplined platoon exemplifies the professionalism associated with the U.S. Marine Corps. It first

performed in the Sunset Parades of 1948 and received such a favorable response that it became a regular

part of the parades at Marine Barracks, Washington, DC. Performance requests for the Silent Drill Platoon

should be made 30–90 days prior to the event. Phone, 504-697-8184.

http://www.marines.mil/Community-Relations/Asset-Requests/Silent-Drill-Platoon               |         Email:
smb.mfr.pao.comrel@usmc.mil

Site Map
The Web site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their

interests.

http://www.marines.mil/Home/SiteMap.aspx

Social Media
The Marine Corps maintains a social media presence and supports online communities where people can

go to share and collect information and stories.

http://www.marines.mil/News/Social-Media

Speakers
The Marine Corps supports speaking engagements for community events nationwide, ranging from small-

town civic organizations to big-city national conventions. The Marine Corps In the Community program

helps business executives, educators, members of civic organizations, conference organizers, and others

make contact with a Marine Corps public speaker. Phone, 504-697-8184.

http://www.marines.mil/Community-Relations/Asset-Requests/Speakers                      |              Email:
smb.mfr.pao.comrel@usmc.mil

Tattoo Regulations
The Marine Corps tattoo policy seeks to balance personal taste with the high standards of professional

military appearance and heritage. The Marine Corps Bulletin 1020 (June 2016) explains the current tattoo
policy, which replaces previous guidance on the subject.

http://www.marines.mil/Tattoos.aspx

Unit Directory
A complete list of Marine Corps units with links to their respective web pages is available online.

http://www.marines.mil/Units.aspx
http://www.marines.mil/Contact-Us
For further information regarding the Marine Corps, contact the Director of Public Affairs, Headquarters,

U.S. Marine Corps, 2 Navy Annex–Pentagon 5D773, Washington, DC 20380-1775. Phone, 703-614-1492.



United States Naval Academy
Annapolis, MD 21402-5018


410-293-1500

http://www.usna.edu


  SUPERINTENDENT                                         Vice Adm. Walter E. Carter, Jr., USN


  Commandant of Midshipmen                               Col. Stephen E. Liszewski, USMC



The U.S. Naval Academy is the undergraduate college of the Naval Service. Through its comprehensive 4-

year program, which stresses excellence in academics, physical education, professional training, conduct,

and honor, the Academy prepares young men and women morally, mentally, and physically to be

professional officers in the Navy and Marine Corps. All graduates receive a Bachelor of Science degree in 1

of 19 majors.

https://www.usna.edu/About/index.php



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Armel-Leftwich Visitor Center
From March to December, the visitor center is open daily, 9 a.m.–5 p.m. During January and February, the

visitor center is open on weekdays, 9 a.m.–4 p.m. The gift shop, however, is open on the weekends, 9

a.m.–5 p.m.

http://www.usnabsd.com/for-visitors | Email: tourinfo@usna.edu

A–Z Index
The Naval Academy's Web site has an alphabetical index to help visitors search for information or browse

topics of interest.

https://www.usna.edu/TOC/index.php

Career Opportunities
Six sources of employment are associated with the Naval Academy and its supporting organizations.

https://www.usna.edu/Employment

Naval Academy Preparatory School
The Naval Academy Preparatory School prepares midshipman candidates for success at the U.S. Naval

Academy. The 10-month course of instruction, August–May, centers on preparation in Chemistry, English

Composition, Information Technology, Mathematics, and Physics. Phone, 401-841-6966 (administration).

Phone, 401-841-2947 (academics).

https://www.usna.edu/NAPS

Naval Academy Store
All Profits support the brigade of midshipmen.

http://navyonline.com

Nimitz Library
An online tool is available to search the library's collection of articles, books, ebooks, and journals. Phone,

410-293-6945.

https://www.usna.edu/Library | Email: askref@usna.edu
https://www.usna.edu/Contact
For further information concerning the U.S. Naval Academy, contact the Superintendent, U.S. Naval

Academy, 121 Blake Road, Annapolis, MD 21402-5018.



Defense Agencies

Defense                    Advanced                         Research                      Projects
Agency
675 North Randolph Street, Arlington, VA 22203-2114


703-526-6630

http://www.darpa.mil


  DIRECTOR                                               Victoria Coleman


  Deputy Director                                        Peter Highnam


https://www.darpa.mil/about-us/people



  The Sources of Information were updated 12–2020.



The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency is a separately organized agency within the Department
of Defense and is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense
(Acquisition, Technology and Logistics). The Agency serves as the central research and development

organization of the Department of Defense with a primary responsibility to maintain U.S. technological

superiority over potential adversaries. It pursues imaginative and innovative research and development

projects, and conducts demonstration projects that represent technology appropriate for joint programs,

programs in support of deployed forces, or selected programs of the military departments. To this end,

the Agency arranges, manages, and directs the performance of work connected with assigned advanced

projects by the military departments, other Government agencies, individuals, private business entities, and

educational or research institutions, as appropriate.

http://www.darpa.mil
For further information, contact the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, 675 North Randolph

Street, Arlington, VA 22203-2114. Phone, 703-526-6630.



Defense Commissary Agency
1300 E Avenue, Fort Lee, VA 23801-1800


804-734-8720

http://www.commissaries.com


  DIRECTOR / CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER                    William F. Moore


  Deputy Director / Chief Operating Officer             Michael J. Dowling


https://www.commissaries.com/our-agency/deca-organization



  The Sources of Information were updated 12–2020.



The Defense Commissary Agency (DeCA) was established in 1990 and is under the authority, direction, and
control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness and the operational supervision of

the Defense Commissary Agency Board of Directors.


DeCA provides an efficient and effective worldwide system of commissaries that sell quality groceries and

household supplies at low prices to members of the Armed Services community. This benefit satisfies

customer demand for quality products and delivers exceptional savings while enhancing the military

community's quality of life. DeCA works closely with its employees, customers, and civilian business

partners to satisfy its customers and to promote the commissary benefit. The benefit fosters recruitment,

retention, and readiness of skilled and trained personnel.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Employment information is available at www.commissaries.com or by calling the following telephone
numbers: employment (703-603-1600); small business activities (804-734-8000, extension 4-8015/4-8529);

contracting for resale items (804-734-8000, extension 4-8884/4-8885); and contracting for operations

support and equipment (804-734-8000, extension 4-8391/4-8830).

http://www.commissaries.com
For further information, contact the Defense Commissary Agency, 1300 E Avenue, Fort Lee, VA 23801-

1800. Phone, 804-734-8720



Defense Contract Audit Agency
8725 John J. Kingman Road, Suite 2135, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6219


703-767-3265

http://www.dcaa.mil | Email: dcaaweb@dcaa.mil


 DIRECTOR                                             Anita F. Bales


https://www.dcaa.mil/Portals/88/FY2019%20DCAA%20Report%20to%20Congress.pdf?
ver=XKAncoiKefo8TD5eh-OCxQ%3d%3d



 The Sources of Information were updated 4–2020.



The Defense Contract Audit Agency (DCAA) was established in 1965 and is under the authority, direction,

and control of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer. DCAA performs all

necessary contract audit functions for DOD and provides accounting and financial advisory services to all

Defense components responsible for procurement and contract administration. These services are

provided in connection with the negotiation, administration, and settlement of contracts and subcontracts

to ensure taxpayer dollars are spent on fair and reasonable contract prices. They include evaluating the

acceptability of costs claimed or proposed by contractors and reviewing the efficiency and economy of

contractor operations. Other Government agencies may request the DCAA's services under appropriate

arrangements.


DCAA manages its operations through five regional offices responsible for approximately 104 field audit

offices throughout the United States and overseas. Each region is responsible for the contract auditing

function in its assigned area. Point of contact information for DCAA regional offices is available at

www.dcaa.mil.

http://www.dcaa.mil | Email: dcaaweb@dcaa.mil
For further information, contact the Executive Officer, Defense Contract Audit Agency, 8725 John J.

Kingman Road, Suite 2135, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6219. Phone, 703-767-3265.


Defense Contract Management Agency
3901 A Avenue, Fort Lee, VA 23801
804-734-0814

http://www.dcma.mil


 DIRECTOR                                              Lt. Gen. David G. Bassett, USA


 Deputy Director                                       John M. Lyle


http://www.dcma.mil/About-Us



 The Sources of Information were updated 12–2020.



The Defense Contract Management Agency (DCMA) was established by the Deputy Secretary of Defense

in 2000 and is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition,

Technology, and Logistics). DCMA is responsible for DOD contract management in support of the military

departments, other DOD components, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, other

designated Federal and State agencies, foreign governments, and international organizations, as

appropriate.

http://www.dcma.mil
For further information, contact the Office of General Counsel, Defense Contract Management Agency,

3901 A Avenue, Fort Lee, VA 23801. Phone, 804-734-0814.


Defense Finance and Accounting Service
4800 Mark Center Drive, Suite 08J25-01, Alexandria, VA 22350-3000


571-372-7883

http://www.dfas.mil


 DIRECTOR                                              Audrey Y. Davis


 Principal Deputy Director                             (vacancy)


https://www.dfas.mil/Pressroom/dfasleadership



 The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) was established in 1991 under the authority, direction,

and control of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer to strengthen and

reduce costs of financial management and operations within DOD. DFAS is responsible for all payments to

servicemembers, employees, vendors, and contractors. It provides business intelligence and finance and

accounting information to DOD decisionmakers. DFAS is also responsible for preparing annual financial

statements and the consolidation, standardization, and modernization of finance and accounting
requirements, functions, processes, operations, and systems for DOD.

http://www.dfas.mil
For further information, contact Defense Finance and Accounting Service Corporate Communications,

4800 Mark Center Drive, Suite 08J25-01, Alexandria, VA 22350-3000. Phone, 571-372-7883.



Defense Information Systems Agency
P.O. Box 549, Command Building, Fort Meade, MD 20755


301-225-6000

http://www.disa.mil | Email: dia-pao@dia.mil


  DIRECTOR                                             Vice Adm. Nancy A. Norton, USN


  Executive Deputy Director                            Anthony Montemarano


http://www.disa.mil/About/Our-Leaders



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA), established originally as the Defense Communications

Agency in 1960, is under the authority, direction, and control of the Assistant Secretary of Defense

(Networks and Information Integration). DISA is a combat support agency responsible for planning,

engineering, acquiring, fielding, operating, and supporting global net-centric solutions to serve the needs

of the President, Vice President, Secretary of Defense, and other DOD components.

http://www.disa.mil | Email: dia-pao@dia.mil
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Defense Information Systems Agency, P.O. Box

549, Command Building, Fort Meade, MD 20755. Phone, 301-225-6000.


Defense Intelligence Agency
200 MacDill Boulevard, Washington DC 20340-5100


202-231-0800

http://www.dia.mil | Email: dia-pao@dia.mil


  DIRECTOR                                             Lt. Gen. Scott D. Berrier, USA


  Deputy Director                                      Suzanne L. White


http://www.dia.mil/About/Leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.
The Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) was established in 1961 and is under the authority, direction, and

control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence. DIA provides timely, objective, and cogent

military intelligence to warfighters, force planners, as well as defense and national security policymakers.

DIA obtains and reports information through its field sites worldwide and the Defense Attache System;

provides timely intelligence analysis; directs Defense Human Intelligence programs; operates the Joint

Intelligence Task Force for Combating Terrorism and the Joint Military Intelligence College; coordinates

and facilitates Measurement and Signature Intelligence activities; manages and plans collections from

specialized technical sources; manages secure DOD intelligence networks; and coordinates required

intelligence support for the Secretary of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff, Combatant Commanders, and Joint

Task Forces.

http://www.dia.mil | Email: dia-pao@dia.mil
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Defense Intelligence Agency, 200 MacDill

Boulevard, Washington DC 20340-5100. Phone, 202-231-0800.



Defense Legal Services Agency
The Pentagon, Washington, DC 20301-1600


703-695-3341

http://www.dod.mil/dodgc


  DIRECTOR / GENERAL COUNSEL                  OF    THE
                                                          Paul C. Ney, Jr.
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE


https://ogc.osd.mil/gc_bio.html

  Principal Deputy General         Counsel     of   the
                                                          William S. Castle
  Department of Defense


https://ogc.osd.mil/dgc_bio.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Legal Services Agency (DLSA) was established in 1981 and is under the authority, direction,

and control of the General Counsel of the Department of Defense, who also serves as its Director. DLSA

provides legal advice and services for specified DOD components and adjudication of personnel security

cases for DOD and other assigned Federal agencies and departments. It also provides technical support

and assistance for development of the Department's legislative program; coordinates positions on

legislation and Presidential Executive orders; provides a centralized legislative and congressional document

reference and distribution point for the Department; maintains the Department's historical legislative files;

and administers programs governing standards of conduct and alternative dispute resolution.
https://ogc.osd.mil/index.html
For further information, contact the Administrative Office, Defense Legal Services Agency, Room 3A734,

Washington, DC 20301-1600. Phone, 703-697-8343.



Defense Logistics Agency
8725 John J. Kingman Road, Suite 2533, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6221


703-767-5264

http://www.dla.mil


  DIRECTOR                                             Vice Adm. Michelle C. Skubic


  Vice Director                                        Michael D. Scott


http://www.dla.mil/Leaders.aspx



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of

Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics. DLA supports both the logistics requirements of the

military services and their acquisition of weapons and other materiel. It provides logistics support and

technical services to all branches of the military and to a number of Federal agencies. DLA supply centers

consolidate the requirements of the military services and procure the supplies in sufficient quantities to

meet their projected needs. DLA manages supplies in eight commodity areas: fuel, food, clothing,

construction material, electronic supplies, general supplies, industrial supplies, and medical supplies.

Information on DLA’s field activities and regional commands is available at www.dla.mil/ataglance.aspx.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
For the Washington, DC, metropolitan area, all inquiries and applications concerning job recruitment

programs should be addressed to Human Resources, Customer Support Office, 3990 East Broad Street,

Building 11, Section 3, Columbus, OH, 43213-0919. Phone, 877-352-4762.

http://www.dla.mil/Careers.aspx

Environmental Program
For information on the environmental program, contact the Staff Director, Environmental and Safety,

Defense Logistics Agency, Attn: DSS-E, 8725 John J. Kingman Road, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6221. Phone,

703-767-6278.
Procurement / Small Business Activities
For information on procurement and small business activities, contact the Director, Small and

Disadvantaged Business Utilization, Defense Logistics Agency, Attn: DB, 8725 John J. Kingman Road, Fort

Belvoir, VA 22060-6221. Phone, 703-767-0192.

http://www.dla.mil/DoingBusinessWithDLA.aspx

Surplus Sales Program
Questions concerning this program should be addressed to DOD Surplus Sales, International Sales Office,

74 Washington Avenue North, Battle Creek, MI 49017-3092. Phone, 877-352-2255.

http://dispositionservices.dla.mil/sales/Pages/default.aspx
http://www.dla.mil
For further information, contact the Defense Logistics Agency, 8725 John J. Kingman Road, Fort Belvoir, VA

22060-6221. Phone, 703-767-5264.



Defense Security Cooperation Agency
201 Twelfth Street South, Suite 203, Arlington, VA 22202-5408


703-604-6605

http://www.dsca.mil | Email: info@dsca.mil


  DIRECTOR                                               Heidi H. Grant


  Deputy Director                                        Cara L. Abercrombie, Acting


https://www.dsca.mil/about-dsca/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA) was established in 1971 and is under the authority,

direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense (Policy). DSCA provides traditional security

assistance functions such as military assistance, international military education and training, and foreign

military sales. DSCA also has program management responsibilities for humanitarian assistance, demining,

and other DOD programs.

http://www.dsca.mil | Email: info@dsca.mil
For further information, contact the Defense Security Cooperation Agency, 201 Twelfth Street South, Suite

203, Arlington, VA 22202-5408. Phone, 703-604-6605.


Defense Counterintelligence and Security
Agency
27130 Telegraph Road, Quantico, VA 22134
571-305-6562

http://www.dcsa.mil


  DIRECTOR                                              William K. Lietzau


https://www.dcsa.mil/About-Us/Leadership/Bio-Display/Article/1822359/william-k-lietzau



Assistant Directors


  Background Investigations                             Christy K. Wilder


  Critical Technology Protection                        David Stapleton

https://www.dcsa.mil/about/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency (DCSA) is under the authority, direction, and control

of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence. It protects America’s trusted workforce and trusted real

and virtual workspaces. The DCSA joins two missions: personnel vetting and critical technology protection.

Vetting personnel and protecting technology are supported by counterintelligence and training,

education, and certification functions. The DCSA services over 100 Federal entities, oversees 10,000 cleared

companies, and conducts approximately 2 million background investigations each year.


The DCSA ensures the safeguarding of classified information used by contractors on behalf of the DOD

and other executive branch agencies under the National Industrial Security Program. It oversees the

protection of conventional arms, munitions, and explosives in the custody of DOD contractors; evaluates

the protection of selected private sector critical assets and infrastructures; and recommends measures

needed to maintain operations identified as vital to the DOD. The agency makes clearance determinations

for industry and provides support services for DOD Central Adjudicative Facilities. It provides security

education, training, and proactive awareness programs for military, civilian, and cleared industry to

enhance their proficiency and awareness of DOD security policies and procedures. The DCSA also

integrates counterintelligence principles into security countermeasures missions and supports the national

counterintelligence strategy.

https://www.dcsa.mil/abouthttps://www.dcsa.mil/contact/pao          |        Email:     dcsa.quantico.dcsa-
hq.mbx.pa@mail.mil
For further information, contact the Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency, Office of Public

Affairs, 27130 Telegraph Road, Quantico, VA 22134. Phone, 571-305-6562.


Defense Threat Reduction Agency
8725 John J. Kingman Road, MS 6201, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6201


703-767-7594

http://www.dtra.mil


  DIRECTOR                                                 Vayl S. Oxford


https://www.dtra.mil/About/DTRADirector

  Deputy Director                                          Maj. Gen. Antonio M. Fletcher, USA


https://www.dtra.mil/About/DTRA-Leadership/Deputy-Director-for-Combat-Support



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) was established in 1998 and is under the authority,

direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics. DTRA's

mission is to reduce the threat posed by weapons of mass destruction (WMD). DTRA covers the full range

of WMD threats (chemical, biological, nuclear, radiological, and high explosive), bridges the gap between

the warfighters and the technical community, sustains the nuclear deterrent, and provides both offensive

and defensive technology and operational concepts to warfighters. DTRA reduces the threat of WMD by

implementing arms control treaties and executing the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program. It uses

combat support, technology development, and chemical-biological defense to deter the use and reduce

the impact of such weapons. DTRA also prepares for future threats by developing the technology and

concepts needed to counter new WMD threats and adversaries.

https://www.dtra.mil/WhoWeArehttp://www.dtra.mil
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Defense Threat Reduction Agency, 8725 John J.

Kingman     Road,      MS   6201,   Fort   Belvoir,   VA     22060-5916.    Phone,      703-767-7594.   Email,

dtra.publicaffairs@dtra.mil.


Missile Defense Agency
5700 Eighteenth Street, Bldg 245, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5573


703-695-6420

http://www.mda.mil/ | Email: mda.info@mda.mil


  DIRECTOR                                                 Vice Adm. Jon A. Hill, USN


https://www.mda.mil/global/documents/pdf/Hill.pdf

  Executive Director                                       Laura M. DeSimone
https://www.mda.mil/global/documents/pdf/orgcht(002).pdf



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.




  [For the Missile Defense Agency statement of organization, see the Code of Federal
  Regulations, Title 32, Part 388]



The Missile Defense Agency's (MDA) mission is to establish and deploy a layered ballistic missile defense

system to intercept missiles in all phases of their flight and against all ranges of threats. This capability will

provide a defense of the United States, deployed forces, and allies. The MDA is under the authority,

direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics. It

manages and directs DOD's ballistic missile defense acquisition programs and enables the Services to field

elements of the overall system as soon as practicable. The MDA develops and tests technologies and, if

necessary, uses prototype and test assets to provide early capability. Additionally, MDA improves the

effectiveness of deployed capabilities by implementing new technologies as they become available or

when the threat warrants an accelerated capability.

https://www.mda.mil/about/about.htmlhttps://www.mda.mil/contactus/contact.html                    |        Email:
mda.info@mda.mil
For further information, contact the Human Resources Directorate, Missile Defense Agency, 5700

Eighteenth    Street,   Bldg   245,   Fort    Belvoir,   VA   22060-5573.     Phone,     703-695-6420.     Email,

mda.info@mda.mil.


National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
7500 Geoint Drive, MS N73-OCCAE, Springfield, Virginia 22150


571-557-7300

http://www.nga.mil


  DIRECTOR                                                 Vice Adm. Robert D. Sharp, USN


https://www.nga.mil/about/1596227427521_Vice_Admiral_Robert_D_Sharp_Director_.html

  Deputy Director                                          Stacey A. Dixon


https://www.nga.mil/about/1596228141343_Dr_Stacey_A_Dixon_Deputy_Director_.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA), formerly the National Imagery and Mapping Agency,

was established in 1996 and is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of
Defense for Intelligence. NGA is a DOD combat support agency and a member of the national intelligence

community. NGA's mission is to provide timely, relevant, and accurate geospatial intelligence in support of

our national security. Geospatial intelligence means the use and analysis of imagery to describe, assess,

and visually depict physical features and geographically referenced activities on the Earth. Headquartered

in Bethesda, MD, NGA has major facilities in the Washington, DC, Northern Virginia, and St. Louis, MO,

areas with NGA support teams worldwide.

https://www.nga.mil/contact/1595419637908_Contact_Us.html | Email: publicaffairs@nga.mil
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency,. 7500

Geoint Drive, MS N73-OCCAE, Springfield, Virginia 22150. Phone, 571-557-7300.



National Security                                      Agency                     /        Central
Security Service
Fort Meade, MD 20755-6248


301-688-6524

301-688-6198

http://www.nsa.gov


  DIRECTOR                                               Gen. Paul M. Nakasone, USA


https://www.nsa.gov/About-Us/Current-Leadership/Article-View/Article/1596277/paul-m-nakasone/

  Deputy Director                                        George C. Barnes


https://www.nsa.gov/About-Us/Current-Leadership/Article-View/Article/1596282/george-c-barnes/



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The National Security Agency (NSA) was established in 1952 and the Central Security Service (CSS) was

established in 1972. NSA/CSS is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of

Defense for Intelligence. As the Nation's cryptologic organization, NSA/CSS employs the Nation's premier

codemakers and codebreakers. It ensures an informed, alert, and secure environment for U.S. warfighters

and policymakers. The cryptologic resources of NSA/CSS unite to provide U.S. policymakers with

intelligence information derived from America's adversaries while protecting U.S. Government signals and

information systems from exploitation by those same adversaries.

https://www.nsa.gov/what-we-dohttps://www.nsa.gov/about/contact-us | Email: nsapao@nsa.gov
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, National Security Agency/Central Security Service,

Fort Meade, MD 20755-6248. Phone, 301-688-6524. Fax, 301-688-6198.


Pentagon Force Protection Agency
9000 Defense Pentagon, Washington, DC 20301


703-697-1001

http://www.pfpa.mil


  DIRECTOR                                              Daniel P. Walsh, Acting


https://www.pfpa.mil/Our-Agency/Leadership/Dr-Daniel-P-Walsh



Executive Directors


  Law Enforcement                                       Christopher Bargery


  Security Integration and Technology                   James A. Day

https://www.pfpa.mil/Our-Agency/Leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Pentagon Force Protection Agency (PFPA) was established in May 2002 in response to the events of

September 11, 2001, and subsequent terrorist threats facing the DOD workforce and facilities in the

National Capital Region (NCR). PFPA is under the authority, direction, and control of the Director,

Administration and Management, in the Office of the Secretary of Defense. PFPA provides force

protection, security, and law enforcement for the people, facilities, infrastructure, and other resources at

the Pentagon and for DOD activities and facilities within the NCR that are not under the jurisdiction of a

military department. Consistent with the national strategy on combating terrorism, PFPA addresses threats,

including chemical, biological, and radiological agents, through a strategy of prevention, preparedness,
detection, and response to ensure that the DOD workforce and facilities in the NCR are secure and

protected.

https://www.pfpa.mil/Our-Agency/Our-Mission-Visionhttps://www.pfpa.mil/Contact
For further information, contact the Pentagon Force Protection Agency, 9000 Defense Pentagon,

Washington, DC 20301. Phone, 703-697-1001.


Joint Service Schools
Defense Acquisition University
9820 Belvoir Road, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5565


703-805-2764

http://www.dau.edu/
  PRESIDENT                                            James P. Woosley


https://www.dau.edu/about/Documents/DAU_James%20Woolsey%20Bio_20170222.pdf

  Vice President                                       Frank L. Kelley


https://www.dau.edu/about/p/Mission-Organization



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Acquisition University (DAU), established pursuant to the Defense Acquisition

Workforce Improvement Act of 1990 (10 U.S.C. 1701 note), serves as the DOD center for acquisition,

technology, and logistics training; performance support; continuous learning; and knowledge

sharing. DAU is a unified structure with five regional campuses and the Defense Systems

Management College-School of Program Managers, which provides executive and international

acquisition training. DAU’s mission is to provide the training, career management, and services that

enable the acquisition, technology, and logistics community to make smart business decisions and

deliver timely and affordable capabilities to warfighters.

https://www.dau.edu/abouthttps://www.dau.edu/about/p/Contact-Us
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Defense Acquisition University, 9820 Belvoir

Road, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5565. Phone, 703-805-5412.


National Intelligence University
MAIN CAMPUS: Intelligence Community Campus—Bethesda, MD


301-243-2093

http://ni-u.edu/wp


  PRESIDENT                                            J. Scott Cameron


https://ni-u.edu/wp/about-niu/leadership-2/office-of-the-president

  Executive Vice President / Provost                   Terrence Markin


https://ni-u.edu/wp/about-niu/leadership-2



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The National Intelligence University, formerly the Joint Military Intelligence College, was established

in 1962. The College is a joint service interagency educational institution serving the intelligence

community and operates under the authority of the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency. Its
mission is to educate military and civilian intelligence professionals, conduct and disseminate

relevant intelligence research, and perform academic outreach regarding intelligence matters. The

College is authorized by Congress to award the bachelor of science in intelligence, master of science

and technology intelligence, and master of science of strategic intelligence. Courses are offered to

full-time students in a traditional daytime format and for part-time students in the evening, on

Saturday, and in an executive format (one weekend per month and a 2-week intensive summer

period).

https://ni-u.edu/wp/about-niuhttps://ni-u.edu/wp/contact | Email: niuadmit@dodiis.mil
For further information, contact the Office of Enrollment and Student Services, National Intelligence

University, Roberdeau Hall, Washington, DC 20511. Phone, 301-243-2094. Fax, 301-227-7067.



National Defense University
300 Fifth Avenue, Building 62, Fort Lesley J. McNair, DC 20319-5066


202-685-2649

http://www.ndu.edu


COLLEGE OF INFORMATION AND CYBERSPACE


http://cic.ndu.edu


COLLEGE OF INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS


http://cisa.ndu.edu


JOINT FORCES STAFF COLLEGE


http://jfsc.ndu.edu


NATIONAL WAR COLLEGE


http://nwc.ndu.edu


THE EISENHOWER SCHOOL FOR NATIONAL SECURITY AND RESOURCE STRATEGY


http://es.ndu.edu


  PRESIDENT                                         Vice Adm. Fritz Roegge, USN


https://www.ndu.edu/About/Leadership/Article-View/Article/1314417/vice-admiral-fritz-roegge-usn

  Provost                                           Alan Drimmer


  Senior Vice President                             Arnold Chacon
Chancellors


 College of Information and Cyberspace              Cassandra C. Lewis, Acting


 College of International Security Affairs          John Hoover, Acting




Commandants


 Joint Forces Staff College


 National War College


 The Eisenhower School for National Security
 and Resource Strategy

https://www.ndu.edu/About/Leadership



 The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.




NATIONAL DEFENSE UNIVERSITY
The mission of the National Defense University is to prepare military and civilian leaders from the

United States and other countries to evaluate national and international security challenges through

multidisciplinary educational and research programs, professional exchanges, and outreach.


The National Defense University was established in 1976 and comprises the following colleges and

programs: The Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy, National War

College, Joint Forces Staff College, College of Information and Cyberspace (formerly, Information

Resources Management College), College of International Security Affairs, Institute for National

Strategic Studies, Center for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, Center for Technology and

National Security Policy, International Student Management Office, Joint Reserve Affairs Center,

CAPSTONE, Security of Defense Corporate Fellows Program, NATO Education Center, Institute for

National Security Ethics and Leadership, Center for Joint Strategic Logistics Excellence, Center for

Applied Strategic Leaders, and Center for Complex Operations.

http://www.ndu.edu

 For further information, contact the Human Resources Directorate, National Defense
 University, 300 Fifth Avenue, Building 62, Fort Lesley J. McNair, DC 20319-5066. Phone,
 202-685-2169.
College of Information and Cyberspace
After a Joint Staff request, in response to a continually changing national security environment,

which includes new cyberspace and information related challenges, the Information Resources

Management College was renamed the College of Information and Cyberspace (CIC). The change

was confirmed by law in the Fiscal Year 2017 National Defense Authorization Act. The CIC offers

educational activities, services, and programs for preparing information professionals to play critical

roles in national security in the Age of Information.

https://cic.ndu.edu/Contact/Contact-Us/ | Email: CICOSS@ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Office of Student Services, College of Information
  and Cyberspace, 300 Fifth Avenue, Building 62, Fort McNair, DC 20319-5066. Phone, 202-
  685-6300.



College of International Security Affairs
The College of International Security Affairs (CISA) is one of NDU’s five colleges. CISA educates

students from across the international, interagency, and interservice communities. CISA’s primary

areas of concentration include counterterrorism, conflict management of stability of operations,

homeland security, and defense and international security studies. CISA is also home to NDU’s

International Counterterrorism Fellowship Program.

http://cisa.ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Office of Academic Affairs, College of International
  Security Affairs, 260 Fifth Avenue, Building 64, Fort McNair, DC 20319-5066. Phone, 202-
  685-7774.



Joint Forces Staff College
The Joint Forces Staff College (JFSC) is an intermediate- and senior-level joint college in the

professional military education system dedicated to the study of the principles, perspectives, and

techniques of joint operational-level planning and warfare. The mission of JFSC is to educate

national security professionals in the planning and execution of joint, multinational, and interagency

operations in order to instill a primary commitment to joint, multinational, and interagency

teamwork, attitudes, and perspectives. The College accomplishes this mission through four schools:

the Joint Advanced Warfighters School, the Joint and Combined Warfighting School, the Joint

Continuing and Distance Education School, and the Joint Command, Control, and Information

Operations School.

http://jfsc.ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Public Affairs Officer, Joint Forces Staff College,
  7800 Hampton Boulevard, Norfolk, VA 23511-1702. Phone, 757-443-6212. Fax, 757-443-
  6210.



National War College
The National War College provides education in national security policy to selected military officers

and career civil service employees of Federal departments and agencies concerned with national

security. It is the only senior service college with the primary mission of offering a course of study

that emphasizes national security policy formulation and the planning and implementation of

national strategy. Its 10-month academic program is an issue-centered study in U.S. national security.

The elective program is designed to permit each student to tailor his or her academic experience to

meet individual professional development needs.

http://nwc.ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Office of Administration, National War College, 300
  D Street SW., Building 61, Fort McNair, DC 20319-5078. Phone, 202-685-3674.



The Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy
The Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy provides graduate

level education to senior members of the U.S. Armed Forces, Government civilians, foreign nationals,

and professionals from the private industrial sector. The School prepares students to contribute to

national security strategy and policy, emphasizing the evaluation, marshaling, and managing of

national resources. Students who fulfill the degree requirements receive a Master of Science degree

in national resource strategy.

http://es.ndu.edu/Home.aspx

  For further information, contact the Director of Operations, Dwight D. Eisenhower
  School for National Security and Resource Strategy, 408 Fourth Avenue, Building 59,
  Fort McNair, DC 20319-5062. Phone, 202-685-4333.




Uniformed Services University of the
Health Sciences
4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814-4799


301-295-3190

http://www.usuhs.edu


  PRESIDENT                                          Maj. Gen. Richard W. Thomas, USA (retired)


https://www.usuhs.edu/sites/default/files/media/vpe/pdf/thomas_richard_w_edit_17_nov_2020.pdf



Senior Vice Presidents for University Programs


  Southern Region                                    Lt. Gen. Thomas W. Travis, USAF (retired)
        Western Region                                       Rear Adm. William Roberts, USN (retired)

     https://www.usuhs.edu/pres/leadership



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



     Authorized by act of September 21, 1972 (10 U.S.C. 2112), the Uniformed Services University of the

     Health Sciences was established to educate career-oriented medical officers for the Military

     Departments and the Public Health Service. The University currently incorporates the F. Edward

     Hebert School of Medicine (including graduate and continuing education programs) and the

     Graduate School of Nursing.


     Students are selected by procedures recommended by the Board of Regents and prescribed by the

     Secretary of Defense. The actual selection is carried out by a faculty committee on admissions and is

     based upon motivation and dedication to a career in the uniformed services and an overall appraisal

     of the personal and intellectual characteristics of the candidates without regard to sex, race, religion,

     or national origin. Applicants must be U.S. citizens.


     Medical school matriculants will be commissioned officers in one of the uniformed services. They

     must meet the physical and personal qualifications for such a commission and must give evidence of

     a strong commitment to serving as a uniformed medical officer. The graduating medical student is

     required to serve a period of obligation of not less than 7 years, excluding graduate medical

     education.


     Students of the Graduate School of Nursing must be commissioned officers of the Army, Navy, Air

     Force, or Public Health Service prior to application. Graduate nursing students must serve a

     commitment determined by their respective service.

     http://www.usuhs.mil
     For further information, contact the President, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences,

     4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814-4799. Phone, 301-295-3013.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act
No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                Department of the Air Force




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE
    1690 Air Force Pentagon, Washington, DC 20330-1670


    703-697-6061

    http://www.af.mil




    AIR FORCE SECRETARIAT
 SECRETARY OF THE AIR FORCE                                    Dr. Heather A. Wilson


 Under Secretary of the Air Force                              Lisa S. Disbrow




 Administrative Assistant                                      Patricia J. Zarodkiewicz


 Auditor General                                               Daniel F. McMillin


 General Counsel                                               Joseph M. McDade, Jr.


 Information Dominance and Chief Information Officer (A6)      Lt. Gen. William J. Bender


 Inspector General                                             Lt. Gen. Anthony J. Rock


 Legislative Liaison                                           Maj. Gen. Steven L. Basham




 Assistant Secretary, Acquisition                              Darlene Costello


 Assistant Secretary, Financial Management and Comptroller     Doug Bennett


 Assistant Secretary, Installations, Environment, and Energy   Richard K. Hartley


 Assistant Secretary, Manpower and Reserve Affairs             Daniel R. Sitterly




 Deputy Under Secretary for Management                         Marilyn M. Thomas


 Deputy Under Secretary, International Affairs                 Heidi H. Grant


 Deputy Under Secretary, Space                                 Winston Beauchamp


 Director, Air Force Small Business Programs                   Mark S. Teskey


                                                               Brig. Gen. Edward
 Director, Public Affairs
                                                               W. Thomas, Jr.




AIR STAFF


 Chief of Staff                                                Gen. David L. Goldfein


 Vice Chief of Staff                                           Gen. Stephen W. Wilson
Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force                                      CMSAF Kaleth O. Wright




Assistant Vice Chief of Staff                                               Lt. Gen. Stayce D. Harris


Judge Advocate General                                                      Lt. Gen. Christopher F. Burne


Surgeon General                                                             Lt. Gen. Mark A. Ediger




Chief of Air Force Reserve                                                  Lt. Gen. Maryanne Miller


Chief of Chaplains                                                          Maj. Gen. Dondi Constin


Chief of Safety                                                             Maj. Gen. Andrew Mueller


Chief of Staff, Strategic Deterrence and Nuclear Integration (A10)          Lt. Gen. Jack Weinstein


Chief Scientist                                                             Greg L. Zacharias




Deputy Chief of Staff, Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (A2)   Lt. Gen. VeraLinn Jamieson


Deputy Chief of Staff, Logistics, Engineering and Force Protection (A4)     Lt. Gen. John B. Cooper


Deputy Chief of Staff, Manpower, Personnel and Services (A1)                Lt. Gen. Gina Grosso


Deputy Chief of Staff, Operations, Plans and Requirements (A3)              Lt. Gen. Mark C. Nowland


Deputy Chief of Staff, Strategic Plans and Programs (A5/8)                  Lt. Gen. Jerry D. Harris, Jr.




Director, Air Force Sexual Assault Prevention and Response                  Maj. Gen. James C. Johnson


Director, Air National Guard                                                Lt. Gen. L. Scott Rice


Director, History and Museums Policies and Programs                         Walter A. Grudzinskas


Director, Studies and Analyses, Assessments (A9)                            Kevin E. Williams


Director, Test and Evaluation                                               Devin Cate




MAJOR COMMANDS
  Air Combat Command                                                                        Gen. James M. Holmes


  Air Education and Training Command                                                        Lt. Gen. Darryl L. Roberson


  Air Force Global Strike Command                                                           Gen. Robin Rand


  Air Force Materiel Command                                                                Gen. Ellen M. Pawlikowski


  Air Force Reserve Command                                                                 Lt. Gen. Maryanne Miller


  Air Force Space Command                                                                   Gen. John W. Raymond


  Air Force Special Operations Command                                                      Lt. Gen. Marshall B. Webb


  Air Mobility Command                                                                      Gen. Carlton D. Everhart II


                                                                                            Gen. Terrence
  Pacific Air Forces
                                                                                            J. O'Shaughnessy


  U.S. Air Forces in Europe                                                                 Gen. Tod D. Wolters

The Department of the Air Force defends the United States by providing air, space, and cyberspace capabilities.

Organizational Chart
The Department of the Air Force (USAF) was established as part of the National Military Establishment by the National

Security Act of 1947 (61 Stat. 502) and came into being on September 18, 1947. The National Security Act Amendments

of 1949 redesignated the National Military Establishment as the Department of Defense, established it as an executive

department, and made the Department of the Air Force a military department within the Department of Defense (63

Stat. 578). The Department of the Air Force is separately organized under the Secretary of the Air Force. It operates

under the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary of Defense (10 U.S.C. 8010). The Department comprises the

Office of the Secretary of the Air Force, the Air Staff, and field organizations.


Secretary
The Secretary and Secretariat Staff oversee matters of organization, training, logistical support, maintenance, welfare

of personnel, administrative, recruiting, research and development, and other activities that the President or Secretary

of Defense prescribes.

http://www.af.mil/AboutUs/AirForceSeniorLeaders/SECAF.aspx

Air Staff
The Air Staff assists the Secretary, the Under Secretary, the Assistant Secretaries, and the Chief of Staff in carrying out

their responsibilities.


Field Organizations
The major commands, field operating agencies, and direct reporting units constitute the field organizations of the Air

Force. They are organized primarily on a functional basis in the United States and on a geographic basis overseas.
These commands are responsible for accomplishing certain phases of the Air Force's worldwide activities. They also

organize, administer, equip, and train subordinate elements to accomplish assigned missions.




MAJOR COMMANDS: CONTINENTAL U.S. COMMANDS

Air Combat Command
The Air Combat Command operates CONUS-based, combat-coded fighter and attack aircraft. It organizes, trains,

equips, and maintains combat-ready forces for rapid deployment and employment while ensuring strategic air

defense forces are ready to meet the challenges of peacetime air sovereignty and wartime air defense.

http://www.acc.af.mil

Air Education and Training Command
The Air Education and Training Command recruits, assesses, commissions, educates, and trains Air Force enlisted and

officer personnel. It provides basic military training, initial and advanced technical training, flying training, and

professional military and post-secondary education. The Command also conducts Air Force security assistance, joint,

medical service, and readiness training.

http://www.aetc.af.mil

Air Force Global Strike Command
The Air Force Global Strike Command is responsible for the Nation's three intercontinental ballistic missile wings; the

Air Force's bomber force, including the B–1, B–2, and B–52 wings; the Long Range Strike Bomber program; and

operational and maintenance support to organizations within the nuclear enterprise.

http://www.afgsc.af.mil

Air Force Materiel Command
The Air Force Materiel Command delivers expeditionary capabilities through research, development, test, evaluation,

acquisition, modernization, and sustainment of aerospace weapon systems throughout their life cycles. Those weapon

systems include Air Force fighter, bomber, cargo, and attack fleets and armament. They also include net-centric

command and control assets; intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance assets; and combat support information

systems. The command oversees basic research and development that support air, space, and cyberspace capabilities.

The command relies on an integrated, efficient life cycle management approach to ensure the best possible support to

warfighters.

http://www.afmc.af.mil

Air Force Reserve Command
The Air Force Reserve Command provides the Air Force with approximately 14 percent of the total force and

approximately 4 percent of the manpower budget. Reservists support air, space, and cyberspace superiority;

command and control; global integrated intelligence surveillance reconnaissance; global precision attack; nuclear

deterrence operations; special operations; rapid global mobility; and personnel recovery. They also perform aircraft

flight testing, space operations, and aerial port operations, as well as communications, civil engineer, military training,
mobility support, security forces, services, and transportation missions.

http://www.afrc.af.mil

Air Force Space Command
The Air Force Space Command provides space and cyberspace capabilities such as missile warning, space control,

spacelift, satellite operations, and designated cyberspace activities.

http://www.afspc.af.mil

Air Force Special Operations Command
The Air Force Special Operations Command provides the air component of U.S. Special Operations Command. The

command deploys specialized air power and delivers special operations combat power wherever and whenever

needed. It provides agile combat support, combat search and rescue, information warfare, precision aerospace fires,

psychological operations, and specialized aerospace mobility and refueling to unified commands.

http://www.afsoc.af.mil

Air Mobility Command
The Air Mobility Command provides airlift, air refueling, special air missions, and aeromedical evacuation for U.S.

forces. It also airlifts forces to theater commands to support wartime tasking.

http://www.amc.af.mil



MAJOR COMMANDS: OVERSEAS COMMANDS

Pacific Air Forces
The Pacific Air Forces deliver rapid and precise air, space, and cyberspace capabilities to protect the United States, its

territories, and its allies and partners; provide integrated air and missile warning and defense; promote interoperability

throughout the Pacific area of responsibility; maintain strategic access and freedom of movement across all domains;

and posture to respond across the full spectrum of military contingencies to restore regional security.

http://www.pacaf.af.mil

U.S. Air Forces in Europe
The U.S. Air Forces in Europe (USAFE) execute the Air Force, European Command, and Africa Command missions with

forward-based air power and infrastructure to conduct and enable theater and global operations. The USAFE direct air

operations in a theater that spans three continents, covers more than 19 million square miles, contains 104

independent states, produces more than a quarter of the world's gross domestic product, and comprises more than a

quarter of Earth's population.

http://www.usafe.af.mil



FIELD OPERATING AGENCIES

Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation
The Air Force Agency for Modeling and Simulation provides seamless integration of cross-functional live, virtual, and

constructive operational training environments that allow war fighters to maximize performance and optimize

decisionmaking. The agency works with combatant commands, major commands, the Air Force Reserve Command,

the Air National Guard, the Air Force headquarters, direct reporting units, and field operating agencies to provide the

necessary development and implementation standards for common access and interoperability within the live, virtual,

and constructive domains for efficient and secure global operations.

http://www.afams.af.mil

Air Force Audit Agency
The Air Force Audit Agency provides all levels of Air Force management with independent, objective, and quality audit

services by reviewing and promoting operational economy, effectiveness, and efficiency; evaluating programs and

activities to achieve intended results; and assessing and improving financial reporting.

http://www.afaa.af.mil

Air Force Cost Analysis Agency
The Air Force Cost Analysis Agency performs nonadvocate cost analyses for major space, aircraft, and information

system programs. The agency supports the departmentwide cost analysis program by developing and maintaining

cost-estimating tools, techniques, and infrastructure. It provides guidance, analytical support, quantitative risk analyses,

and special studies to improve long-range planning, force structure, analysis of alternatives, and lifecycle cost analyses.


Air Force Flight Standards Agency
The Air Force Flight Standards Agency performs worldwide inspection of airfields, navigation systems, and instrument

approaches. It provides flight standards to develop Air Force instrument requirements and certifies procedures and

directives for cockpit display and navigation systems. It also provides air traffic control and airlift procedures and

evaluates air traffic control systems and airspace management procedures.


Air Force Historical Research Agency
The Air Force Historical Research Agency serves as a repository for Air Force historical records and maintains research

facilities for scholars and the general public.

http://www.afhra.af.mil/index.asp

Air Force Inspection Agency
The Air Force Inspection Agency provides independent inspection, evaluation, oversight, training and analysis to

improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the Air Force.

http://www.af.mil/AboutUs/FactSheets/Display/tabid/224/Article/104564/air-force-inspection-agency.aspx

Air Force Legal Operations Agency
The Air Force Legal Operations Agency includes all senior defense, senior trial, appellate defense, and Government

counsel in the Air Force, as well as all Air Force civil litigators who defend the Air Force against civil lawsuits that claim

damages and seek other remedies in contracts, environmental, labor, and tort litigation.


Air Force Manpower Analysis Agency
The Air Force Manpower Analysis Agency provides analysis and develops tools for helping Air Force and Department

of Defense senior leaders make decisions affecting total force manpower requirements. The agency supports the

Under Secretary of the Air Force for Management's efforts to improve processes and carries out departmentwide

transformation initiatives. It also oversees human capital planning and training to develop and sustain manpower-

specific capabilities at adequate levels.

http://www.af.mil/AboutUs/FactSheets/Display/tabid/224/Article/104598/air-force-manpower-agency.aspx

Air Force Medical Operations Agency
The Air Force Medical Operations Agency assists the Air Force Surgeon General in developing plans, programs, and

policies for aerospace medicine, bioenvironmental engineering, clinical investigations, family advocacy, health

promotion, military public health, quality assurance, radioactive material management, and the medical service.

http://www.airforcemedicine.af.mil/afmoa

Air Force Medical Support Agency
The Air Force Medical Support Agency provides consultative support and policy development for the Air Force

Surgeon General in medical force management. It also supports ground and air expeditionary medical capabilities

used in global, homeland security, and force health protection, as well as all aspects of medical and dental services,

aerospace medicine operations, and medical support functions.


Air Force Mortuary Affairs Operations
The Air Force Mortuary Affairs Operations, a field operating agency of the Deputy Chief of Staff for Manpower,

Personnel and Services, works to support the entire Department of Defense and other Federal entities ensuring

dignity, honor and respect to the fallen, and care, service, and support to their families.

http://www.mortuary.af.mil

Air Force Office of Special Investigations
The Air Force Office of Special Investigations identifies, exploits, and neutralizes criminal, terrorist, and intelligence

threats to the U.S. Air Force, Department of Defense, and U.S. Government. Its primary responsibilities are criminal

investigations and counterintelligence services. It also protects critical technologies and information, detects and

mitigates threats, provides global specialized services, conducts major criminal investigations, and offensively engages

foreign adversaries and threats.

http://www.osi.af.mil

Air Force Operations Group
The Air Force Operations Group collects, processes, analyzes, and communicates information, enabling situational

awareness of USAF operations worldwide. This awareness facilitates timely, responsive, and effective decisionmaking

by senior USAF leaders and combatant commanders.


Air Force Personnel Center
The Air Force Personnel Center ensures that commanders around the world have enough skilled Air Force personnel

to carry out the mission. The center also runs programs affecting the entire life cycle of military and civilian Air Force
personnel from accession through retirement.

http://www.af.mil/AboutUs/FactSheets/Display/tabid/224/Article/104554/air-force-personnel-center.aspx

Air Force Program Executive Offices
The Air Force Program Executive Offices (PEOs) oversee the execution of a program throughout its entire lifecycle.

While the PEOs are not part of USAF headquarters, they report on acquisition and program-specific issues directly to

the Air Force Service Acquisition Executive and the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Acquisition. Air Force PEOs

are currently responsible for diverse programs in a range of areas: aircraft, command and control and combat support

systems, Joint Strike Fighter, and weapons.

http://ww3.safaq.hq.af.mil/organizations/index.asp

Air Force Public Affairs Agency
The Air Force Public Affairs Agency manages the Air Force media center. The center collects, archives, and distributes

Air Force imagery; manages licensing and branding of Air Force trademarks; provides policy guidance and oversight

for the Air Force's Web site and social media programs; operates the Air Force's official social media program;

composes original musical arrangements for Air Force regional bands; and develops training curricula and

requirements for the Air Force's nearly 6,000 public affairs practitioners.

http://www.publicaffairs.af.mil

Air Force Review Boards Agency
The Air Force Review Boards Agency manages various military and civilian appellate processes for the Secretary of the

Air Force.

http://www.af.mil/AboutUs/FactSheets/Display/tabid/224/Article/104511/air-force-review-boards-agency.aspx

Air Force Safety Center
The Air Force Safety Center promotes safety to reduce the number and severity of mishaps. It also supports combat

readiness by developing, implementing, executing, and evaluating Air Force aviation, ground, weapons, nuclear surety,

space, and system programs.

http://www.safety.af.mil

Air National Guard Readiness Center
The Air National Guard Readiness Center performs the operational and technical tasks associated with manning,

equipping, and training Air National Guard units to meet required readiness levels.

http://www.angrc.ang.af.mil

National Air and Space Intelligence Center
The National Air and Space Intelligence Center (NASIC) assesses foreign air and space threats. It creates integrated,

predictive intelligence in the domains of air, space, and cyberspace to support military operations, force

modernization, and policymaking. NASIC analyzes data on foreign aerospace forces and weapons systems to

determine performance characteristics, capabilities, vulnerabilities, and intentions. These assessments are used to

shape national security and defense policies. NASIC personnel also play a role in weapons treaty negotiations and

verification.
http://www.nasic.af.mil



DIRECT REPORTING UNITS

Air Force District of Washington
The Air Force District of Washington supports Headquarters Air Force and other Air Force units in the National Capital

Region.

http://www.afdw.af.mil

Air Force Operational Test and Evaluation Center
The Air Force Operational Test and Evaluation Center plans and conducts test and evaluation procedures to determine

operational effectiveness and suitability of new or modified USAF systems and their capacity to meet mission needs.

http://www.afotec.af.mil

U.S. Air Force Academy
The U.S. Air Force Academy provides academic and military instruction and experience to prepare future USAF career

officers. The Academy offers Bachelor of Science degrees in 31 academic majors, and upon completion, graduates

receive commissions as second lieutenants.

http://www.usafa.af.mil



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
Members of the Air Force civilian service work side by side with active duty airmen. They are a diverse group of

professionals: contract specialists, engineers, human resources specialists, intelligence experts, mechanics, scientists,

teachers, and more.

https://afciviliancareers.com/content/home-air-force-civilian-service

Factsheets
Factsheets contain current information and statistics on Air Force careers, organizations, inventory, and equipment—

including aircraft and weapons.

http://www.af.mil/AboutUs/FactSheets.aspx | Email: DMAPublicAffairs@mail.mil

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The Freedom of Information and Privacy Act Office manages the policy and procedural guidance for the Freedom of

Information Act (FOIA), Privacy Act (PA) and Quality of Information (QIP) programs in accordance with applicable laws.

http://www.foia.af.mil/Welcome.aspx
Links to FOIA requester service centers are available online. The service centers are grouped, by base and by

command, in two lists.
http://www.foia.af.mil/Offices

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Air Force provides answers to FAQs on its web-site.

http://www.af.mil/Questions.aspx

History
For over a century, the Air Force has relied on the bravery and skill of American airmen to protect the United States in

the air, space, and cyberspace. An overview of that history is available online.

https://www.airforce.com/mission/history

Inspector General (IG)
The IG receives and investigates complaints of abuse, fraud, and waste involving Air Force personnel or programs.

http://www.af.mil/InspectorGeneralComplaints.aspx | Email: usaf.ighotline@mail.mil

Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR)
The Air Force's web-site features a section dedicated to ISR activities and news.

http://www.af.mil/ISR.aspx

Joining the Air Force
To learn about its mission, how to join, and about educational, training, and career opportunities that enlistment

offers, visit the Air Force's recruitment Web site.

https://www.airforce.com/how-to-join

Medal of Honor
Members of the Air Force and its predecessor organizations have earned Medals of Honor. The medal is awarded for

conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of life above and beyond the call of duty.

http://www.af.mil/MedalofHonor.aspx

News
The Air Force posts announcements, art, commentaries, news items, and photos on its Web site. Air Force TV and

radio news are also accessible online.

http://www.af.mil/News.aspx | Email: DMAPublicAffairs@mail.mil
"Air Force Magazine" is posted online. Beginning in January 2013, full issues are available. Beginning in November

2015, HTML5 versions are available .

http://www.airforcemag.com/MagazineArchive/Pages/default.aspx

Reading List
The Air Force Chief of Staff's annual reading list (2016) is available on the Department's Web site. An archives of the

reading list, starting with the year 2007, is also available online.

http://static.dma.mil/usaf/csafreadinglist/01_books.html

Sexual Assault
    The "Sexual Assault Prevention and Response" (SAPR) Web page has information, policies, and reports on sexual

    assault, as well as links leading to additional resources within the Department of Defense (DOD) community and to

    external resources.

    http://www.af.mil/SAPR.aspx
    The "SAPR" Web page also provides access to the Safe Helpline—an anonymous, confidential, and free crisis support

    service for DOD community members who have been affected by sexual assault. Phone, 877-995-5247.

    https://www.safehelpline.org/about-dod-safe-helpline

    Social Media
    The Air Force has a blog and maintains a social media presence on Facebook, Flickr, Instagram, Twitter, and YouTube.

    The Web site provides shortcuts to the different platforms as well as social media resources.

    http://www.af.mil/AFSites/SocialMediaSites.aspx

    Strategic Documents
    The site contains various “CSAF Focus Area", and other strategic documents in Portable Document Format (PDF).

    http://www.af.mil/Airpower4America.aspx

    Suicide Prevention
    The "Suicide Prevention" Web page promotes resources like the ACE (Ask, Care, and Escort) Card and provides access,

    by phone or confidential online chat, to the Military Crisis Line. Phone, 800-273-8255.

    http://www.af.mil/SuicidePrevention.aspx

    Web sites
    A directory of all registered Air Force Web sites is available online.

    http://www.af.mil/ContactUs.aspx
    For further information concerning the Department of the Air Force, contact the Office of the Director of Public Affairs,

    Department of the Air Force, 1690 Air Force Pentagon, Washington, DC 20330-1670. Phone, 703-697-6061.

    http://www.af.mil/ContactUs.aspx

        For further information concerning the Department of the Air Force, contact the Office of the Director of
        Public Affairs, Department of the Air Force, 1690 Air Force Pentagon, Washington, DC 20330-1670. Phone,
        703-697-6061.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy
Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                  Department of the Army




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY
    The Pentagon, Washington, DC 20310


    703-695-6518

    http://www.army.mil




    EXECUTIVE OFFICE
 SECRETARY OF THE ARMY                                                    Daniel Driscoll


 Under Secretary of the Army                                              Karl F. Schneider, Acting




 Administrative Assistant to the Secretary of the Army                    Gerald B. O'Keefe


 Auditor General                                                          Anne L. Richards


 Deputy Under Secretary of the Army                                       Thomas E. Hawley


 Director, Small Business Programs                                        Tommy L. Marks


 Executive Director, Army National Military Cemeteries                    Patrick K. Hallinan


 General Counsel                                                          (vacancy)


 Inspector General                                                        Lt. Gen. David E. Quantock




 Assistant Secretary of the Army, Acquisition, Logistics and Technology   Steffanie Easter


 Assistant Secretary of the Army, Civil Works                             Jo-Ellen Darcy


 Assistant Secretary of the Army, Financial Management / Comptroller      Robert M. Speer


 Assistant Secretary of the Army, Installations, Energy and Environment   Katherine G. Hammack


 Assistant Secretary of the Army, Manpower and Reserve Affairs            Debra S. Wada




 Chief Information Officer (G–6)                                          Maj. Gen. Bruce T. Crawford


                                                                          Maj. Gen. Laura
 Chief of Legislative Liaison
                                                                          E. Richardson


 Chief of Public Affairs                                                  Brig. Gen. Omar J. Jones IV




OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF STAFF


 Chief of Staff of the Army                                               Gen. Mark A. Milley


 Vice Chief of Staff of the Army                                          Gen. Daniel B. Allyn
 Director of the Army Staff                          Lt. Gen. Gary H. Cheek


 Vice Director of the Army Staff                     Steven J. Redmann




ARMY STAFF


 Sergeant Major of the Army                          SMA Daniel A. Dailey


 Chief of the National Guard Bureau                  Gen. Joseph Lengyel




 Assistant Chief of Staff, Installation Management   Lt. Gen. Gwen Bingham


 Chief of Army Reserve                               Lt. Gen. Charles D. Luckey


 Chief of Chaplains                                  Maj. Gen. Paul K. Hurley


 Chief of Engineers                                  Lt. Gen. Todd T. Semonite


 Director, Army National Guard                       Lt. Gen. Timothy J. Kadavy


 Judge Advocate General                              Lt. Gen. Flora D. Darpino


 Provost Marshal General                             Maj. Gen. Mark S. Inch


 Surgeon General                                     Lt. Gen. Nadja Y. West




 DEPUTY CHIEFS OF STAFF


 Financial Management (G–8)                          Lt. Gen. John M. Murray


 Intelligence (G–2)                                  Lt. Gen. Robert P. Ashley, Jr.


 Logistics (G–4)                                     Lt. Gen. Gustave F. Perna


 Operations (G–3/5/7)                                Lt. Gen. Joseph Anderson


 Personnel (G–1)                                     Lt. Gen. James C. McConville




COMMANDS
 COMMANDING GENERALS


 U.S. Army Forces Command                                             Gen. Robert B. Abrams


 U.S. Army Materiel Command                                           Gen. Gustave F. Perna


 U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command                              Gen. David G. Perkins




ARMY SERVICE COMPONENT COMMANDS


 COMMANDING GENERALS


                                                                      Maj. Gen. Joseph
 U.S. Army Africa / Southern European Task Force
                                                                      P. Harrington


 U.S. Army Central                                                    Lt. Gen. Michael X. Garrett


 U.S. Army Europe                                                     Lt. Gen. Ben Hodges


 U.S. Army North                                                      Lt. Gen. Jeffrey S. Buchanan


 U.S. Army Pacific                                                    Gen. Robert B. Brown


 U.S. Army South                                                      Maj. Gen. Clarence K.K. Chinn


 U.S. Army Military Surface Deployment and Distribution Command       Maj. Gen. Susan A. Davidson


 U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense Command/Army Strategic Command   Lt. Gen. David L. Mann


 U.S. Army Special Operations Command                                 Lt. Gen. Kenneth E. Tovo




DIRECT REPORTING UNITS


 Commandant, U.S. Army War College                                    Maj. Gen. William E. Rapp


 Commander, Second Army                                               Lt. Gen. Edward C. Cardon


 Commander, U.S. Army Accessions Support Brigade                      Col. Janet R. Holliday


 Director, U.S. Army Acquisition Support Center                       Craig A. Spisak


 Executive Director, Arlington National Cemetery                      Patrick K. Hallinan
  Superintendent, U.S. Military Academy                                                  Lt. Gen. Robert L. Caslen, Jr.




  COMMANDING GENERALS


  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers                                                           Lt. Gen. Todd T. Semonite


  U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Command                                               Maj. Gen. Mark S. Inch


  U.S. Army Installation Management Command                                              Lt. Gen. Kenneth R. Dahl


                                                                                         Maj. Gen. Christopher
  U.S. Army Intelligence and Security Command
                                                                                         S. Ballard


  U.S. Army Medical Command                                                              Lt. Gen. Nadja Y. West


  U.S. Army Military District of Washington                                              Maj. Gen. Bradley A. Becker


  U.S. Army Reserve Command                                                              Lt. Gen. Charles D. Luckey


  U.S. Army Test and Evaluation Command                                                  Maj. Gen. Daniel L. Karbler

The Department of the Army equips, organizes, and trains active duty and reserve forces to maintain peace and security

and to defend the Nation; administers programs to mitigate erosion and flooding, to develop water resources, to

improve waterway navigation, and to protect the environment; and provides military and natural disaster relief

assistance to Federal, State, and local government agencies.

Organizational Chart
The Continental Congress established the American Continental Army, now called the United States Army, on June 14,

1775, more than a year before the Declaration of Independence. The Department of War was established as an

executive department at the seat of Government by act approved August 7, 1789 (1 Stat. 49). The Secretary of War was

established as its head. The National Security Act of 1947 (50 U.S.C. 401) created the National Military Establishment,

and the Department of War was designated the Department of the Army. The title of its Secretary became Secretary

of the Army (5 U.S.C. 171). The National Security Act Amendments of 1949 (63 Stat. 578) provided that the Department

of the Army be a military department within the Department of Defense.




SECRETARY
The Secretary of the Army is the senior official of the Department of the Army. Subject to the direction, authority, and

control of the President as Commander in Chief and of the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of the Army is

responsible for and has the authority to conduct all affairs of the Department of the Army, including its organization,

administration, operation, efficiency, and such other activities as may be prescribed by the President or the Secretary

of Defense as authorized by law.

https://www.army.mil/leaders/sa
  For further information, call 703-695-2422.




ARMY STAFF
The Army Staff is the Secretary of the Army's military staff. It makes preparations for deploying the Army, including

recruiting, organizing, supplying, equipping, training, mobilizing, and demobilizing it, to support the Secretary or the

Chief of Staff in his or her executive capacity; investigates and reports on the efficiency of the Army and its preparation

for military operations; acts as the agent of the Secretary of the Army and the Chief of Staff in coordinating the action

of all organizations of the Department of the Army; and performs other nonstatutory duties that the Secretary of the

Army may prescribe.




PROGRAM AREAS

Civil Functions
Civil functions of the Department of the Army include the administration of Arlington and the U.S. Soldiers' and

Airmen's Home National Cemeteries and the Civil Works Program—the Nation's principal Federal water resources

development activity involving dams, reservoirs, levees, harbors, waterways, locks, and other engineering structures.

http://www.army.mil/asacw

History
This area includes advisory and coordination service provided to the Army Secretariat and staff on all historical

matters: the formulation and execution of the Army historical program, the maintenance of the organizational history

of Army units, the preparation and publication of histories that the Army requires, and historical properties.

http://www.history.army.mil | Email: usarmy.mcnair.cmh.mbx.answers@mail.mil

Installations
This area consists of policies, procedures, and resources for the management of installations to ensure the availability

of efficient and affordable base services and infrastructure in support of military missions. It includes the identification

and validation of resource requirements, the review of facilities requirements and stationing, and program and budget

development and justification. Other activities include support for base operations; base realignment and closure;

competitive sourcing; energy security and sustainability; environmental programs; housing; military construction;

morale, recreation, and welfare; and real property maintenance and repair.

https://www.army.mil/info/organization/unitsandcommands/commandstructure/imcom

Intelligence
This area includes management of Army intelligence with responsibility for policy formulation, planning, programming,

budgeting, evaluation, and oversight of intelligence activities. The Army Staff is responsible for monitoring relevant

foreign intelligence developments and foreign disclosure; imagery, signals, human, open-source, measurement, and

signatures intelligence; counterintelligence; threat models and simulations; and security countermeasures.
https://www.army.mil/inscom/?from=org

Medical
This area includes management of health services for the Army and as directed for other services, agencies, and

organizations; health standards for Army personnel; health professional education and training; career management

authority over commissioned and warrant officer personnel of the Army Medical Department; medical research,

materiel development, testing, and evaluation; policies concerning health aspects of Army environmental programs

and prevention of disease; and planning, programming, and budgeting for Armywide health services.

https://www.army.mil/armymedicine/?from=org

Military Operations and Plans
This includes Army forces strategy formation; mid-range, long-range, and regional strategy application; arms control,

negotiation, and disarmament; national security affairs; joint service matters; net assessment; politico-military affairs;

force mobilization, demobilization, and planning; programming structuring, development, analysis, requirements, and

management; operational readiness; overall roles and missions; collective security; individual and unit training;

psychological operations; information operations; unconventional warfare; counterterrorism; operations security; signal

security; special plans; equipment development and approval; nuclear and chemical matters; civil affairs; military

support of civil defense; civil disturbance; domestic actions; command and control; automation and communications

programs and activities; management of the program for law enforcement, correction, and crime prevention for

military members of the Army; special operations forces; foreign language and distance learning; and physical security.


Reserve Components
This area includes management of individual and unit readiness and mobilization for Reserve Components, which

consist of the Army National Guard and U.S. Army Reserve.

https://www.army.mil/reserve/?from=org

Religious
This area includes departmentwide management of religious and moral leadership and chaplain support activities;

religious ministrations, religious education, pastoral care, and counseling for Army military personnel; liaison with

ecclesiastical agencies; chapel construction requirements and design approval; and career management of clergymen

serving in the Chaplains Corps.

http://www.army.mil/chaplaincorps



ARMY COMMANDS

U.S. Army Forces Command
Headquartered at Fort Bragg, NC, U.S. Army Forces Command (FORSCOM) prepares conventional forces to provide a

sustained flow of trained and ready land power to combatant commanders in defense of the Nation at home and

abroad.

https://www.army.mil/info/organization/unitsandcommands/commandstructure/forscom/?from=org
  For further information, contact the FORSCOM Public Affairs Office. Phone, 910-570-7200.



U.S. Army Materiel Command
U.S. Army Materiel Command (AMC) is the Army's premier provider of materiel readiness—technology, acquisition

support, materiel development, logistics power projection, and sustainment—to the total force across the spectrum of

joint military operations. Headquartered at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama, AMC's missions include the development of

weapon systems, advanced research on future technologies, and maintenance and distribution of spare parts and

equipment. AMC works closely with program executive offices, industry, academia, and other Military Services and

Government agencies to develop, test, and acquire equipment that soldiers and units need to accomplish their

missions.

https://www.army.mil/info/organization/unitsandcommands/commandstructure/amc/?from=org

  For further information, contact the AMC Public Affairs Office. Phone, 256-450-7978.



U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command
Headquartered in Fort Eustis, VA, U.S. Army Training and Doctrine Command (TRADOC) develops, educates, and

trains soldiers, civilians, and leaders; supports unit training; and designs, builds, and integrates a versatile mix of

capabilities, formations, and equipment to strengthen the U.S. Army as a force of decisive action.

https://www.army.mil/tradoc/?from=org

  For further information, contact the TRADOC Public Affairs Office. Phone, 757-501-5876.




ARMY SERVICE COMPONENT COMMANDS

U.S. Army Africa / Southern European Task Force
U.S. Army Africa (USARAF) / Southern European Task Force (SETAF) is the Army service component command for U.S.

Africa Command. It supports U.S. Africa Command operations, employs Army forces as partners, builds sustainable

capacity, and supports the joint force to disrupt transnational threats and promote regional security in Africa.

http://www.usaraf.army.mil

  For further information, contact the USARAF / SETAF Public Affairs Office. Phone, 011-39-0444-71-8341 or
  8342.



U.S. Army Central
U.S. Army Central (ARCENT) shapes the U.S. Central Command area of responsibility in 20 countries through forward

land power presence and security cooperation engagements that ensure access, build partner capacity, and develop

relationships. ARCENT also provides flexible options and strategic depth to the U.S. combatant commander and sets

the conditions for improved regional security and stability.
http://www.arcent.army.mil | Email: usarmy.shaw.usarcent.mbx.public-affairs@mail.mil

  For further information, contact the USARCENT Public Affairs Office. Phone, 803-885-8266.



U.S. Army Europe
U.S. Army Europe (USAREUR) provides the principal land component for U.S. European Command throughout a 51-

country area. As the U.S. Army’s largest forward-deployed expeditionary force, USAREUR supports NATO and U.S.

bilateral, multinational, and unilateral objectives. It supports U.S. Army forces in the European Command area; receives

and assists in the reception, staging, and onward movement and integration of U.S. forces; establishes, operates, and

expands operational lines of communication; ensures regional security, access, and stability through presence and

security cooperation; and supports U.S. combatant commanders and joint and combined commanders.

http://www.eur.army.mil

  For further information, contact the USAREUR Public Affairs Office. Phone, 011-49-611-143-537-0005 or
  0006.



U.S. Army North
U.S. Army North (USARNORTH) supports U.S. Northern Command, the unified command responsible for defending

the U.S. homeland and coordinating defense support of civil authorities. USARNORTH helps maintain readiness to

support homeland defense, civil support operations, and theater security cooperation activities.

http://www.arnorth.army.mil | Email: usarmy.jbsa.arnorth.list.pao-owner@mail.mil

  For further information, contact the USARNORTH Public Affairs Office. Phone, 210-221-0015.



U.S. Army South
U.S. Army South (ARSOUTH) is the Army service component command of U.S. Southern Command. ARSOUTH

conducts security cooperation and responds to contingencies as part of a whole-of-government approach in

conjunction with partner national armies in the U.S. Southern Command area of responsibility, which encompasses 31

countries and 15 areas of special sovereignty in Central and South America and the Caribbean. These activities counter

transnational threats and strengthen regional security in defense of the homeland. ARSOUTH maintains a deployable

headquarters at Fort Sam Houston, Texas, where it conducts strategic and operational planning.

http://www.arsouth.army.mil | Email: usarmy.jbsa.arsouth.mbx.pao@mail.mil

  For further information, contact the ARSOUTH Public Affairs Office. Phone, 210-295-6739.



U.S. Army Pacific
U.S. Army Pacific (USARPAC) prepares the force for unified land operations, responds to threats, sustains and protects

the force, and builds military relationships that develop partner defense capacity to contribute to the stability and

security of the U.S. Pacific Command area of responsibility. USARPAC commands soldiers in an area spanning from
the Northwest Coast and Alaska to the Asia-Pacific region, including Japan. Since September 11, 2001, USARPAC

soldiers have played a vital role in homeland defense for Alaska and Hawaii, Guam, and Japan, as well as in supporting

operations with our allies elsewhere in the region.

https://www.army.mil/info/organization/unitsandcommands/commandstructure/usarpac/?from=org

  For further information, contact USARPAC Public Affairs. Phone, 808-438-9761.



U.S. Army Military Surface Deployment and Distribution Command
U.S. Army Military Surface Deployment and Distribution Command (SDDC) delivers world-class, origin-to-destination

distribution. It is the Army service component command of the U.S. Transportation Command and a subordinate

command to the Army Materiel Command. This relationship links the Transportation Command's joint deployment

and distribution enterprise with the Army Materiel Command's materiel enterprise. The SDDC also partners with the

commercial transportation industry as the coordinating link between Department of Defense surface transportation

requirements and the capability industry provides.

http://www.sddc.army.mil

  For further information, contact the SDDC Public Affairs Office. Phone, 618-220-6284.



U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense Command / Army Strategic Command
U.S. Army Space and Missile Defense Command (SMDC / ARSTRAT) conducts space and missile defense operations

and provides planning, integration, control, and coordination of Army forces and capabilities in support of U.S.

Strategic Command missions. SMDC / ARSTRAT also supports space, high-altitude, and global missile defense

modernization efforts; serves as the Army operational integrator for global missile defense; and conducts mission-

related research and development to support the Army's statutory responsibilities.

http://www.army.mil/info/organization/unitsandcommands/commandstructure/smdc

  For further information, contact the SMDC Public Affairs Office. Phone, 256-955-3887.



U.S. Army Special Operations Command
U.S. Army Special Operations Command (USASOC) administers, deploys, educates, equips, funds, mans, mobilizes,

organizes, sustains, and trains Army special operations forces to carry out missions worldwide, as directed. These

special and diverse military operations support regional combatant commanders, American ambassadors, and other

agencies.

https://www.army.mil/usasoc/?from=orghttp://www.soc.mil | Email: pao@soc.mil

  For further information, contact the USASOC Public Affairs Office. Phone, 910-432-6005.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Business Opportunities
For information on contract procurement policies and procedures, contact the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army,

Procurement. Phone, 703-695-2488.

http://www.micc.army.mil/contracting-offices.asp
Assistance for small businesses and minority educational institutions to increase participation in the Army contracting

program is available through the Office of Small Business Programs. Phone, 703-697-2868. Fax, 703-693-3898.

http://www.micc.army.mil/small-business.asp

Cemeteries
Arlington National Cemetery is one of the two national military cemeteries that the Army maintains. This cemetery is

the final resting place for more than 400,000 active duty servicemembers, veterans, and their families. For more

information, visit its Web site or contact the cemetery. Phone, 877-907-8585.

http://www.arlingtoncemetery.mil
The U.S. Soldiers’ and Airmen’s Home National Cemetery is one of the two national military cemeteries that the Army

maintains. This cemetery is the final resting place for more than 14,000 veterans, including those that fought in the Civil

War. For more information, visit its Web site or contact the Superintendent. Phone, 877-907-8585.

http://www.nps.gov/nr/travel/national_cemeteries/district_of_columbia/us_soldiers_and_airmens_home_national_cemet
ery.html

Environment
Information is available from the U.S. Army Environmental Command.

https://aec.army.mil
Information is also available from the Office of the Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Army for Environment, Safety and

Occupational Health.

http://www.asaie.army.mil/Public/ESOH
The Army Environmental Policy Institute posts publications on its Web site. "Army Water Security Strategy" (DEC 2011),

the results of the first comprehensive study of Army water security management, is available in Portable Document

Format (PDF). "Quantifying the Army Supply Chain Water Bootprint" (DEC 2011), an initial step to quantify the amount

of water used by suppliers to produce the goods and services that the Army procures through the supply chain, is also

available in PDF.

http://www.aepi.army.mil

Employment
More than 330,000 Army civilians work in a wide range of diverse professions. These professionals are not active duty

military, but serve as an integral part of the Army team to support the defense of the Nation.

http://armycivilianservice.com

Films
Address loan requests for Army-produced films to the Visual Information Support Centers of Army installations.

Unclassified Army productions are available for sale from the National Audiovisual Center, National Technical
Information Service, 5301 Shawnee Road, Alexandria, VA 22312. Phone, 800-553-6847.

http://www.ntis.gov/Index.aspx | Email: orders@ntis.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Contact the appropriate information management officer associated with the Army installation or activity managing

the desired information. Information is also available on the Records Management and Declassification Agency's Web

site.

https://www.rmda.army.mil

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Army posts answers to FAQs on its Web site.

https://www.army.mil/faq

Gold Star Survivors
All Gold Star family members have made a sacrifice to the Nation. The Army recognizes that no one gives more for

the Nation than a family member of the fallen. Gold Star Mother’s and Family’s Day is the last Sunday of September,

and Gold Star Spouses Day is April 5.

https://www.army.mil/goldstar

History
"Army History" magazine, the professional bulletin of Army history, is available online in Portable Document Format

(PDF).

http://www.history.army.mil/news/2016/160900a_armyHistoryMag.html
A directory of Army museums is available on the Center of Military History's Web site.

http://www.history.army.mil/museums/directory.html
The Office of Historic Properties and Partnerships raises awareness of and explores and tests creative uses for the

Army's historic buildings. Its staff also promotes partnerships between the Army and nonprofit organizations, public or

private, to preserve, renovate, and restore.

http://www.asaie.army.mil/Public/IH/OHP/ohp.htm

Joining the Army
Information on Army life, assignments, benefits, pay, and enlisting or joining in other capacities is available online.

Phone, 888-550-2769.

http://www.goarmy.com

National Guard
The National Guard responds to domestic emergencies, counterdrug efforts, overseas combat missions, reconstruction

missions, and more. The President or a State governor can call on the Guard in a moment’s notice. Guard soldiers

hold civilian jobs or attend college while maintaining their military training on a part-time basis, and their primary area

of operation is their home state.

https://www.nationalguard.com
Public Affairs / Community Relations
For official Army and community relations information, contact the Office of the Chief of Public Affairs. Phone, 703-

695-0616. Automated assistance is available after normal work hours. Phone, 201-590-6575.

http://www.army.mil/info/institution/publicAffairs

Publications
To request a publication, contact either the proponent listed on the title page of the document or the information

management officer of the Army activity that publishes the desired publication. If the requester does not know which

Army activity published the document, contact the Publishing Division, Army Publishing Directorate. Phone, 703-693-

1557.

http://www.army.mil/media/publications
Official texts published by Headquarters, Department of the Army, are available from the National Technical

Information Service. Phone, 888-584-8332.

http://www.ntis.gov

Ranks
Descriptions of officer, warrant officer, and enlisted ranks are available on the Army Web site.

https://www.army.mil/symbols/armyranks.html

Reading List
The U.S. Army Chief of Staff's professional reading list comprises three categories—Armies at war: battles and

campaigns; the Army profession; and strategy and the strategic environment—and is accessible online.

http://www.history.army.mil/html/books/105/105-1-1/index.html

Research
The Research, Development and Engineering Command is the Army's technology leader and largest technology

developer. Its Web site features news on and resources related to long-range research and development plans for

materiel requirements and objectives. Phone, 443-395-4006 (Public Affairs) or 3922 (Media Relations).

http://www.army.mil/info/organization/unitsandcommands/commandstructure/rdecom

Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC)
Available at over 1,100 colleges and universities nationwide, the ROTC offers merit-based scholarships that can cover

the full cost of tuition and open educational opportunities.

http://www.goarmy.com/rotc.html

Site Index
The Army's Web site features an A–Z index.

https://www.army.mil/info/a-z

Specialized Careers
Information on how to become an Army chaplain, the chaplain candidate program, and chaplain corps careers and
     jobs is available online and from the U.S. Army Recruiting Command. Phone, 877-437-6572.

     http://www.goarmy.com/chaplain
     Health care professionals serving as officers in the Army's medical department benefit from a wide range of

     opportunities and financial incentives.

     http://www.goarmy.com/amedd.html
     Members of the Army Judge Advocate General's corps often represent soldiers during courts-martial; however, they

     also engage in a wider range of legal activities that include civil litigation, international law, labor law, and tort claims.

     For more information, contact the Army Judge Advocate Recruiting Office. Phone, 866-276-9524.

     http://www.goarmy.com/jag
     The Army relies on talented musicians to assist with military ceremonies, boost morale, and provide entertainment.

     http://www.goarmy.com/band.html

     Speakers
     The Public Affairs Office nearest the event can help provide local Army speakers. The Office of the Chief of Public

     Affairs can assist with scheduling a general officer to address Army matters at public forums. To request a general

     officer speaker, writer to the Office of the Chief of Public Affairs, ATTN: Community Relations, Division (Speaker

     Request), 1500 Army Pentagon, Washington, DC 20310-1500. A lead time of at least 60–90 days is required. Phone,

     703-614-1107.

     http://www.army.mil/comrel/assetrequests

     U. S. Military Academy
     West Point has been educating, training, and inspiring U.S. Army leaders for more than 200 years. The academy offers

     a 47-month leader-development program of academic rigor, military discipline, and physical challenges with

     adherence to a code of honor.

     http://www.usma.edu | Email: admissions-info@usma.edu
     http://www.army.mil/info/institution/publicAffairs

        For further information concerning the Department of the Army, contact U.S. Army Public Affairs,
        Community Relations Division, Office of the Chief of Public Affairs, 1500 Army Pentagon, Washington, DC
        20310-1500.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility
Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                 Department of the Navy
                                                United States Marine Corps
                                               United States Naval Academy




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY
    The Pentagon, Washington, DC 20350


    703-697-7391

    http://www.navy.mil


      SECRETARY OF THE NAVY                                                                 Sean J. Stackley, Acting


      Under Secretary of the Navy                                                           Thomas P. Dee, Acting
ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


Energy, Installations and Environment                     Steven R. Iselin, Acting


Financial Management / Comptroller                        Joseph B. Marshall Jr., Acting


Manpower and Reserve Affairs                              Robert L. Woods, Acting


Research, Development and Acquisition                     Allison F. Stiller




Auditor General                                           Donjette L. Gilmore, Acting


Chief Information Officer                                 Robert Foster


                                                          Rear Adm. Dawn Cutler,
Chief of Information
                                                          Acting


Chief of Legislative Affairs                              Rear Adm. Craig S. Faller


Chief of Naval Research                                   Rear Adm. David J. Hahn


Director, Naval Criminal Investigative Service            Andrew L. Traver


General Counsel                                           Anne M. Brennan, Acting


                                                          Vice Adm. James
Judge Advocate General
                                                          W. Crawford III


Naval Inspector General                                   Vice Adm. Herman Shelanski


Deputy Under Secretary of the Navy (Management)           Scott W. Lutterloh


Director, Sexual Assault Prevention and Response Office   Jill Vines Loftus


Chief of Naval Operations                                 Admiral John M. Richardson


Vice Chief of Naval Operations                            Admiral Bill Moran


Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy                    Steven S. Giordano




NAVAL OPERATIONS
 Chief of Naval Operations                                                   Adm. John M. Richardson


 Vice Chief of Naval Operations                                              Adm. William F. Moran




 DEPUTY CHIEFS OF NAVAL OPERATIONS


 Fleet Readiness and Logistics                                               Vice Adm. Dixon Smith


 Information Dominance                                                       Vice Adm. Jan Tighe


 Integration of Capabilities and Resources                                   Vice Adm. William Lescher


 Manpower, Personnel, Training Education                                     Vice Adm. Robert P. Burke


 Operations, Plans and Strategy                                              Vice Adm. John C. Aquilino




 DIRECTORS


 Naval Intelligence                                                          Vice Adm. Jan Tighe


 Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program                                            Adm. James F. Caldwell


 Navy Staff                                                                  Vice Adm. James G. Foggo


 Test and Evaluation and Technology Requirements / Chief of Naval Research   Rear Adm. David J. Hahn




                                                                             Rear Adm. Margaret
 Chief of Chaplains of the Navy
                                                                             G. Kibben


 Chief of Naval Reserve                                                      Vice Adm. Luke McCollum


 Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy                                      Steven Giordano


                                                                             Rear Adm. Timothy
 Oceanographer of the Navy / Navigator of the Navy
                                                                             C. Gallaudet


 Surgeon General of the Navy                                                 Vice Adm. C. Forrest Faison III




SHORE ESTABLISHMENT


 Chief of Naval Operations                                                   Adm. John M. Richardson
 COMMANDERS


 Naval Air Systems Command                                                            Vice Adm. Paul Grosklags


 Naval Education and Training Command                                                 Rear Adm. Michael S. White


 Naval Facilities Engineering Command                                                 Rear Adm. Kate L. Gregory


 Naval Legal Service Command                                                          Rear Adm. John G. Hannink


                                                                                      Rear Adm. Timothy
 Naval Meteorology and Oceanography
                                                                                      C. Galludet


 Naval Network Warfare Command                                                        Capt. John W. Chandler


 Naval Sea Systems Command                                                            Vice Adm. Thomas Moore


 Naval Supply Systems Command                                                         Rear Adm. Jonathan A. Yuen


 Naval Warfare Development Command                                                    Rear Adm. Bret C. Batchelder


 Navy Installations Command                                                           Vice Adm. Dixon Smith


 Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command                                              Rear Adm. David H. Lewis




 Chief, Bureau of Medicine and Surgery                                                Vice Adm. C. Forrest Faison III


 Chief, Naval Personnel                                                               Vice Adm. Robert P. Burke


 Director, National Maritime Intelligence-Integration Office / Commander, Office of
                                                                                      Rear Adm. Elizabeth L. Train
 Naval Intelligence


 Director, Strategic Systems Program                                                  Rear Adm. Terry J. Benedict


                                                                                      Vice Adm. Walter E. Carter,
 Superintendent, U.S. Naval Academy
                                                                                      Jr.




OPERATING FORCES


 COMMANDERS


 U.S. Fleet Forces Command                                                            Adm. Philip S. Davidson
  Pacific Fleet                                                                              Adm. Scott H. Swift


                                                                                             Rear Adm. Dee
  Military Sealift Command
                                                                                             L. Mewbourne


  Naval Forces Central Command                                                               Vice Adm. Kevin M. Donegan


  Naval Forces Europe                                                                        Adm. Michelle J. Howard


                                                                                             Rear Adm. Thomas
  Naval Reserve Forces Command
                                                                                             W. Luscher


                                                                                             Rear
  Naval Special Warfare Command
                                                                                             Adm. Timothy Szymanski


  Operational Test and Evaluation Force                                                      Rear Adm. Jeffrey R. Penfield


  [For the Department of the Navy statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations, Title
  32, Part 700]



The Department of the Navy protects the United States and its interests by the prosecution of war at sea, including the

seizure or defense of advanced naval bases with the assistance of its Marine Corps component; supports the forces of all

military departments of the United States; and safeguards freedom of the seas.

Organizational Chart
The United States Navy was founded on October 13, 1775, when Congress enacted the first legislation creating the

Continental Navy of the American Revolution. The Department of the Navy and the Office of Secretary of the Navy

were established by act of April 30, 1798 (10 U.S.C. 5011, 5031). For 9 years prior to that date, by act of August 7, 1789 (1

Stat. 49), the Secretary of War oversaw the conduct of naval affairs.


The National Security Act Amendments of 1949 provided that the Department of the Navy be a military department

within the Department of Defense (63 Stat. 578).


The President appoints the Secretary of the Navy as the head of the Department of the Navy. The Secretary is

responsible to the Secretary of Defense for the operation and efficiency of the Navy (10 U.S.C. 5031). The Department

of the Navy includes the U.S. Coast Guard when it is operating as a Service in the Navy.


Secretary
The Secretary of the Navy is the head of the Department of the Navy, responsible for the policies and control of the

Department of the Navy, including its organization, administration, functioning, and efficiency. The members of the

Secretary's executive administration assist in the discharge of the responsibilities of the Secretary of the Navy.

http://www.navy.mil/secnav

Legal
The Office of the Judge Advocate General provides all legal advice and related services throughout the Department of

the Navy, except for the advice and services provided by the General Counsel. It also provides legal and policy advice

to the Secretary of the Navy on military justice, ethics, administrative law, claims, environmental law, operational and

international law and treaty interpretation, and litigation involving these issues. The Judge Advocate General provides

technical supervision for the Naval Justice School at Newport, RI.

http://www.navy.mil/local/jag/index.asp

  For further information, contact the Office of the Judge Advocate General, Department of the Navy,
  Washington Navy Yard, Suite 3000, 1322 Patterson Avenue SE., Washington Navy Yard, DC 20374-5066.
  Phone, 202-685-5190.



Criminal Investigations
The Naval Criminal Investigative Service investigates and neutralizes criminal, terrorist, and foreign intelligence threats

to the United States Navy and Marine Corps. To carry out its mission, the Service relies on the professionalism and law

enforcement expertise of administrative support personnel, forensic specialists, intelligence analysts, investigators,

military personnel, security specialists, special agents, and technical investigative specialists.

http://www.ncis.navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Naval Criminal Investigative Service, 27130 Telegraph Road,
  Quantico, VA 22134. Phone, 877-579-3648.



Research
The Office of Naval Research initiates, coordinates, plans, and promotes naval research, including the coordination of

research and development conducted by other agencies and offices in the Department of the Navy. The Office

researches, develops, and delivers decisive naval capabilities by investing in a balanced portfolio of promising scientific

research, innovative technology, and talent. It also manages and controls activities within the Department concerning

copyrights, inventions, manufacturing technology, patents, royalty payments, small businesses, and trademarks.

http://www.onr.navy.mil | Email: onrpublicaffairs@navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Office of Naval Research, One Liberty Center,
  875 North Randolph Street, Arlington, VA 22203-1995. Phone, 703-696-5031.



Operating Forces
Operating forces carry out operations that enable the Navy to meet its responsibility to uphold and advance the

national policies and interests of the United States. These forces include the several fleets; seagoing, fleet marine, and

other assigned Marine Corps forces; the Military Sealift Command; Naval Reserve forces; and other forces and

activities that the President or the Secretary of the Navy may assign. The Chief of Naval Operations administers and

commands the operating forces of the Navy.


The Atlantic Fleet is composed of ships, submarines, and aircraft that operate throughout the Atlantic Ocean and

Mediterranean Sea.
The Naval Forces Europe includes forces assigned by the Chief of Naval Operations or made available from either the

Pacific or Atlantic Fleet to operate in the European theater.


The Pacific Fleet is composed of ships, submarines, and aircraft operating throughout the Pacific and Indian Oceans.


The Military Sealift Command provides ocean transportation for personnel and cargo of all components of the

Department of Defense and, as authorized, for other Federal agencies; operates and maintains underway

replenishment ships and other vessels providing mobile logistic support to elements of the combatant fleets; and

operates ships in support of scientific projects and other programs for Federal agencies.


Other major commands of the operating forces of the Navy are the Naval Forces Central Command, Operational Test

and Evaluation Force, Naval Special Warfare Command, and Naval Reserve Force.

http://www.navy.mil/navydata/organization/orgopfor.asp



ACTIVITIES

Air Systems
The Naval Air Systems Command provides full life-cycle support of naval aviation aircraft, weapons, and systems

operated by Sailors and Marines. This support includes research, design, development, and systems engineering;

acquisition; test and evaluation; training facilities and equipment; repair and modification; and in-service engineering

and logistics support. The Command comprises eight "competencies" or communities of practice: program

management, contracts, research and engineering, test and evaluation, logistics and industrial operations, corporate

operations, comptroller, and counsel. The Command also supports the affiliated naval aviation program executive

officer and the assigned program managers, who are responsible for meeting the cost, schedule, and performance

requirements of their assigned programs. It is the principal provider for the Naval Aviation Enterprise, while

contributing to every warfare enterprise in the interest of national security.

http://www.navair.navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Commander, Naval Air Systems Command, 47123 Buse Road,
  Building 2272, Suite 540, Patuxent River, MD 20670-1547. Phone, 301-757-7825.



Coast Guard
The Commandant of the Coast Guard reports to the Secretary of the Navy and the Chief of Naval Operations when

the Coast Guard is operating as a service in the Navy and represents the Coast Guard before the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

During such service, Coast Guard operations are integrated and uniform with Department of the Navy operations to

the maximum extent possible. The Commandant of the Coast Guard organizes, trains, prepares, and maintains the

readiness of the Coast Guard for the performance of national defense missions as directed. The Commandant also

maintains a security capability; enforces Federal laws and regulations on and under the high seas and waters subject to

the jurisdiction of the United States; and develops, establishes, maintains, and operates aids to maritime navigation, as

well as ice-breaking and rescue facilities, with due regard to the requirements of national defense.

http://www.uscg.mil
Computers and Telecommunications
Naval Network Warfare Command operates the Navy's networks to achieve effective command and control through

optimal alignment, common architecture, mature processes, and functions and standard terminology. The command

enhances the Navy's network security posture and improves IT services through standardized enterprise-level

management, network information assurance compliance, enterprise management, and root cause and trend analysis.

Naval Network Warfare Command also delivers enhanced space products to operating forces by leveraging

Department of Defense, national, commercial, and international space capabilities. The command serves as the Navy's

commercial satellite operations manager; it executes tactical-level command and control of Navy networks and

leverages Joint Space capabilities for Navy and Joint Operations.

http://www.public.navy.mil/fcc-c10f/nnwc/Pages/default.aspx

  For further information, contact Public Affairs, Naval Network Warfare Command, 112 Lake View Parkway,
  Suffolk, VA 23435. Phone, 757-203-0205.



Education and Training
The Naval Education and Training Command provides shore-based education and training for Navy, certain Marine

Corps, and other personnel; develops specifically designated education and training afloat programs for the fleet;

provides voluntary and dependents education; and participates with research and development activities in the

development and implementation of the most effective teaching and training systems and devices for optimal

education and training.

http://www.navy.mil/local/cnet/ | Email: pnsc.netc.pao@navy.mil

  For further information, contact the NETC Office of Public Affairs, 250 Dallas Street, Pensacola, FL 32508-
  5220. Phone, 850-452-4858.



Facilities
The Naval Facilities Engineering Command provides material and technical support to the Navy and Marine Corps for

shore facilities, real property and utilities, fixed ocean systems and structures, transportation and construction

equipment, energy, environmental and natural resources management, and support of the naval construction forces.

http://www.navy.mil/local/navfachq

  For further information, contact the Commander, Naval Facilities Engineering Command and Chief of
  Civil Engineers, Washington Navy Yard, 1322 Patterson Avenue SE., Suite 1000, Washington, DC 20374-
  5065. Phone, 202-685-1423.



Intelligence
The Office of Naval Intelligence ensures the fulfillment of the intelligence requirements and responsibilities of the

Department of the Navy.

http://www.oni.navy.mil | Email: pao@nmic.navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Office of Public Affairs, Office of Naval Intelligence, Department of
  the Navy, 4251 Suitland Road, Washington, DC 20395-5720. Phone, 301-669-5670.
Manpower
The Bureau of Naval Personnel directs the procurement, distribution, administration, and career motivation of the

military personnel of the regular and reserve components of the U.S. Navy to meet the quantitative and qualitative

manpower requirements determined by the Chief of Naval Operations.

http://www.navy.mil/cnp/index.asp

 For further information, contact the Bureau of Naval Personnel, Department of the Navy, Federal Office
 Building 2, Washington, DC 20370-5000.



Medicine
The Bureau of Medicine and Surgery directs the medical and dental services for Navy and Marine Corps personnel

and their dependents; administers the implementation of contingency support plans and programs to effect medical

and dental readiness capability; provides medical and dental services to the fleet, fleet marine force, and shore

activities of the Navy; and ensures cooperation with civil authorities in matters of public health disasters and other

emergencies.

http://www.med.navy.mil

 For further information, contact the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery, Department of the Navy, 2300 E
 Street NW., Washington, DC 20373-5300. Phone, 202-762-3211.



Oceanography
The Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command and the Naval Observatory are responsible for the science,

technology, and engineering operations that are essential to explore the ocean and the atmosphere and to provide

astronomical data and time for naval and related national objectives. To that end, the naval oceanographic program

studies astrometry, hydrography, meteorology, oceanography, and precise time.

http://www.usno.navy.mil/USNO

 For further information, contact the Commander, Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command, 1100
 Balch Boulevard, Stennis Space Center, MS 39529-5005. Phone, 228-688-4384. Internet,
 http://www.navmetoccom.navy.mil. Or, contact the Oceanographer of the Navy, U.S. Naval Observatory,
 3450 Massachusetts Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20392-1800. Phone, 202-762-1026.



Sea Systems
The Naval Sea Systems Command provides material support to the Navy and Marine Corps and to the Departments

of Defense and Transportation for ships, submarines, and other sea platforms, shipboard combat systems and

components, other surface and undersea warfare and weapons systems, and ordnance expendables not specifically

assigned to other system commands.

http://www.navsea.navy.mil | Email: nssc_public_affairs@navy.mil

 For further information, contact the Office of Public Affairs, Naval Sea Systems Command, 1333 Isaac Hull
  Avenue SE., Washington Navy Yard, DC 20376-1010. Phone, 202-781-4123.



Space and Naval Warfare
The Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command develops, delivers, and sustains advanced cyber capabilities for

naval warfighters. It helps provide the hardware and software needed to executive Navy missions. With nearly 10,000

active military and civilian professionals worldwide, the Command is at the forefront of research, engineering, and

acquisition relevant for keeping U.S. military forces connected around the globe.

http://www.spawar.navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Commander, Space and Naval Warfare Systems Command, 4301
  Pacific Highway, San Diego, CA 92110-3127. Phone, 619-524-3428.



Strategic Systems
The Office of Strategic Systems Programs provides development, production, and material support to the Navy for

fleet ballistic missile and strategic weapons systems, security, training of personnel, and the installation and direction of

necessary supporting facilities.

http://www.ssp.navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Director, Strategic Systems Programs, Department of the Navy,
  Nebraska Avenue Complex, 287 Somers Court NW., Suite 10041, Washington, DC 20393-5446. Phone,
  202-764-1608.



Supply Systems
The Naval Supply Systems Command provides supply management policies and methods and administers related

support service systems for the Navy and Marine Corps.

http://www.navy.mil/local/navsup | Email: navsuphqQuestions@navy.mil

  For further information, contact the Commander, Naval Supply Systems Command, 5450 Carlisle Pike,
  P.O. Box 2050, Mechanicsburg, PA 17055-0791. Phone, 717-605-3565.



Warfare Development
The Navy Warfare Development Command plans and coordinates experiments employing emerging operational

concepts; represents the Department of the Navy in joint and other service laboratories and facilities and tactical

development commands; and publishes and disseminates naval doctrine.

http://www.navy.mil/local/nwdc

  For further information, contact the Commander, Navy Warfare Development Command, 686 Cushing
  Road, Sims Hall, Newport, RI 02841. Phone, 401-841-2833.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Business Opportunities
"Open for Business," a short video that gives an overview of the Navy's buying activities and small business programs,

is available online. For more information, contact the Office of Small Business Programs. Phone, 202-685-6485.

http://www.secnav.navy.mil/smallbusiness/Pages/video-openforbusiness.aspx | Email: osbp.info@navy.mil

Civilian Employment
The possibilities of a civilian career at the Department of the Navy are many and diverse. They include a full range of

occupations: from aircraft mechanic to pipefitter, from electrician to engineer, from zoologist to physician, and more.

The Navy offers hundreds of different occupations nationwide and around the world.

http://www.secnav.navy.mil/donhr/Pages/Default.aspx | Email: donhrfaq@navy.mil

Environment
For information on Navy and Marine Corps environmental protection and natural resources management programs,

contact the Deputy Assistant Secretary–Environment, 1000 Navy Pentagon, Room 4A674, Washington, DC 20350-

1000. Phone, 703-614-5493.

http://www.secnav.navy.mil/eie/Pages/Environment.aspx
The "U.S. Navy Climate Change Roadmap" (April 2010) is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) online.

http://www.navy.mil/navydata/documents/CCR.pdf
The Navy has posted its environmental goals and descriptions of its strategies to achieve them.

http://greenfleet.dodlive.mil/environment

Glossary
The origins of Navy terminology section explains nautical terminology that has become a part of everyday English.

http://www.navy.mil/navydata/traditions/html/navyterm.html

Joining the Navy
Unparalleled opportunities, challenges, and experiences motivate bright and skilled people to join. America's Navy

offers careers and jobs that match many backgrounds and interests. Hundreds of distinct roles in dozens of

professional fields are part of what the Navy has to offer.

http://www.navy.com/joining.html

Naval Oceanography Portal
The U.S. Naval Meteorology and Oceanography Command provides information from the ocean depths to the distant

reaches of space to meet the needs of civilian and the military and scientific communities.

http://www.usno.navy.mil
The U.S. Naval Observatory offers a wide range of astronomical data and products, and it serves as the official source

of time for the Department of Defense and as the official source of a standard of time for the entire United States.

http://www.usno.navy.mil/USNO
"The Sky This Week" is a weekly set of pictures and descriptions of the planets, sky, and stars.
http://www.usno.navy.mil/USNO/tours-events/sky-this-week/the-sky-this-week

News
The Navy posts recent headline news stories on its Web site.

http://www.navy.mil/listStories.asp?x=2
An online subscription form is available to sign up for updates from the Navy news service.

https://service.govdelivery.com/accounts/USNAVYDMA/subscriber/new
"All Hands" magazine is an electronic publication for sailors by sailors. It features articles, imagery, information, and

videos that are relevant to sailors and their families.

http://www.navy.mil/ah_online

Research Programs
Research programs of the Office of Naval Research cover a broad spectrum of scientific fields. The research is primarily

for the needs of the Navy and Marine Corps, but some of these programs conduct research that has relevance for the

general public. For information on specific research programs, contact the Office of Naval Research–Public Affairs,

One Liberty Center 875 N. Randolph Street, Arlington, VA 22203-1995. Phone, 703-696-5031.

http://www.onr.navy.mil

Ships
The Navy operates and relies on many types of ships to carry out its mission. Descriptions of these different ships—

aircraft carriers, amphibious assault ships, cruisers, destroyers, littoral combat ships, and submarines—are available

online.

http://www.navy.mil/navydata/our_ships.asp

Site Index
An A–Z information index is available on the Navy's Web site.

http://www.navy.mil/navydata/infoIndex.asp?id=A
http://www.navy.mil/submit/contacts.asp
For further information concerning the Navy, contact the Office of Information, Department of the Navy, 1200 Navy

Pentagon, Washington, DC 20350-1200. For press inquiries, phone 703-697-7391 or 703-697-5342.



United States Marine Corps
Commandant of the Marine Corps, Headquarters, U.S. Marine Corps, 3000 Pentagon, Washington, DC 20380-

1775


703-614-2500

http://www.marines.mil


  COMMANDANT OF THE MARINE CORPS                           Gen. Robert B. Neller


  Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps                 Gen. Glenn M. Walters
  Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps                         Sgt. Maj. Ronald L. Green



The Continental Congress established the United States Marine Corps by resolution on November 10, 1775.

Marine Corps composition and functions are detailed in 10 U.S.C. 5063.


The Marine Corps, which is part of the Department of the Navy, is the smallest of the Nation's combat forces. It

also is the only service that the Congress has tasked specifically to be able to fight in the air, on land, and at sea.

Although Marines fight in each of these dimensions, they are primarily a maritime force linked with the Navy,

moving from the sea to fight on land.


The Marine Corps conducts entry-level training for its enlisted marines at two bases: Marine Corps Recruit

Depot, Parris Island, SC; and Marine Corps Recruit Depot, San Diego, CA. Officer candidates are evaluated at

Officer Candidate School, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, Quantico, VA. Marines train to be first

on the scene to respond to attacks on the United States or its interests and to acts of political violence against

Americans abroad, to provide disaster relief and humanitarian assistance, and to evacuate Americans from

foreign countries.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

DSTRESS Line
The DSTRESS Line offers an around-the-clock anonymous phone, live chat, and referral service. The call center is

staffed with veteran Marines, Fleet Marine Force Navy Corpsmen who were previously attached to the Marine

Corps, Marine spouses and other family members, and licensed behavioral health counselors trained in Marine

Corps culture. DSTRESS Line is designed to help callers improve overall fitness and to develop the necessary

skills for coping with the challenges of life in the Marine Corps. Phone, 877-476-7734.

http://www.usmc-mccs.org/index.cfm/services/support/dstress-line | Email: dstressline@usmc.mil

Electronic Publications
Authentic and current digital versions of publications issued by Headquarters Marine Corps staff agencies, major

commands, and other Department of Defense and Federal agencies are available online.

http://www.marines.mil/News/Publications

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Procedures for requesting records that the U.S. Marine Corps controls are available online. Phone, 703-614-

4008.

http://www.hqmc.marines.mil/Agencies/USMC-FOIA | Email: hqmcfoia@usmc.mil

Marine Corps Bands
Marine Corps bands perform at ceremonies, concerts, festivals, parades, professional sporting events, and other

public events. Marine Corps bands perform six types of ensembles: brass/woodwind quintet, bugler, ceremonial

band, concert band, jazz combo, and jazz/show band. Phone, 504-697-8184.
http://www.marines.mil/Community-Relations/Asset-Requests/Band | Email: smb.mfr.pao.comrel@usmc.mil

News
The Marine Corps posts press releases on its Web site.

http://www.marines.mil/News/Press-Releases
Marines TV is accessible via the Marine Corps Web site.

http://www.marines.mil/News/Marines-TV

Reading List
The Commandant's professional reading list is available online.

http://guides.grc.usmcu.edu/content.php?pid=408059&sid=3340387 | Email: Reading@usmc.mil

Sexual Assault
The Marine Corps' Sexual Assault Prevention and Response program lowers the incidence of sexual assault

through preventative strategies and provides care to victims of the crime.

http://www.usmc-mccs.org/index.cfm/services/support/sexual-assault-prevention
The Safe Helpline provides anonymous and confidential support for sexual assault survivors in the military.

Phone, 877-995-5247.

https://safehelpline.org

Silent Drill Platoon
The Marine Corps Silent Drill Platoon is a 24-Marine rifle platoon that performs a precision drill exhibition. This

disciplined platoon exemplifies the professionalism associated with the U.S. Marine Corps. It first performed in

the Sunset Parades of 1948 and received such a favorable response that it became a regular part of the parades

at Marine Barracks, Washington, DC. Performance requests for the Silent Drill Platoon should be made 30–90

days prior to the event. Phone, 504-697-8184.

http://www.marines.mil/Community-Relations/Asset-Requests/Silent-Drill-Platoon                    |            Email:
smb.mfr.pao.comrel@usmc.mil

Site Map
The Web site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

http://www.marines.mil/Home/SiteMap.aspx

Social Media
The Marine Corps maintains a social media presence and supports online communities where people can go to

share and collect information and stories.

http://www.marines.mil/News/Social-Media

Speakers
The Marine Corps supports speaking engagements for community events nationwide, ranging from small-town

civic organizations to big-city national conventions. The Marine Corps In the Community program helps business

executives, educators, members of civic organizations, conference organizers, and others make contact with a
Marine Corps public speaker. Phone, 504-697-8184.

http://www.marines.mil/Community-Relations/Asset-Requests/Speakers | Email: smb.mfr.pao.comrel@usmc.mil

Tattoo Regulations
The Marine Corps tattoo policy seeks to balance personal taste with the high standards of professional military

appearance and heritage. The Marine Corps Bulletin 1020 (June 2016) explains the current tattoo policy, which

replaces previous guidance on the subject.

http://www.marines.mil/Tattoos.aspx

Unit Directory
A complete list of Marine Corps units with links to their respective web pages is available online.

http://www.marines.mil/Units.aspx
http://www.marines.mil/Contact-Us
For further information regarding the Marine Corps, contact the Director of Public Affairs, Headquarters, U.S.

Marine Corps, 2 Navy Annex–Pentagon 5D773, Washington, DC 20380-1775. Phone, 703-614-1492.



United States Naval Academy
Annapolis, MD 21402-5018


410-293-1500

http://www.usna.edu


  SUPERINTENDENT                                            Vice Adm. Walter E. Carter, Jr., USN


  Commandant of Midshipmen                                  Col. Stephen E. Liszewski, USMC



The U.S. Naval Academy is the undergraduate college of the Naval Service. Through its comprehensive 4-year

program, which stresses excellence in academics, physical education, professional training, conduct, and honor,
the Academy prepares young men and women morally, mentally, and physically to be professional officers in

the Navy and Marine Corps. All graduates receive a Bachelor of Science degree in 1 of 19 majors.

https://www.usna.edu/About/index.php



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Armel-Leftwich Visitor Center
From March to December, the visitor center is open daily, 9 a.m.–5 p.m. During January and February, the visitor

center is open on weekdays, 9 a.m.–4 p.m. The gift shop, however, is open on the weekends, 9 a.m.–5 p.m.

http://www.usnabsd.com/for-visitors | Email: tourinfo@usna.edu

A–Z Index
The Naval Academy's Web site has an alphabetical index to help visitors search for information or browse topics
     of interest.

     https://www.usna.edu/TOC/index.php

     Career Opportunities
     Six sources of employment are associated with the Naval Academy and its supporting organizations.

     https://www.usna.edu/Employment

     Naval Academy Preparatory School
     The Naval Academy Preparatory School prepares midshipman candidates for success at the U.S. Naval

     Academy. The 10-month course of instruction, August–May, centers on preparation in Chemistry, English

     Composition, Information Technology, Mathematics, and Physics. Phone, 401-841-6966 (administration). Phone,

     401-841-2947 (academics).

     https://www.usna.edu/NAPS

     Naval Academy Store
     All Profits support the brigade of midshipmen.

     http://navyonline.com

     Nimitz Library
     An online tool is available to search the library's collection of articles, books, ebooks, and journals. Phone, 410-

     293-6945.

     https://www.usna.edu/Library | Email: askref@usna.edu
     https://www.usna.edu/Contact
     For further information concerning the U.S. Naval Academy, contact the Superintendent, U.S. Naval Academy,

     121 Blake Road, Annapolis, MD 21402-5018.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                United States Marine Corps




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS
    Commandant of the Marine Corps, Headquarters, U.S. Marine Corps, 3000 Pentagon, Washington, DC 20380-1775


    703-614-2500

    http://www.marines.mil


      COMMANDANT OF THE MARINE CORPS                                                        Gen. Robert B. Neller


      Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps                                              Gen. Glenn M. Walters


      Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps                                                    Sgt. Maj. Ronald L. Green
The Continental Congress established the United States Marine Corps by resolution on November 10, 1775. Marine

Corps composition and functions are detailed in 10 U.S.C. 5063.


The Marine Corps, which is part of the Department of the Navy, is the smallest of the Nation's combat forces. It also is

the only service that the Congress has tasked specifically to be able to fight in the air, on land, and at sea. Although

Marines fight in each of these dimensions, they are primarily a maritime force linked with the Navy, moving from the

sea to fight on land.


The Marine Corps conducts entry-level training for its enlisted marines at two bases: Marine Corps Recruit Depot,

Parris Island, SC; and Marine Corps Recruit Depot, San Diego, CA. Officer candidates are evaluated at Officer

Candidate School, Marine Corps Combat Development Command, Quantico, VA. Marines train to be first on the

scene to respond to attacks on the United States or its interests and to acts of political violence against Americans

abroad, to provide disaster relief and humanitarian assistance, and to evacuate Americans from foreign countries.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

DSTRESS Line
The DSTRESS Line offers an around-the-clock anonymous phone, live chat, and referral service. The call center is

staffed with veteran Marines, Fleet Marine Force Navy Corpsmen who were previously attached to the Marine Corps,

Marine spouses and other family members, and licensed behavioral health counselors trained in Marine Corps culture.

DSTRESS Line is designed to help callers improve overall fitness and to develop the necessary skills for coping with the

challenges of life in the Marine Corps. Phone, 877-476-7734.

http://www.usmc-mccs.org/index.cfm/services/support/dstress-line | Email: dstressline@usmc.mil

Electronic Publications
Authentic and current digital versions of publications issued by Headquarters Marine Corps staff agencies, major

commands, and other Department of Defense and Federal agencies are available online.

http://www.marines.mil/News/Publications

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Procedures for requesting records that the U.S. Marine Corps controls are available online. Phone, 703-614-4008.

http://www.hqmc.marines.mil/Agencies/USMC-FOIA | Email: hqmcfoia@usmc.mil

Marine Corps Bands
Marine Corps bands perform at ceremonies, concerts, festivals, parades, professional sporting events, and other public

events. Marine Corps bands perform six types of ensembles: brass/woodwind quintet, bugler, ceremonial band,

concert band, jazz combo, and jazz/show band. Phone, 504-697-8184.

http://www.marines.mil/Community-Relations/Asset-Requests/Band | Email: smb.mfr.pao.comrel@usmc.mil

News
The Marine Corps posts press releases on its Web site.

http://www.marines.mil/News/Press-Releases
Marines TV is accessible via the Marine Corps Web site.

http://www.marines.mil/News/Marines-TV

Reading List
The Commandant's professional reading list is available online.

http://guides.grc.usmcu.edu/content.php?pid=408059&sid=3340387 | Email: Reading@usmc.mil

Sexual Assault
The Marine Corps' Sexual Assault Prevention and Response program lowers the incidence of sexual assault through

preventative strategies and provides care to victims of the crime.

http://www.usmc-mccs.org/index.cfm/services/support/sexual-assault-prevention
The Safe Helpline provides anonymous and confidential support for sexual assault survivors in the military. Phone, 877-

995-5247.

https://safehelpline.org

Silent Drill Platoon
The Marine Corps Silent Drill Platoon is a 24-Marine rifle platoon that performs a precision drill exhibition. This

disciplined platoon exemplifies the professionalism associated with the U.S. Marine Corps. It first performed in the

Sunset Parades of 1948 and received such a favorable response that it became a regular part of the parades at Marine

Barracks, Washington, DC. Performance requests for the Silent Drill Platoon should be made 30–90 days prior to the

event. Phone, 504-697-8184.

http://www.marines.mil/Community-Relations/Asset-Requests/Silent-Drill-Platoon                       |                Email:
smb.mfr.pao.comrel@usmc.mil

Site Map
The Web site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

http://www.marines.mil/Home/SiteMap.aspx

Social Media
The Marine Corps maintains a social media presence and supports online communities where people can go to share

and collect information and stories.

http://www.marines.mil/News/Social-Media

Speakers
The Marine Corps supports speaking engagements for community events nationwide, ranging from small-town civic

organizations to big-city national conventions. The Marine Corps In the Community program helps business

executives, educators, members of civic organizations, conference organizers, and others make contact with a Marine

Corps public speaker. Phone, 504-697-8184.

http://www.marines.mil/Community-Relations/Asset-Requests/Speakers | Email: smb.mfr.pao.comrel@usmc.mil
     Tattoo Regulations
     The Marine Corps tattoo policy seeks to balance personal taste with the high standards of professional military

     appearance and heritage. The Marine Corps Bulletin 1020 (June 2016) explains the current tattoo policy, which replaces

     previous guidance on the subject.

     http://www.marines.mil/Tattoos.aspx

     Unit Directory
     A complete list of Marine Corps units with links to their respective web pages is available online.

     http://www.marines.mil/Units.aspx
     http://www.marines.mil/Contact-Us

        For further information regarding the Marine Corps, contact the Director of Public Affairs, Headquarters,
        U.S. Marine Corps, 2 Navy Annex–Pentagon 5D773, Washington, DC 20380-1775. Phone, 703-614-1492.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               United States Naval Academy




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES NAVAL ACADEMY
    Annapolis, MD 21402-5018


    410-293-1500

    http://www.usna.edu


                                                                                            Vice Adm. Walter E. Carter,
      SUPERINTENDENT
                                                                                            Jr., USN


                                                                                            Col. Stephen E. Liszewski,
      Commandant of Midshipmen
                                                                                            USMC
The U.S. Naval Academy is the undergraduate college of the Naval Service. Through its comprehensive 4-year

program, which stresses excellence in academics, physical education, professional training, conduct, and honor, the

Academy prepares young men and women morally, mentally, and physically to be professional officers in the Navy

and Marine Corps. All graduates receive a Bachelor of Science degree in 1 of 19 majors.

https://www.usna.edu/About/index.php



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Armel-Leftwich Visitor Center
From March to December, the visitor center is open daily, 9 a.m.–5 p.m. During January and February, the visitor

center is open on weekdays, 9 a.m.–4 p.m. The gift shop, however, is open on the weekends, 9 a.m.–5 p.m.

http://www.usnabsd.com/for-visitors | Email: tourinfo@usna.edu

A–Z Index
The Naval Academy's Web site has an alphabetical index to help visitors search for information or browse topics of

interest.

https://www.usna.edu/TOC/index.php

Career Opportunities
Six sources of employment are associated with the Naval Academy and its supporting organizations.

https://www.usna.edu/Employment

Naval Academy Preparatory School
The Naval Academy Preparatory School prepares midshipman candidates for success at the U.S. Naval Academy. The

10-month course of instruction, August–May, centers on preparation in Chemistry, English Composition, Information

Technology, Mathematics, and Physics. Phone, 401-841-6966 (administration). Phone, 401-841-2947 (academics).

https://www.usna.edu/NAPS

Naval Academy Store
All Profits support the brigade of midshipmen.

http://navyonline.com

Nimitz Library
An online tool is available to search the library's collection of articles, books, ebooks, and journals. Phone, 410-293-

6945.

https://www.usna.edu/Library | Email: askref@usna.edu
https://www.usna.edu/Contact

  For further information concerning the U.S. Naval Academy, contact the Superintendent, U.S. Naval
  Academy, 121 Blake Road, Annapolis, MD 21402-5018.
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                   Defense Agencies
                                    Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
                                             Defense Commissary Agency
                                           Defense Contract Audit Agency
                                       Defense Contract Management Agency
                                       Defense Finance and Accounting Service
                                        Defense Information Systems Agency
                                             Defense Intelligence Agency
                                            Defense Legal Services Agency
                                               Defense Logistics Agency
                                        Defense Security Cooperation Agency
                                  Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency
                                          Defense Threat Reduction Agency
                                                Missile Defense Agency
                                       National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
                                  National Security Agency / Central Security Service
                                         Pentagon Force Protection Agency
                                                 Joint Service Schools
                                            Defense Acquisition University
                                            National Intelligence University
                                              National Defense University
                                 Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
The United States Government Manual




    DEFENSE AGENCIES


   Defense                     Advanced                         Research                      Projects
   Agency
   675 North Randolph Street, Arlington, VA 22203-2114


   703-526-6630

   http://www.darpa.mil


    DIRECTOR                                                Victoria Coleman


    Deputy Director                                         Peter Highnam


   https://www.darpa.mil/about-us/people



    The Sources of Information were updated 12–2020.



   The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency is a separately organized agency within the Department of

   Defense and is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition,
   Technology and Logistics). The Agency serves as the central research and development organization of the

   Department of Defense with a primary responsibility to maintain U.S. technological superiority over potential

   adversaries. It pursues imaginative and innovative research and development projects, and conducts

   demonstration projects that represent technology appropriate for joint programs, programs in support of

   deployed forces, or selected programs of the military departments. To this end, the Agency arranges, manages,

   and directs the performance of work connected with assigned advanced projects by the military departments,

   other Government agencies, individuals, private business entities, and educational or research institutions, as

   appropriate.

   http://www.darpa.mil
   For further information, contact the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, 675 North Randolph Street,

   Arlington, VA 22203-2114. Phone, 703-526-6630.


   Defense Commissary Agency
1300 E Avenue, Fort Lee, VA 23801-1800


804-734-8720

http://www.commissaries.com


  DIRECTOR / CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER                       William F. Moore


  Deputy Director / Chief Operating Officer                Michael J. Dowling


https://www.commissaries.com/our-agency/deca-organization



  The Sources of Information were updated 12–2020.



The Defense Commissary Agency (DeCA) was established in 1990 and is under the authority, direction, and

control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness and the operational supervision of the

Defense Commissary Agency Board of Directors.


DeCA provides an efficient and effective worldwide system of commissaries that sell quality groceries and

household supplies at low prices to members of the Armed Services community. This benefit satisfies customer

demand for quality products and delivers exceptional savings while enhancing the military community's quality

of life. DeCA works closely with its employees, customers, and civilian business partners to satisfy its customers

and to promote the commissary benefit. The benefit fosters recruitment, retention, and readiness of skilled and

trained personnel.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Employment information is available at www.commissaries.com or by calling the following telephone numbers:

employment (703-603-1600); small business activities (804-734-8000, extension 4-8015/4-8529); contracting for

resale items (804-734-8000, extension 4-8884/4-8885); and contracting for operations support and equipment

(804-734-8000, extension 4-8391/4-8830).

http://www.commissaries.com
For further information, contact the Defense Commissary Agency, 1300 E Avenue, Fort Lee, VA 23801-1800.

Phone, 804-734-8720



Defense Contract Audit Agency
8725 John J. Kingman Road, Suite 2135, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6219


703-767-3265

http://www.dcaa.mil | Email: dcaaweb@dcaa.mil


  DIRECTOR                                                 Anita F. Bales
https://www.dcaa.mil/Portals/88/FY2019%20DCAA%20Report%20to%20Congress.pdf?ver=XKAncoiKefo8TD5eh-
OCxQ%3d%3d



  The Sources of Information were updated 4–2020.



The Defense Contract Audit Agency (DCAA) was established in 1965 and is under the authority, direction, and

control of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer. DCAA performs all necessary

contract audit functions for DOD and provides accounting and financial advisory services to all Defense

components responsible for procurement and contract administration. These services are provided in

connection with the negotiation, administration, and settlement of contracts and subcontracts to ensure

taxpayer dollars are spent on fair and reasonable contract prices. They include evaluating the acceptability of

costs claimed or proposed by contractors and reviewing the efficiency and economy of contractor operations.

Other Government agencies may request the DCAA's services under appropriate arrangements.


DCAA manages its operations through five regional offices responsible for approximately 104 field audit offices

throughout the United States and overseas. Each region is responsible for the contract auditing function in its

assigned area. Point of contact information for DCAA regional offices is available at www.dcaa.mil.

http://www.dcaa.mil | Email: dcaaweb@dcaa.mil
For further information, contact the Executive Officer, Defense Contract Audit Agency, 8725 John J. Kingman

Road, Suite 2135, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6219. Phone, 703-767-3265.



Defense Contract Management Agency
3901 A Avenue, Fort Lee, VA 23801


804-734-0814

http://www.dcma.mil


  DIRECTOR                                                 Lt. Gen. David G. Bassett, USA


  Deputy Director                                          John M. Lyle


http://www.dcma.mil/About-Us



  The Sources of Information were updated 12–2020.



The Defense Contract Management Agency (DCMA) was established by the Deputy Secretary of Defense in

2000 and is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition,

Technology, and Logistics). DCMA is responsible for DOD contract management in support of the military

departments, other DOD components, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, other designated

Federal and State agencies, foreign governments, and international organizations, as appropriate.
http://www.dcma.mil
For further information, contact the Office of General Counsel, Defense Contract Management Agency, 3901 A

Avenue, Fort Lee, VA 23801. Phone, 804-734-0814.



Defense Finance and Accounting Service
4800 Mark Center Drive, Suite 08J25-01, Alexandria, VA 22350-3000


571-372-7883

http://www.dfas.mil


 DIRECTOR                                                Audrey Y. Davis


 Principal Deputy Director                               (vacancy)


https://www.dfas.mil/Pressroom/dfasleadership



 The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) was established in 1991 under the authority, direction, and

control of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer to strengthen and reduce costs

of financial management and operations within DOD. DFAS is responsible for all payments to servicemembers,

employees, vendors, and contractors. It provides business intelligence and finance and accounting information

to DOD decisionmakers. DFAS is also responsible for preparing annual financial statements and the

consolidation, standardization, and modernization of finance and accounting requirements, functions, processes,

operations, and systems for DOD.

http://www.dfas.mil
For further information, contact Defense Finance and Accounting Service Corporate Communications, 4800

Mark Center Drive, Suite 08J25-01, Alexandria, VA 22350-3000. Phone, 571-372-7883.


Defense Information Systems Agency
P.O. Box 549, Command Building, Fort Meade, MD 20755


301-225-6000

http://www.disa.mil | Email: dia-pao@dia.mil


 DIRECTOR                                                Vice Adm. Nancy A. Norton, USN


 Executive Deputy Director                               Anthony Montemarano


http://www.disa.mil/About/Our-Leaders
  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA), established originally as the Defense Communications Agency

in 1960, is under the authority, direction, and control of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Networks and

Information Integration). DISA is a combat support agency responsible for planning, engineering, acquiring,

fielding, operating, and supporting global net-centric solutions to serve the needs of the President, Vice

President, Secretary of Defense, and other DOD components.

http://www.disa.mil | Email: dia-pao@dia.mil
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Defense Information Systems Agency, P.O. Box 549,

Command Building, Fort Meade, MD 20755. Phone, 301-225-6000.



Defense Intelligence Agency
200 MacDill Boulevard, Washington DC 20340-5100


202-231-0800

http://www.dia.mil | Email: dia-pao@dia.mil


  DIRECTOR                                                 Lt. Gen. Scott D. Berrier, USA


  Deputy Director                                          Suzanne L. White


http://www.dia.mil/About/Leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) was established in 1961 and is under the authority, direction, and control

of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence. DIA provides timely, objective, and cogent military
intelligence to warfighters, force planners, as well as defense and national security policymakers. DIA obtains and

reports information through its field sites worldwide and the Defense Attache System; provides timely

intelligence analysis; directs Defense Human Intelligence programs; operates the Joint Intelligence Task Force for

Combating Terrorism and the Joint Military Intelligence College; coordinates and facilitates Measurement and

Signature Intelligence activities; manages and plans collections from specialized technical sources; manages

secure DOD intelligence networks; and coordinates required intelligence support for the Secretary of Defense,

Joint Chiefs of Staff, Combatant Commanders, and Joint Task Forces.

http://www.dia.mil | Email: dia-pao@dia.mil
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Defense Intelligence Agency, 200 MacDill Boulevard,

Washington DC 20340-5100. Phone, 202-231-0800.


Defense Legal Services Agency
The Pentagon, Washington, DC 20301-1600
703-695-3341

http://www.dod.mil/dodgc


  DIRECTOR / GENERAL               COUNSEL    OF    THE
                                                           Paul C. Ney, Jr.
  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE


https://ogc.osd.mil/gc_bio.html

  Principal Deputy General Counsel of the Department
                                                     William S. Castle
  of Defense


https://ogc.osd.mil/dgc_bio.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Legal Services Agency (DLSA) was established in 1981 and is under the authority, direction, and
control of the General Counsel of the Department of Defense, who also serves as its Director. DLSA provides

legal advice and services for specified DOD components and adjudication of personnel security cases for DOD

and other assigned Federal agencies and departments. It also provides technical support and assistance for

development of the Department's legislative program; coordinates positions on legislation and Presidential

Executive orders; provides a centralized legislative and congressional document reference and distribution point

for the Department; maintains the Department's historical legislative files; and administers programs governing

standards of conduct and alternative dispute resolution.

https://ogc.osd.mil/index.html
For further information, contact the Administrative Office, Defense Legal Services Agency, Room 3A734,

Washington, DC 20301-1600. Phone, 703-697-8343.


Defense Logistics Agency
8725 John J. Kingman Road, Suite 2533, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6221


703-767-5264

http://www.dla.mil


  DIRECTOR                                                 Vice Adm. Michelle C. Skubic


  Vice Director                                            Michael D. Scott


http://www.dla.mil/Leaders.aspx



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.
The Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of

Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics. DLA supports both the logistics requirements of the military

services and their acquisition of weapons and other materiel. It provides logistics support and technical services

to all branches of the military and to a number of Federal agencies. DLA supply centers consolidate the

requirements of the military services and procure the supplies in sufficient quantities to meet their projected

needs. DLA manages supplies in eight commodity areas: fuel, food, clothing, construction material, electronic

supplies, general supplies, industrial supplies, and medical supplies. Information on DLA’s field activities and

regional commands is available at www.dla.mil/ataglance.aspx.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
For the Washington, DC, metropolitan area, all inquiries and applications concerning job recruitment programs

should be addressed to Human Resources, Customer Support Office, 3990 East Broad Street, Building 11, Section

3, Columbus, OH, 43213-0919. Phone, 877-352-4762.

http://www.dla.mil/Careers.aspx

Environmental Program
For information on the environmental program, contact the Staff Director, Environmental and Safety, Defense

Logistics Agency, Attn: DSS-E, 8725 John J. Kingman Road, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6221. Phone, 703-767-6278.


Procurement / Small Business Activities
For information on procurement and small business activities, contact the Director, Small and Disadvantaged

Business Utilization, Defense Logistics Agency, Attn: DB, 8725 John J. Kingman Road, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-

6221. Phone, 703-767-0192.

http://www.dla.mil/DoingBusinessWithDLA.aspx

Surplus Sales Program
Questions concerning this program should be addressed to DOD Surplus Sales, International Sales Office, 74

Washington Avenue North, Battle Creek, MI 49017-3092. Phone, 877-352-2255.

http://dispositionservices.dla.mil/sales/Pages/default.aspx
http://www.dla.mil
For further information, contact the Defense Logistics Agency, 8725 John J. Kingman Road, Fort Belvoir, VA

22060-6221. Phone, 703-767-5264.



Defense Security Cooperation Agency
201 Twelfth Street South, Suite 203, Arlington, VA 22202-5408


703-604-6605

http://www.dsca.mil | Email: info@dsca.mil
  DIRECTOR                                                  Heidi H. Grant


  Deputy Director                                           Cara L. Abercrombie, Acting


https://www.dsca.mil/about-dsca/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA) was established in 1971 and is under the authority, direction,

and control of the Under Secretary of Defense (Policy). DSCA provides traditional security assistance functions

such as military assistance, international military education and training, and foreign military sales. DSCA also has

program management responsibilities for humanitarian assistance, demining, and other DOD programs.

http://www.dsca.mil | Email: info@dsca.mil
For further information, contact the Defense Security Cooperation Agency, 201 Twelfth Street South, Suite 203,

Arlington, VA 22202-5408. Phone, 703-604-6605.


Defense Counterintelligence and Security
Agency
27130 Telegraph Road, Quantico, VA 22134


571-305-6562

http://www.dcsa.mil


  DIRECTOR                                                  William K. Lietzau


https://www.dcsa.mil/About-Us/Leadership/Bio-Display/Article/1822359/william-k-lietzau



Assistant Directors


  Background Investigations                                 Christy K. Wilder


  Critical Technology Protection                            David Stapleton

https://www.dcsa.mil/about/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency (DCSA) is under the authority, direction, and control of the

Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence. It protects America’s trusted workforce and trusted real and virtual
workspaces. The DCSA joins two missions: personnel vetting and critical technology protection. Vetting

personnel and protecting technology are supported by counterintelligence and training, education, and

certification functions. The DCSA services over 100 Federal entities, oversees 10,000 cleared companies, and

conducts approximately 2 million background investigations each year.


The DCSA ensures the safeguarding of classified information used by contractors on behalf of the DOD and

other executive branch agencies under the National Industrial Security Program. It oversees the protection of

conventional arms, munitions, and explosives in the custody of DOD contractors; evaluates the protection of

selected private sector critical assets and infrastructures; and recommends measures needed to maintain

operations identified as vital to the DOD. The agency makes clearance determinations for industry and provides

support services for DOD Central Adjudicative Facilities. It provides security education, training, and proactive

awareness programs for military, civilian, and cleared industry to enhance their proficiency and awareness of

DOD security policies and procedures. The DCSA also integrates counterintelligence principles into security

countermeasures missions and supports the national counterintelligence strategy.

https://www.dcsa.mil/abouthttps://www.dcsa.mil/contact/pao | Email: dcsa.quantico.dcsa-hq.mbx.pa@mail.mil
For further information, contact the Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency, Office of Public Affairs,

27130 Telegraph Road, Quantico, VA 22134. Phone, 571-305-6562.



Defense Threat Reduction Agency
8725 John J. Kingman Road, MS 6201, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6201


703-767-7594

http://www.dtra.mil


  DIRECTOR                                                Vayl S. Oxford


https://www.dtra.mil/About/DTRADirector

  Deputy Director                                         Maj. Gen. Antonio M. Fletcher, USA


https://www.dtra.mil/About/DTRA-Leadership/Deputy-Director-for-Combat-Support



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) was established in 1998 and is under the authority, direction, and

control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics. DTRA's mission is to reduce

the threat posed by weapons of mass destruction (WMD). DTRA covers the full range of WMD threats (chemical,

biological, nuclear, radiological, and high explosive), bridges the gap between the warfighters and the technical

community, sustains the nuclear deterrent, and provides both offensive and defensive technology and

operational concepts to warfighters. DTRA reduces the threat of WMD by implementing arms control treaties

and executing the Cooperative Threat Reduction Program. It uses combat support, technology development,
and chemical-biological defense to deter the use and reduce the impact of such weapons. DTRA also prepares
for future threats by developing the technology and concepts needed to counter new WMD threats and

adversaries.

https://www.dtra.mil/WhoWeArehttp://www.dtra.mil
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Defense Threat Reduction Agency, 8725 John J.

Kingman Road, MS 6201, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5916. Phone, 703-767-7594. Email, dtra.publicaffairs@dtra.mil.



Missile Defense Agency
5700 Eighteenth Street, Bldg 245, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5573


703-695-6420

http://www.mda.mil/ | Email: mda.info@mda.mil


  DIRECTOR                                                  Vice Adm. Jon A. Hill, USN


https://www.mda.mil/global/documents/pdf/Hill.pdf

  Executive Director                                        Laura M. DeSimone


https://www.mda.mil/global/documents/pdf/orgcht(002).pdf



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.




  [For the Missile Defense Agency statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations,
  Title 32, Part 388]



The Missile Defense Agency's (MDA) mission is to establish and deploy a layered ballistic missile defense system

to intercept missiles in all phases of their flight and against all ranges of threats. This capability will provide a

defense of the United States, deployed forces, and allies. The MDA is under the authority, direction, and control

of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics. It manages and directs DOD's

ballistic missile defense acquisition programs and enables the Services to field elements of the overall system as

soon as practicable. The MDA develops and tests technologies and, if necessary, uses prototype and test assets

to provide early capability. Additionally, MDA improves the effectiveness of deployed capabilities by

implementing new technologies as they become available or when the threat warrants an accelerated capability.

https://www.mda.mil/about/about.htmlhttps://www.mda.mil/contactus/contact.html | Email: mda.info@mda.mil
For further information, contact the Human Resources Directorate, Missile Defense Agency, 5700 Eighteenth

Street, Bldg 245, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5573. Phone, 703-695-6420. Email, mda.info@mda.mil.


National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency
7500 Geoint Drive, MS N73-OCCAE, Springfield, Virginia 22150
571-557-7300

http://www.nga.mil


  DIRECTOR                                                Vice Adm. Robert D. Sharp, USN


https://www.nga.mil/about/1596227427521_Vice_Admiral_Robert_D_Sharp_Director_.html

  Deputy Director                                         Stacey A. Dixon


https://www.nga.mil/about/1596228141343_Dr_Stacey_A_Dixon_Deputy_Director_.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA), formerly the National Imagery and Mapping Agency, was

established in 1996 and is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for

Intelligence. NGA is a DOD combat support agency and a member of the national intelligence community.

NGA's mission is to provide timely, relevant, and accurate geospatial intelligence in support of our national

security. Geospatial intelligence means the use and analysis of imagery to describe, assess, and visually depict

physical features and geographically referenced activities on the Earth. Headquartered in Bethesda, MD, NGA

has major facilities in the Washington, DC, Northern Virginia, and St. Louis, MO, areas with NGA support teams

worldwide.

https://www.nga.mil/contact/1595419637908_Contact_Us.html | Email: publicaffairs@nga.mil
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency,. 7500 Geoint

Drive, MS N73-OCCAE, Springfield, Virginia 22150. Phone, 571-557-7300.


National Security Agency / Central Security
Service
Fort Meade, MD 20755-6248


301-688-6524

301-688-6198

http://www.nsa.gov


  DIRECTOR                                                Gen. Paul M. Nakasone, USA


https://www.nsa.gov/About-Us/Current-Leadership/Article-View/Article/1596277/paul-m-nakasone/

  Deputy Director                                         George C. Barnes


https://www.nsa.gov/About-Us/Current-Leadership/Article-View/Article/1596282/george-c-barnes/
  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The National Security Agency (NSA) was established in 1952 and the Central Security Service (CSS) was

established in 1972. NSA/CSS is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for

Intelligence. As the Nation's cryptologic organization, NSA/CSS employs the Nation's premier codemakers and

codebreakers. It ensures an informed, alert, and secure environment for U.S. warfighters and policymakers. The

cryptologic resources of NSA/CSS unite to provide U.S. policymakers with intelligence information derived from

America's adversaries while protecting U.S. Government signals and information systems from exploitation by

those same adversaries.

https://www.nsa.gov/what-we-dohttps://www.nsa.gov/about/contact-us | Email: nsapao@nsa.gov
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, National Security Agency/Central Security Service, Fort

Meade, MD 20755-6248. Phone, 301-688-6524. Fax, 301-688-6198.



Pentagon Force Protection Agency
9000 Defense Pentagon, Washington, DC 20301


703-697-1001

http://www.pfpa.mil


  DIRECTOR                                                 Daniel P. Walsh, Acting


https://www.pfpa.mil/Our-Agency/Leadership/Dr-Daniel-P-Walsh



Executive Directors


  Law Enforcement                                          Christopher Bargery


  Security Integration and Technology                      James A. Day

https://www.pfpa.mil/Our-Agency/Leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Pentagon Force Protection Agency (PFPA) was established in May 2002 in response to the events of

September 11, 2001, and subsequent terrorist threats facing the DOD workforce and facilities in the National

Capital Region (NCR). PFPA is under the authority, direction, and control of the Director, Administration and

Management, in the Office of the Secretary of Defense. PFPA provides force protection, security, and law

enforcement for the people, facilities, infrastructure, and other resources at the Pentagon and for DOD activities

and facilities within the NCR that are not under the jurisdiction of a military department. Consistent with the

national strategy on combating terrorism, PFPA addresses threats, including chemical, biological, and
radiological agents, through a strategy of prevention, preparedness, detection, and response to ensure that the

DOD workforce and facilities in the NCR are secure and protected.

https://www.pfpa.mil/Our-Agency/Our-Mission-Visionhttps://www.pfpa.mil/Contact
For further information, contact the Pentagon Force Protection Agency, 9000 Defense Pentagon, Washington,

DC 20301. Phone, 703-697-1001.



Joint Service Schools
Defense Acquisition University
9820 Belvoir Road, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5565


703-805-2764

http://www.dau.edu/


  PRESIDENT                                              James P. Woosley


https://www.dau.edu/about/Documents/DAU_James%20Woolsey%20Bio_20170222.pdf

  Vice President                                         Frank L. Kelley


https://www.dau.edu/about/p/Mission-Organization



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Acquisition University (DAU), established pursuant to the Defense Acquisition Workforce

Improvement Act of 1990 (10 U.S.C. 1701 note), serves as the DOD center for acquisition, technology, and

logistics training; performance support; continuous learning; and knowledge sharing. DAU is a unified

structure with five regional campuses and the Defense Systems Management College-School of Program

Managers, which provides executive and international acquisition training. DAU’s mission is to provide the

training, career management, and services that enable the acquisition, technology, and logistics

community to make smart business decisions and deliver timely and affordable capabilities to warfighters.

https://www.dau.edu/abouthttps://www.dau.edu/about/p/Contact-Us
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Defense Acquisition University, 9820 Belvoir Road,

Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5565. Phone, 703-805-5412.


National Intelligence University
MAIN CAMPUS: Intelligence Community Campus—Bethesda, MD


301-243-2093

http://ni-u.edu/wp
  PRESIDENT                                             J. Scott Cameron


https://ni-u.edu/wp/about-niu/leadership-2/office-of-the-president

  Executive Vice President / Provost                    Terrence Markin


https://ni-u.edu/wp/about-niu/leadership-2



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The National Intelligence University, formerly the Joint Military Intelligence College, was established in

1962. The College is a joint service interagency educational institution serving the intelligence community

and operates under the authority of the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency. Its mission is to educate

military and civilian intelligence professionals, conduct and disseminate relevant intelligence research, and

perform academic outreach regarding intelligence matters. The College is authorized by Congress to

award the bachelor of science in intelligence, master of science and technology intelligence, and master of

science of strategic intelligence. Courses are offered to full-time students in a traditional daytime format

and for part-time students in the evening, on Saturday, and in an executive format (one weekend per

month and a 2-week intensive summer period).

https://ni-u.edu/wp/about-niuhttps://ni-u.edu/wp/contact | Email: niuadmit@dodiis.mil
For further information, contact the Office of Enrollment and Student Services, National Intelligence

University, Roberdeau Hall, Washington, DC 20511. Phone, 301-243-2094. Fax, 301-227-7067.


National Defense University
300 Fifth Avenue, Building 62, Fort Lesley J. McNair, DC 20319-5066


202-685-2649

http://www.ndu.edu


COLLEGE OF INFORMATION AND CYBERSPACE


http://cic.ndu.edu


COLLEGE OF INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS


http://cisa.ndu.edu


JOINT FORCES STAFF COLLEGE


http://jfsc.ndu.edu


NATIONAL WAR COLLEGE


http://nwc.ndu.edu
THE EISENHOWER SCHOOL FOR NATIONAL SECURITY AND RESOURCE STRATEGY


http://es.ndu.edu


 PRESIDENT                                             Vice Adm. Fritz Roegge, USN


https://www.ndu.edu/About/Leadership/Article-View/Article/1314417/vice-admiral-fritz-roegge-usn

 Provost                                               Alan Drimmer


 Senior Vice President                                 Arnold Chacon




Chancellors


 College of Information and Cyberspace                 Cassandra C. Lewis, Acting


 College of International Security Affairs             John Hoover, Acting




Commandants


 Joint Forces Staff College


 National War College


 The Eisenhower School for National Security and
 Resource Strategy

https://www.ndu.edu/About/Leadership



 The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.




NATIONAL DEFENSE UNIVERSITY
The mission of the National Defense University is to prepare military and civilian leaders from the United

States and other countries to evaluate national and international security challenges through

multidisciplinary educational and research programs, professional exchanges, and outreach.


The National Defense University was established in 1976 and comprises the following colleges and

programs: The Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy, National War College, Joint

Forces Staff College, College of Information and Cyberspace (formerly, Information Resources
Management College), College of International Security Affairs, Institute for National Strategic Studies,

Center for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction, Center for Technology and National Security Policy,

International Student Management Office, Joint Reserve Affairs Center, CAPSTONE, Security of Defense

Corporate Fellows Program, NATO Education Center, Institute for National Security Ethics and Leadership,

Center for Joint Strategic Logistics Excellence, Center for Applied Strategic Leaders, and Center for

Complex Operations.

http://www.ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Human Resources Directorate, National Defense
  University, 300 Fifth Avenue, Building 62, Fort Lesley J. McNair, DC 20319-5066. Phone, 202-
  685-2169.



College of Information and Cyberspace
After a Joint Staff request, in response to a continually changing national security environment, which

includes new cyberspace and information related challenges, the Information Resources Management

College was renamed the College of Information and Cyberspace (CIC). The change was confirmed by law

in the Fiscal Year 2017 National Defense Authorization Act. The CIC offers educational activities, services,

and programs for preparing information professionals to play critical roles in national security in the Age of

Information.

https://cic.ndu.edu/Contact/Contact-Us/ | Email: CICOSS@ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Office of Student Services, College of Information and
  Cyberspace, 300 Fifth Avenue, Building 62, Fort McNair, DC 20319-5066. Phone, 202-685-
  6300.



College of International Security Affairs
The College of International Security Affairs (CISA) is one of NDU’s five colleges. CISA educates students

from across the international, interagency, and interservice communities. CISA’s primary areas of

concentration include counterterrorism, conflict management of stability of operations, homeland security,

and defense and international security studies. CISA is also home to NDU’s International Counterterrorism

Fellowship Program.

http://cisa.ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Office of Academic Affairs, College of International
  Security Affairs, 260 Fifth Avenue, Building 64, Fort McNair, DC 20319-5066. Phone, 202-685-
  7774.



Joint Forces Staff College
The Joint Forces Staff College (JFSC) is an intermediate- and senior-level joint college in the professional

military education system dedicated to the study of the principles, perspectives, and techniques of joint

operational-level planning and warfare. The mission of JFSC is to educate national security professionals in

the planning and execution of joint, multinational, and interagency operations in order to instill a primary
commitment to joint, multinational, and interagency teamwork, attitudes, and perspectives. The College

accomplishes this mission through four schools: the Joint Advanced Warfighters School, the Joint and

Combined Warfighting School, the Joint Continuing and Distance Education School, and the Joint

Command, Control, and Information Operations School.

http://jfsc.ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Public Affairs Officer, Joint Forces Staff College, 7800
  Hampton Boulevard, Norfolk, VA 23511-1702. Phone, 757-443-6212. Fax, 757-443-6210.



National War College
The National War College provides education in national security policy to selected military officers and

career civil service employees of Federal departments and agencies concerned with national security. It is

the only senior service college with the primary mission of offering a course of study that emphasizes

national security policy formulation and the planning and implementation of national strategy. Its 10-

month academic program is an issue-centered study in U.S. national security. The elective program is

designed to permit each student to tailor his or her academic experience to meet individual professional

development needs.

http://nwc.ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Office of Administration, National War College, 300 D
  Street SW., Building 61, Fort McNair, DC 20319-5078. Phone, 202-685-3674.



The Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy
The Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy provides graduate level

education to senior members of the U.S. Armed Forces, Government civilians, foreign nationals, and

professionals from the private industrial sector. The School prepares students to contribute to national

security strategy and policy, emphasizing the evaluation, marshaling, and managing of national resources.

Students who fulfill the degree requirements receive a Master of Science degree in national resource

strategy.

http://es.ndu.edu/Home.aspx

  For further information, contact the Director of Operations, Dwight D. Eisenhower School for
  National Security and Resource Strategy, 408 Fourth Avenue, Building 59, Fort McNair, DC
  20319-5062. Phone, 202-685-4333.




Uniformed Services University of the
Health Sciences
4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814-4799


301-295-3190

http://www.usuhs.edu
       PRESIDENT                                             Maj. Gen. Richard W. Thomas, USA (retired)


    https://www.usuhs.edu/sites/default/files/media/vpe/pdf/thomas_richard_w_edit_17_nov_2020.pdf



    Senior Vice Presidents for University Programs


       Southern Region                                       Lt. Gen. Thomas W. Travis, USAF (retired)


       Western Region                                        Rear Adm. William Roberts, USN (retired)

    https://www.usuhs.edu/pres/leadership



       The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



    Authorized by act of September 21, 1972 (10 U.S.C. 2112), the Uniformed Services University of the Health

    Sciences was established to educate career-oriented medical officers for the Military Departments and the

    Public Health Service. The University currently incorporates the F. Edward Hebert School of Medicine

    (including graduate and continuing education programs) and the Graduate School of Nursing.


    Students are selected by procedures recommended by the Board of Regents and prescribed by the

    Secretary of Defense. The actual selection is carried out by a faculty committee on admissions and is based

    upon motivation and dedication to a career in the uniformed services and an overall appraisal of the

    personal and intellectual characteristics of the candidates without regard to sex, race, religion, or national

    origin. Applicants must be U.S. citizens.


    Medical school matriculants will be commissioned officers in one of the uniformed services. They must

    meet the physical and personal qualifications for such a commission and must give evidence of a strong

    commitment to serving as a uniformed medical officer. The graduating medical student is required to

    serve a period of obligation of not less than 7 years, excluding graduate medical education.


    Students of the Graduate School of Nursing must be commissioned officers of the Army, Navy, Air Force,

    or Public Health Service prior to application. Graduate nursing students must serve a commitment

    determined by their respective service.

    http://www.usuhs.mil
    For further information, contact the President, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301

    Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814-4799. Phone, 301-295-3013.




Home


The Government of the United States
About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                     Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency




The United States Government Manual




     DEFENSE ADVANCED RESEARCH PROJECTS AGENCY
    675 North Randolph Street, Arlington, VA 22203-2114


    703-526-6630

    http://www.darpa.mil


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Victoria Coleman


      Deputy Director                                                                       Peter Highnam
     https://www.darpa.mil/about-us/people



        The Sources of Information were updated 12–2020.



     The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency is a separately organized agency within the Department of Defense

     and is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition, Technology and
     Logistics). The Agency serves as the central research and development organization of the Department of Defense

     with a primary responsibility to maintain U.S. technological superiority over potential adversaries. It pursues

     imaginative and innovative research and development projects, and conducts demonstration projects that represent

     technology appropriate for joint programs, programs in support of deployed forces, or selected programs of the

     military departments. To this end, the Agency arranges, manages, and directs the performance of work connected

     with assigned advanced projects by the military departments, other Government agencies, individuals, private business

     entities, and educational or research institutions, as appropriate.

     http://www.darpa.mil

        For further information, contact the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, 675 North Randolph
        Street, Arlington, VA 22203-2114. Phone, 703-526-6630.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                Defense Commissary Agency




The United States Government Manual




     DEFENSE COMMISSARY AGENCY
    1300 E Avenue, Fort Lee, VA 23801-1800


    804-734-8720

    http://www.commissaries.com


      DIRECTOR / CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER                                                    William F. Moore


      Deputy Director / Chief Operating Officer                                             Michael J. Dowling
     https://www.commissaries.com/our-agency/deca-organization



        The Sources of Information were updated 12–2020.



     The Defense Commissary Agency (DeCA) was established in 1990 and is under the authority, direction, and control of

     the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness and the operational supervision of the Defense
     Commissary Agency Board of Directors.


     DeCA provides an efficient and effective worldwide system of commissaries that sell quality groceries and household

     supplies at low prices to members of the Armed Services community. This benefit satisfies customer demand for

     quality products and delivers exceptional savings while enhancing the military community's quality of life. DeCA works

     closely with its employees, customers, and civilian business partners to satisfy its customers and to promote the

     commissary benefit. The benefit fosters recruitment, retention, and readiness of skilled and trained personnel.




     SOURCES OF INFORMATION
     Employment information is available at www.commissaries.com or by calling the following telephone numbers:

     employment (703-603-1600); small business activities (804-734-8000, extension 4-8015/4-8529); contracting for resale

     items (804-734-8000, extension 4-8884/4-8885); and contracting for operations support and equipment (804-734-

     8000, extension 4-8391/4-8830).

     http://www.commissaries.com

        For further information, contact the Defense Commissary Agency, 1300 E Avenue, Fort Lee, VA 23801-
        1800. Phone, 804-734-8720




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                              Defense Contract Audit Agency




The United States Government Manual




     DEFENSE CONTRACT AUDIT AGENCY
    8725 John J. Kingman Road, Suite 2135, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6219


    703-767-3265

    http://www.dcaa.mil | Email: dcaaweb@dcaa.mil


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Anita F. Bales


    https://www.dcaa.mil/Portals/88/FY2019%20DCAA%20Report%20to%20Congress.pdf?ver=XKAncoiKefo8TD5eh-
    OCxQ%3d%3d
        The Sources of Information were updated 4–2020.



     The Defense Contract Audit Agency (DCAA) was established in 1965 and is under the authority, direction, and control

     of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer. DCAA performs all necessary contract audit
     functions for DOD and provides accounting and financial advisory services to all Defense components responsible for

     procurement and contract administration. These services are provided in connection with the negotiation,

     administration, and settlement of contracts and subcontracts to ensure taxpayer dollars are spent on fair and

     reasonable contract prices. They include evaluating the acceptability of costs claimed or proposed by contractors and

     reviewing the efficiency and economy of contractor operations. Other Government agencies may request the DCAA's

     services under appropriate arrangements.


     DCAA manages its operations through five regional offices responsible for approximately 104 field audit offices

     throughout the United States and overseas. Each region is responsible for the contract auditing function in its assigned

     area. Point of contact information for DCAA regional offices is available at www.dcaa.mil.

     http://www.dcaa.mil | Email: dcaaweb@dcaa.mil

        For further information, contact the Executive Officer, Defense Contract Audit Agency, 8725 John J.
        Kingman Road, Suite 2135, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6219. Phone, 703-767-3265.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                          Defense Contract Management Agency




The United States Government Manual




     DEFENSE CONTRACT MANAGEMENT AGENCY
    3901 A Avenue, Fort Lee, VA 23801


    804-734-0814

    http://www.dcma.mil


                                                                                            Lt. Gen. David G. Bassett,
      DIRECTOR
                                                                                            USA


      Deputy Director                                                                       John M. Lyle
     http://www.dcma.mil/About-Us



        The Sources of Information were updated 12–2020.



     The Defense Contract Management Agency (DCMA) was established by the Deputy Secretary of Defense in 2000 and

     is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense (Acquisition, Technology, and

     Logistics). DCMA is responsible for DOD contract management in support of the military departments, other DOD

     components, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, other designated Federal and State agencies,

     foreign governments, and international organizations, as appropriate.

     http://www.dcma.mil

        For further information, contact the Office of General Counsel, Defense Contract Management Agency,
        3901 A Avenue, Fort Lee, VA 23801. Phone, 804-734-0814.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                    Search
                                                                                            Search




                                           Defense Finance and Accounting Service




The United States Government Manual




     DEFENSE FINANCE AND ACCOUNTING SERVICE
    4800 Mark Center Drive, Suite 08J25-01, Alexandria, VA 22350-3000


    571-372-7883

    http://www.dfas.mil


      DIRECTOR                                                                                Audrey Y. Davis


      Principal Deputy Director                                                               (vacancy)
     https://www.dfas.mil/Pressroom/dfasleadership



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



     The Defense Finance and Accounting Service (DFAS) was established in 1991 under the authority, direction, and control

     of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller)/Chief Financial Officer to strengthen and reduce costs of financial
     management and operations within DOD. DFAS is responsible for all payments to servicemembers, employees,

     vendors, and contractors. It provides business intelligence and finance and accounting information to DOD

     decisionmakers. DFAS is also responsible for preparing annual financial statements and the consolidation,

     standardization, and modernization of finance and accounting requirements, functions, processes, operations, and

     systems for DOD.

     http://www.dfas.mil

        For further information, contact Defense Finance and Accounting Service Corporate Communications,
        4800 Mark Center Drive, Suite 08J25-01, Alexandria, VA 22350-3000. Phone, 571-372-7883.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                    Search
                                                                                            Search




                                             Defense Information Systems Agency




The United States Government Manual




     DEFENSE INFORMATION SYSTEMS AGENCY
    P.O. Box 549, Command Building, Fort Meade, MD 20755


    301-225-6000

    http://www.disa.mil | Email: dia-pao@dia.mil


                                                                                               Vice Adm. Nancy A. Norton,
      DIRECTOR
                                                                                               USN


      Executive Deputy Director                                                                Anthony Montemarano
     http://www.disa.mil/About/Our-Leaders



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



     The Defense Information Systems Agency (DISA), established originally as the Defense Communications Agency in

     1960, is under the authority, direction, and control of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Networks and Information

     Integration). DISA is a combat support agency responsible for planning, engineering, acquiring, fielding, operating,

     and supporting global net-centric solutions to serve the needs of the President, Vice President, Secretary of Defense,

     and other DOD components.

     http://www.disa.mil | Email: dia-pao@dia.mil

        For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Defense Information Systems Agency, P.O. Box
        549, Command Building, Fort Meade, MD 20755. Phone, 301-225-6000.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                Defense Intelligence Agency




The United States Government Manual




     DEFENSE INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
    200 MacDill Boulevard, Washington DC 20340-5100


    202-231-0800

    http://www.dia.mil | Email: dia-pao@dia.mil


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Lt. Gen. Scott D. Berrier, USA


      Deputy Director                                                                       Suzanne L. White
     http://www.dia.mil/About/Leadership



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



     The Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) was established in 1961 and is under the authority, direction, and control of the

     Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence. DIA provides timely, objective, and cogent military intelligence to
     warfighters, force planners, as well as defense and national security policymakers. DIA obtains and reports information

     through its field sites worldwide and the Defense Attache System; provides timely intelligence analysis; directs Defense

     Human Intelligence programs; operates the Joint Intelligence Task Force for Combating Terrorism and the Joint

     Military Intelligence College; coordinates and facilitates Measurement and Signature Intelligence activities; manages

     and plans collections from specialized technical sources; manages secure DOD intelligence networks; and coordinates

     required intelligence support for the Secretary of Defense, Joint Chiefs of Staff, Combatant Commanders, and Joint

     Task Forces.

     http://www.dia.mil | Email: dia-pao@dia.mil

        For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Defense Intelligence Agency, 200 MacDill
        Boulevard, Washington DC 20340-5100. Phone, 202-231-0800.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Defense Legal Services Agency




The United States Government Manual




     DEFENSE LEGAL SERVICES AGENCY
    The Pentagon, Washington, DC 20301-1600


    703-695-3341

    http://www.dod.mil/dodgc


      DIRECTOR / GENERAL COUNSEL OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE                               Paul C. Ney, Jr.


    https://ogc.osd.mil/gc_bio.html

      Principal Deputy General Counsel of the Department of Defense                         William S. Castle
     https://ogc.osd.mil/dgc_bio.html



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



     The Defense Legal Services Agency (DLSA) was established in 1981 and is under the authority, direction, and control of

     the General Counsel of the Department of Defense, who also serves as its Director. DLSA provides legal advice and

     services for specified DOD components and adjudication of personnel security cases for DOD and other assigned

     Federal agencies and departments. It also provides technical support and assistance for development of the

     Department's legislative program; coordinates positions on legislation and Presidential Executive orders; provides a

     centralized legislative and congressional document reference and distribution point for the Department; maintains the

     Department's historical legislative files; and administers programs governing standards of conduct and alternative

     dispute resolution.

     https://ogc.osd.mil/index.html

        For further information, contact the Administrative Office, Defense Legal Services Agency, Room 3A734,
        Washington, DC 20301-1600. Phone, 703-697-8343.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                  Defense Logistics Agency




The United States Government Manual




     DEFENSE LOGISTICS AGENCY
    8725 John J. Kingman Road, Suite 2533, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6221


    703-767-5264

    http://www.dla.mil


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Vice Adm. Michelle C. Skubic


      Vice Director                                                                         Michael D. Scott
http://www.dla.mil/Leaders.aspx



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense

for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics. DLA supports both the logistics requirements of the military services and
their acquisition of weapons and other materiel. It provides logistics support and technical services to all branches of

the military and to a number of Federal agencies. DLA supply centers consolidate the requirements of the military

services and procure the supplies in sufficient quantities to meet their projected needs. DLA manages supplies in eight

commodity areas: fuel, food, clothing, construction material, electronic supplies, general supplies, industrial supplies,

and medical supplies. Information on DLA’s field activities and regional commands is available at

www.dla.mil/ataglance.aspx.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
For the Washington, DC, metropolitan area, all inquiries and applications concerning job recruitment programs should

be addressed to Human Resources, Customer Support Office, 3990 East Broad Street, Building 11, Section 3,

Columbus, OH, 43213-0919. Phone, 877-352-4762.

http://www.dla.mil/Careers.aspx

Environmental Program
For information on the environmental program, contact the Staff Director, Environmental and Safety, Defense Logistics

Agency, Attn: DSS-E, 8725 John J. Kingman Road, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6221. Phone, 703-767-6278.


Procurement / Small Business Activities
For information on procurement and small business activities, contact the Director, Small and Disadvantaged Business

Utilization, Defense Logistics Agency, Attn: DB, 8725 John J. Kingman Road, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6221. Phone, 703-

767-0192.

http://www.dla.mil/DoingBusinessWithDLA.aspx

Surplus Sales Program
Questions concerning this program should be addressed to DOD Surplus Sales, International Sales Office, 74

Washington Avenue North, Battle Creek, MI 49017-3092. Phone, 877-352-2255.

http://dispositionservices.dla.mil/sales/Pages/default.aspx
http://www.dla.mil

  For further information, contact the Defense Logistics Agency, 8725 John J. Kingman Road, Fort Belvoir,
  VA 22060-6221. Phone, 703-767-5264.
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                           Defense Security Cooperation Agency




The United States Government Manual




     DEFENSE SECURITY COOPERATION AGENCY
    201 Twelfth Street South, Suite 203, Arlington, VA 22202-5408


    703-604-6605

    http://www.dsca.mil | Email: info@dsca.mil


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Heidi H. Grant


      Deputy Director                                                                       Cara L. Abercrombie, Acting
     https://www.dsca.mil/about-dsca/leadership



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



     The Defense Security Cooperation Agency (DSCA) was established in 1971 and is under the authority, direction, and

     control of the Under Secretary of Defense (Policy). DSCA provides traditional security assistance functions such as
     military assistance, international military education and training, and foreign military sales. DSCA also has program

     management responsibilities for humanitarian assistance, demining, and other DOD programs.

     http://www.dsca.mil | Email: info@dsca.mil

        For further information, contact the Defense Security Cooperation Agency, 201 Twelfth Street South,
        Suite 203, Arlington, VA 22202-5408. Phone, 703-604-6605.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                   Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency




The United States Government Manual




     DEFENSE COUNTERINTELLIGENCE AND SECURITY AGENCY
    27130 Telegraph Road, Quantico, VA 22134


    571-305-6562

    http://www.dcsa.mil


      DIRECTOR                                                                               William K. Lietzau


    https://www.dcsa.mil/About-Us/Leadership/Bio-Display/Article/1822359/william-k-lietzau
     Assistant Directors


        Background Investigations                                                                Christy K. Wilder


        Critical Technology Protection                                                           David Stapleton

     https://www.dcsa.mil/about/leadership



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



     The Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency (DCSA) is under the authority, direction, and control of the

     Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence. It protects America’s trusted workforce and trusted real and virtual

     workspaces. The DCSA joins two missions: personnel vetting and critical technology protection. Vetting personnel and

     protecting technology are supported by counterintelligence and training, education, and certification functions. The

     DCSA services over 100 Federal entities, oversees 10,000 cleared companies, and conducts approximately 2 million

     background investigations each year.


     The DCSA ensures the safeguarding of classified information used by contractors on behalf of the DOD and other

     executive branch agencies under the National Industrial Security Program. It oversees the protection of conventional

     arms, munitions, and explosives in the custody of DOD contractors; evaluates the protection of selected private sector

     critical assets and infrastructures; and recommends measures needed to maintain operations identified as vital to the

     DOD. The agency makes clearance determinations for industry and provides support services for DOD Central

     Adjudicative Facilities. It provides security education, training, and proactive awareness programs for military, civilian,

     and cleared industry to enhance their proficiency and awareness of DOD security policies and procedures. The DCSA

     also integrates counterintelligence principles into security countermeasures missions and supports the national

     counterintelligence strategy.

     https://www.dcsa.mil/abouthttps://www.dcsa.mil/contact/pao | Email: dcsa.quantico.dcsa-hq.mbx.pa@mail.mil

        For further information, contact the Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency, Office of Public
        Affairs, 27130 Telegraph Road, Quantico, VA 22134. Phone, 571-305-6562.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility
Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                             Defense Threat Reduction Agency




The United States Government Manual




     DEFENSE THREAT REDUCTION AGENCY
    8725 John J. Kingman Road, MS 6201, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-6201


    703-767-7594

    http://www.dtra.mil


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Vayl S. Oxford


    https://www.dtra.mil/About/DTRADirector

                                                                                            Maj. Gen. Antonio
        Deputy Director
                                                                                            M. Fletcher, USA


     https://www.dtra.mil/About/DTRA-Leadership/Deputy-Director-for-Combat-Support



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



     The Defense Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) was established in 1998 and is under the authority, direction, and

     control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics. DTRA's mission is to reduce the

     threat posed by weapons of mass destruction (WMD). DTRA covers the full range of WMD threats (chemical,

     biological, nuclear, radiological, and high explosive), bridges the gap between the warfighters and the technical

     community, sustains the nuclear deterrent, and provides both offensive and defensive technology and operational

     concepts to warfighters. DTRA reduces the threat of WMD by implementing arms control treaties and executing the

     Cooperative Threat Reduction Program. It uses combat support, technology development, and chemical-biological

     defense to deter the use and reduce the impact of such weapons. DTRA also prepares for future threats by developing

     the technology and concepts needed to counter new WMD threats and adversaries.

     https://www.dtra.mil/WhoWeArehttp://www.dtra.mil

        For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Defense Threat Reduction Agency, 8725 John J.
        Kingman Road, MS 6201, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5916. Phone, 703-767-7594. Email,
        dtra.publicaffairs@dtra.mil.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                   Missile Defense Agency




The United States Government Manual




     MISSILE DEFENSE AGENCY
    5700 Eighteenth Street, Bldg 245, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5573


    703-695-6420

    http://www.mda.mil/ | Email: mda.info@mda.mil


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Vice Adm. Jon A. Hill, USN


    https://www.mda.mil/global/documents/pdf/Hill.pdf

      Executive Director                                                                    Laura M. DeSimone
     https://www.mda.mil/global/documents/pdf/orgcht(002).pdf



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.




        [For the Missile Defense Agency statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 32,
        Part 388]



     The Missile Defense Agency's (MDA) mission is to establish and deploy a layered ballistic missile defense system to

     intercept missiles in all phases of their flight and against all ranges of threats. This capability will provide a defense of

     the United States, deployed forces, and allies. The MDA is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under

     Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics. It manages and directs DOD's ballistic missile defense

     acquisition programs and enables the Services to field elements of the overall system as soon as practicable. The MDA

     develops and tests technologies and, if necessary, uses prototype and test assets to provide early capability.

     Additionally, MDA improves the effectiveness of deployed capabilities by implementing new technologies as they

     become available or when the threat warrants an accelerated capability.

     https://www.mda.mil/about/about.htmlhttps://www.mda.mil/contactus/contact.html | Email: mda.info@mda.mil

        For further information, contact the Human Resources Directorate, Missile Defense Agency, 5700
        Eighteenth Street, Bldg 245, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5573. Phone, 703-695-6420. Email,
        mda.info@mda.mil.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                          National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL GEOSPATIAL-INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
    7500 Geoint Drive, MS N73-OCCAE, Springfield, Virginia 22150


    571-557-7300

    http://www.nga.mil


                                                                                            Vice Adm. Robert D. Sharp,
      DIRECTOR
                                                                                            USN


    https://www.nga.mil/about/1596227427521_Vice_Admiral_Robert_D_Sharp_Director_.html
        Deputy Director                                                                         Stacey A. Dixon


     https://www.nga.mil/about/1596228141343_Dr_Stacey_A_Dixon_Deputy_Director_.html



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



     The National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA), formerly the National Imagery and Mapping Agency, was

     established in 1996 and is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence.

     NGA is a DOD combat support agency and a member of the national intelligence community. NGA's mission is to

     provide timely, relevant, and accurate geospatial intelligence in support of our national security. Geospatial intelligence

     means the use and analysis of imagery to describe, assess, and visually depict physical features and geographically

     referenced activities on the Earth. Headquartered in Bethesda, MD, NGA has major facilities in the Washington, DC,

     Northern Virginia, and St. Louis, MO, areas with NGA support teams worldwide.

     https://www.nga.mil/contact/1595419637908_Contact_Us.html | Email: publicaffairs@nga.mil

        For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency,. 7500
        Geoint Drive, MS N73-OCCAE, Springfield, Virginia 22150. Phone, 571-557-7300.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                  National Security Agency / Central Security Service




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY / CENTRAL SECURITY SERVICE
    Fort Meade, MD 20755-6248


    301-688-6524

    301-688-6198

    http://www.nsa.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Gen. Paul M. Nakasone, USA


    https://www.nsa.gov/About-Us/Current-Leadership/Article-View/Article/1596277/paul-m-nakasone/
        Deputy Director                                                                       George C. Barnes


     https://www.nsa.gov/About-Us/Current-Leadership/Article-View/Article/1596282/george-c-barnes/



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



     The National Security Agency (NSA) was established in 1952 and the Central Security Service (CSS) was established in

     1972. NSA/CSS is under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence. As the

     Nation's cryptologic organization, NSA/CSS employs the Nation's premier codemakers and codebreakers. It ensures

     an informed, alert, and secure environment for U.S. warfighters and policymakers. The cryptologic resources of

     NSA/CSS unite to provide U.S. policymakers with intelligence information derived from America's adversaries while

     protecting U.S. Government signals and information systems from exploitation by those same adversaries.

     https://www.nsa.gov/what-we-dohttps://www.nsa.gov/about/contact-us | Email: nsapao@nsa.gov

        For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, National Security Agency/Central Security
        Service, Fort Meade, MD 20755-6248. Phone, 301-688-6524. Fax, 301-688-6198.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                            Pentagon Force Protection Agency




The United States Government Manual




     PENTAGON FORCE PROTECTION AGENCY
    9000 Defense Pentagon, Washington, DC 20301


    703-697-1001

    http://www.pfpa.mil


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Daniel P. Walsh, Acting


    https://www.pfpa.mil/Our-Agency/Leadership/Dr-Daniel-P-Walsh
     Executive Directors


        Law Enforcement                                                                     Christopher Bargery


        Security Integration and Technology                                                 James A. Day

     https://www.pfpa.mil/Our-Agency/Leadership



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



     The Pentagon Force Protection Agency (PFPA) was established in May 2002 in response to the events of September 11,

     2001, and subsequent terrorist threats facing the DOD workforce and facilities in the National Capital Region (NCR).

     PFPA is under the authority, direction, and control of the Director, Administration and Management, in the Office of

     the Secretary of Defense. PFPA provides force protection, security, and law enforcement for the people, facilities,

     infrastructure, and other resources at the Pentagon and for DOD activities and facilities within the NCR that are not

     under the jurisdiction of a military department. Consistent with the national strategy on combating terrorism, PFPA

     addresses threats, including chemical, biological, and radiological agents, through a strategy of prevention,

     preparedness, detection, and response to ensure that the DOD workforce and facilities in the NCR are secure and

     protected.

     https://www.pfpa.mil/Our-Agency/Our-Mission-Visionhttps://www.pfpa.mil/Contact

        For further information, contact the Pentagon Force Protection Agency, 9000 Defense Pentagon,
        Washington, DC 20301. Phone, 703-697-1001.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                Joint Service Schools
                                           Defense Acquisition University
                                          National Intelligence University
                                            National Defense University
                                 Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences




The United States Government Manual




     JOINT SERVICE SCHOOLS

    Defense Acquisition University
    9820 Belvoir Road, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5565


    703-805-2764

    http://www.dau.edu/
  PRESIDENT                                                 James P. Woosley


https://www.dau.edu/about/Documents/DAU_James%20Woolsey%20Bio_20170222.pdf

  Vice President                                            Frank L. Kelley


https://www.dau.edu/about/p/Mission-Organization



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Defense Acquisition University (DAU), established pursuant to the Defense Acquisition Workforce

Improvement Act of 1990 (10 U.S.C. 1701 note), serves as the DOD center for acquisition, technology, and

logistics training; performance support; continuous learning; and knowledge sharing. DAU is a unified structure

with five regional campuses and the Defense Systems Management College-School of Program Managers,

which provides executive and international acquisition training. DAU’s mission is to provide the training, career

management, and services that enable the acquisition, technology, and logistics community to make smart

business decisions and deliver timely and affordable capabilities to warfighters.

https://www.dau.edu/abouthttps://www.dau.edu/about/p/Contact-Us
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Defense Acquisition University, 9820 Belvoir Road, Fort

Belvoir, VA 22060-5565. Phone, 703-805-5412.


National Intelligence University
MAIN CAMPUS: Intelligence Community Campus—Bethesda, MD


301-243-2093

http://ni-u.edu/wp


  PRESIDENT                                                 J. Scott Cameron


https://ni-u.edu/wp/about-niu/leadership-2/office-of-the-president

  Executive Vice President / Provost                        Terrence Markin


https://ni-u.edu/wp/about-niu/leadership-2



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The National Intelligence University, formerly the Joint Military Intelligence College, was established in 1962. The

College is a joint service interagency educational institution serving the intelligence community and operates

under the authority of the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency. Its mission is to educate military and civilian
intelligence professionals, conduct and disseminate relevant intelligence research, and perform academic
outreach regarding intelligence matters. The College is authorized by Congress to award the bachelor of science

in intelligence, master of science and technology intelligence, and master of science of strategic intelligence.

Courses are offered to full-time students in a traditional daytime format and for part-time students in the

evening, on Saturday, and in an executive format (one weekend per month and a 2-week intensive summer

period).

https://ni-u.edu/wp/about-niuhttps://ni-u.edu/wp/contact | Email: niuadmit@dodiis.mil
For further information, contact the Office of Enrollment and Student Services, National Intelligence University,

Roberdeau Hall, Washington, DC 20511. Phone, 301-243-2094. Fax, 301-227-7067.



National Defense University
300 Fifth Avenue, Building 62, Fort Lesley J. McNair, DC 20319-5066


202-685-2649

http://www.ndu.edu


COLLEGE OF INFORMATION AND CYBERSPACE


http://cic.ndu.edu


COLLEGE OF INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS


http://cisa.ndu.edu


JOINT FORCES STAFF COLLEGE


http://jfsc.ndu.edu


NATIONAL WAR COLLEGE


http://nwc.ndu.edu


THE EISENHOWER SCHOOL FOR NATIONAL SECURITY AND RESOURCE STRATEGY


http://es.ndu.edu


  PRESIDENT                                               Vice Adm. Fritz Roegge, USN


https://www.ndu.edu/About/Leadership/Article-View/Article/1314417/vice-admiral-fritz-roegge-usn

  Provost                                                 Alan Drimmer


  Senior Vice President                                   Arnold Chacon




Chancellors
  College of Information and Cyberspace                     Cassandra C. Lewis, Acting


  College of International Security Affairs                 John Hoover, Acting




Commandants


  Joint Forces Staff College


  National War College


  The Eisenhower School for National Security and
  Resource Strategy

https://www.ndu.edu/About/Leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.




NATIONAL DEFENSE UNIVERSITY
The mission of the National Defense University is to prepare military and civilian leaders from the United States

and other countries to evaluate national and international security challenges through multidisciplinary

educational and research programs, professional exchanges, and outreach.


The National Defense University was established in 1976 and comprises the following colleges and programs:

The Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy, National War College, Joint Forces Staff

College, College of Information and Cyberspace (formerly, Information Resources Management College),

College of International Security Affairs, Institute for National Strategic Studies, Center for the Study of Weapons

of Mass Destruction, Center for Technology and National Security Policy, International Student Management

Office, Joint Reserve Affairs Center, CAPSTONE, Security of Defense Corporate Fellows Program, NATO

Education Center, Institute for National Security Ethics and Leadership, Center for Joint Strategic Logistics

Excellence, Center for Applied Strategic Leaders, and Center for Complex Operations.

http://www.ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Human Resources Directorate, National Defense University, 300
  Fifth Avenue, Building 62, Fort Lesley J. McNair, DC 20319-5066. Phone, 202-685-2169.



College of Information and Cyberspace
After a Joint Staff request, in response to a continually changing national security environment, which includes

new cyberspace and information related challenges, the Information Resources Management College was

renamed the College of Information and Cyberspace (CIC). The change was confirmed by law in the Fiscal Year
2017 National Defense Authorization Act. The CIC offers educational activities, services, and programs for

preparing information professionals to play critical roles in national security in the Age of Information.

https://cic.ndu.edu/Contact/Contact-Us/ | Email: CICOSS@ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Office of Student Services, College of Information and
  Cyberspace, 300 Fifth Avenue, Building 62, Fort McNair, DC 20319-5066. Phone, 202-685-6300.



College of International Security Affairs
The College of International Security Affairs (CISA) is one of NDU’s five colleges. CISA educates students from

across the international, interagency, and interservice communities. CISA’s primary areas of concentration

include counterterrorism, conflict management of stability of operations, homeland security, and defense and

international security studies. CISA is also home to NDU’s International Counterterrorism Fellowship Program.

http://cisa.ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Office of Academic Affairs, College of International Security
  Affairs, 260 Fifth Avenue, Building 64, Fort McNair, DC 20319-5066. Phone, 202-685-7774.



Joint Forces Staff College
The Joint Forces Staff College (JFSC) is an intermediate- and senior-level joint college in the professional military

education system dedicated to the study of the principles, perspectives, and techniques of joint operational-level

planning and warfare. The mission of JFSC is to educate national security professionals in the planning and

execution of joint, multinational, and interagency operations in order to instill a primary commitment to joint,

multinational, and interagency teamwork, attitudes, and perspectives. The College accomplishes this mission

through four schools: the Joint Advanced Warfighters School, the Joint and Combined Warfighting School, the

Joint Continuing and Distance Education School, and the Joint Command, Control, and Information Operations

School.

http://jfsc.ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Public Affairs Officer, Joint Forces Staff College, 7800 Hampton
  Boulevard, Norfolk, VA 23511-1702. Phone, 757-443-6212. Fax, 757-443-6210.



National War College
The National War College provides education in national security policy to selected military officers and career

civil service employees of Federal departments and agencies concerned with national security. It is the only

senior service college with the primary mission of offering a course of study that emphasizes national security

policy formulation and the planning and implementation of national strategy. Its 10-month academic program is

an issue-centered study in U.S. national security. The elective program is designed to permit each student to

tailor his or her academic experience to meet individual professional development needs.

http://nwc.ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Office of Administration, National War College, 300 D Street
 SW., Building 61, Fort McNair, DC 20319-5078. Phone, 202-685-3674.



The Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy
The Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy provides graduate level education

to senior members of the U.S. Armed Forces, Government civilians, foreign nationals, and professionals from the

private industrial sector. The School prepares students to contribute to national security strategy and policy,

emphasizing the evaluation, marshaling, and managing of national resources. Students who fulfill the degree

requirements receive a Master of Science degree in national resource strategy.

http://es.ndu.edu/Home.aspx

 For further information, contact the Director of Operations, Dwight D. Eisenhower School for
 National Security and Resource Strategy, 408 Fourth Avenue, Building 59, Fort McNair, DC 20319-
 5062. Phone, 202-685-4333.




Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences
4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814-4799


301-295-3190

http://www.usuhs.edu


 PRESIDENT                                                Maj. Gen. Richard W. Thomas, USA (retired)


https://www.usuhs.edu/sites/default/files/media/vpe/pdf/thomas_richard_w_edit_17_nov_2020.pdf



Senior Vice Presidents for University Programs


 Southern Region                                          Lt. Gen. Thomas W. Travis, USAF (retired)


 Western Region                                           Rear Adm. William Roberts, USN (retired)

https://www.usuhs.edu/pres/leadership



 The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



Authorized by act of September 21, 1972 (10 U.S.C. 2112), the Uniformed Services University of the Health

Sciences was established to educate career-oriented medical officers for the Military Departments and the Public

Health Service. The University currently incorporates the F. Edward Hebert School of Medicine (including

graduate and continuing education programs) and the Graduate School of Nursing.


Students are selected by procedures recommended by the Board of Regents and prescribed by the Secretary of
     Defense. The actual selection is carried out by a faculty committee on admissions and is based upon motivation

     and dedication to a career in the uniformed services and an overall appraisal of the personal and intellectual

     characteristics of the candidates without regard to sex, race, religion, or national origin. Applicants must be U.S.

     citizens.


     Medical school matriculants will be commissioned officers in one of the uniformed services. They must meet the

     physical and personal qualifications for such a commission and must give evidence of a strong commitment to

     serving as a uniformed medical officer. The graduating medical student is required to serve a period of

     obligation of not less than 7 years, excluding graduate medical education.


     Students of the Graduate School of Nursing must be commissioned officers of the Army, Navy, Air Force, or

     Public Health Service prior to application. Graduate nursing students must serve a commitment determined by

     their respective service.

     http://www.usuhs.mil
     For further information, contact the President, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301 Jones

     Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814-4799. Phone, 301-295-3013.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Defense Acquisition University




The United States Government Manual




     DEFENSE ACQUISITION UNIVERSITY
    9820 Belvoir Road, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5565


    703-805-2764

    http://www.dau.edu/


      PRESIDENT                                                                             James P. Woosley


    https://www.dau.edu/about/Documents/DAU_James%20Woolsey%20Bio_20170222.pdf

      Vice President                                                                        Frank L. Kelley
     https://www.dau.edu/about/p/Mission-Organization



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



     The Defense Acquisition University (DAU), established pursuant to the Defense Acquisition Workforce Improvement

     Act of 1990 (10 U.S.C. 1701 note), serves as the DOD center for acquisition, technology, and logistics training;

     performance support; continuous learning; and knowledge sharing. DAU is a unified structure with five regional

     campuses and the Defense Systems Management College-School of Program Managers, which provides executive

     and international acquisition training. DAU’s mission is to provide the training, career management, and services that

     enable the acquisition, technology, and logistics community to make smart business decisions and deliver timely and

     affordable capabilities to warfighters.

     https://www.dau.edu/abouthttps://www.dau.edu/about/p/Contact-Us

        For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, Defense Acquisition University, 9820 Belvoir
        Road, Fort Belvoir, VA 22060-5565. Phone, 703-805-5412.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               National Intelligence University




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE UNIVERSITY
    MAIN CAMPUS: Intelligence Community Campus—Bethesda, MD


    301-243-2093

    http://ni-u.edu/wp


      PRESIDENT                                                                             J. Scott Cameron


    https://ni-u.edu/wp/about-niu/leadership-2/office-of-the-president

      Executive Vice President / Provost                                                    Terrence Markin
     https://ni-u.edu/wp/about-niu/leadership-2



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



     The National Intelligence University, formerly the Joint Military Intelligence College, was established in 1962. The

     College is a joint service interagency educational institution serving the intelligence community and operates under the

     authority of the Director, Defense Intelligence Agency. Its mission is to educate military and civilian intelligence

     professionals, conduct and disseminate relevant intelligence research, and perform academic outreach regarding

     intelligence matters. The College is authorized by Congress to award the bachelor of science in intelligence, master of

     science and technology intelligence, and master of science of strategic intelligence. Courses are offered to full-time

     students in a traditional daytime format and for part-time students in the evening, on Saturday, and in an executive

     format (one weekend per month and a 2-week intensive summer period).

     https://ni-u.edu/wp/about-niuhttps://ni-u.edu/wp/contact | Email: niuadmit@dodiis.mil

        For further information, contact the Office of Enrollment and Student Services, National Intelligence
        University, Roberdeau Hall, Washington, DC 20511. Phone, 301-243-2094. Fax, 301-227-7067.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                National Defense University




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL DEFENSE UNIVERSITY
    300 Fifth Avenue, Building 62, Fort Lesley J. McNair, DC 20319-5066


    202-685-2649

    http://www.ndu.edu


    COLLEGE OF INFORMATION AND CYBERSPACE


    http://cic.ndu.edu


    COLLEGE OF INTERNATIONAL SECURITY AFFAIRS
http://cisa.ndu.edu


JOINT FORCES STAFF COLLEGE


http://jfsc.ndu.edu


NATIONAL WAR COLLEGE


http://nwc.ndu.edu


THE EISENHOWER SCHOOL FOR NATIONAL SECURITY AND RESOURCE STRATEGY


http://es.ndu.edu


  PRESIDENT                                                                          Vice Adm. Fritz Roegge, USN


https://www.ndu.edu/About/Leadership/Article-View/Article/1314417/vice-admiral-fritz-roegge-usn

  Provost                                                                            Alan Drimmer


  Senior Vice President                                                              Arnold Chacon




Chancellors


  College of Information and Cyberspace                                              Cassandra C. Lewis, Acting


  College of International Security Affairs                                          John Hoover, Acting




Commandants


  Joint Forces Staff College


  National War College


  The Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy

https://www.ndu.edu/About/Leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.




NATIONAL DEFENSE UNIVERSITY
The mission of the National Defense University is to prepare military and civilian leaders from the United States and

other countries to evaluate national and international security challenges through multidisciplinary educational and

research programs, professional exchanges, and outreach.


The National Defense University was established in 1976 and comprises the following colleges and programs: The

Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy, National War College, Joint Forces Staff College,

College of Information and Cyberspace (formerly, Information Resources Management College), College of

International Security Affairs, Institute for National Strategic Studies, Center for the Study of Weapons of Mass

Destruction, Center for Technology and National Security Policy, International Student Management Office, Joint

Reserve Affairs Center, CAPSTONE, Security of Defense Corporate Fellows Program, NATO Education Center, Institute

for National Security Ethics and Leadership, Center for Joint Strategic Logistics Excellence, Center for Applied Strategic

Leaders, and Center for Complex Operations.

http://www.ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Human Resources Directorate, National Defense University, 300 Fifth
  Avenue, Building 62, Fort Lesley J. McNair, DC 20319-5066. Phone, 202-685-2169.



College of Information and Cyberspace
After a Joint Staff request, in response to a continually changing national security environment, which includes new

cyberspace and information related challenges, the Information Resources Management College was renamed the

College of Information and Cyberspace (CIC). The change was confirmed by law in the Fiscal Year 2017 National

Defense Authorization Act. The CIC offers educational activities, services, and programs for preparing information

professionals to play critical roles in national security in the Age of Information.

https://cic.ndu.edu/Contact/Contact-Us/ | Email: CICOSS@ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Office of Student Services, College of Information and Cyberspace,
  300 Fifth Avenue, Building 62, Fort McNair, DC 20319-5066. Phone, 202-685-6300.



College of International Security Affairs
The College of International Security Affairs (CISA) is one of NDU’s five colleges. CISA educates students from across

the international, interagency, and interservice communities. CISA’s primary areas of concentration include

counterterrorism, conflict management of stability of operations, homeland security, and defense and international

security studies. CISA is also home to NDU’s International Counterterrorism Fellowship Program.

http://cisa.ndu.edu

  For further information, contact the Office of Academic Affairs, College of International Security Affairs,
  260 Fifth Avenue, Building 64, Fort McNair, DC 20319-5066. Phone, 202-685-7774.



Joint Forces Staff College
The Joint Forces Staff College (JFSC) is an intermediate- and senior-level joint college in the professional military

education system dedicated to the study of the principles, perspectives, and techniques of joint operational-level
    planning and warfare. The mission of JFSC is to educate national security professionals in the planning and execution

    of joint, multinational, and interagency operations in order to instill a primary commitment to joint, multinational, and

    interagency teamwork, attitudes, and perspectives. The College accomplishes this mission through four schools: the

    Joint Advanced Warfighters School, the Joint and Combined Warfighting School, the Joint Continuing and Distance

    Education School, and the Joint Command, Control, and Information Operations School.

    http://jfsc.ndu.edu

        For further information, contact the Public Affairs Officer, Joint Forces Staff College, 7800 Hampton
        Boulevard, Norfolk, VA 23511-1702. Phone, 757-443-6212. Fax, 757-443-6210.



    National War College
    The National War College provides education in national security policy to selected military officers and career civil

    service employees of Federal departments and agencies concerned with national security. It is the only senior service

    college with the primary mission of offering a course of study that emphasizes national security policy formulation and

    the planning and implementation of national strategy. Its 10-month academic program is an issue-centered study in

    U.S. national security. The elective program is designed to permit each student to tailor his or her academic experience

    to meet individual professional development needs.

    http://nwc.ndu.edu

        For further information, contact the Office of Administration, National War College, 300 D Street SW.,
        Building 61, Fort McNair, DC 20319-5078. Phone, 202-685-3674.



    The Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy
    The Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy provides graduate level education to

    senior members of the U.S. Armed Forces, Government civilians, foreign nationals, and professionals from the private

    industrial sector. The School prepares students to contribute to national security strategy and policy, emphasizing the

    evaluation, marshaling, and managing of national resources. Students who fulfill the degree requirements receive a

    Master of Science degree in national resource strategy.

    http://es.ndu.edu/Home.aspx

        For further information, contact the Director of Operations, Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National
        Security and Resource Strategy, 408 Fourth Avenue, Building 59, Fort McNair, DC 20319-5062. Phone,
        202-685-4333.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                 Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences




The United States Government Manual




     UNIFORMED SERVICES UNIVERSITY OF THE HEALTH SCIENCES
    4301 Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814-4799


    301-295-3190

    http://www.usuhs.edu


                                                                                            Maj. Gen. Richard
      PRESIDENT
                                                                                            W. Thomas, USA (retired)


    https://www.usuhs.edu/sites/default/files/media/vpe/pdf/thomas_richard_w_edit_17_nov_2020.pdf
    Senior Vice Presidents for University Programs


                                                                                                 Lt. Gen. Thomas W. Travis,
        Southern Region
                                                                                                 USAF (retired)


                                                                                                 Rear Adm. William Roberts,
        Western Region
                                                                                                 USN (retired)

    https://www.usuhs.edu/pres/leadership



        The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



    Authorized by act of September 21, 1972 (10 U.S.C. 2112), the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences was

    established to educate career-oriented medical officers for the Military Departments and the Public Health Service. The

    University currently incorporates the F. Edward Hebert School of Medicine (including graduate and continuing

    education programs) and the Graduate School of Nursing.


    Students are selected by procedures recommended by the Board of Regents and prescribed by the Secretary of

    Defense. The actual selection is carried out by a faculty committee on admissions and is based upon motivation and

    dedication to a career in the uniformed services and an overall appraisal of the personal and intellectual characteristics

    of the candidates without regard to sex, race, religion, or national origin. Applicants must be U.S. citizens.


    Medical school matriculants will be commissioned officers in one of the uniformed services. They must meet the

    physical and personal qualifications for such a commission and must give evidence of a strong commitment to serving

    as a uniformed medical officer. The graduating medical student is required to serve a period of obligation of not less

    than 7 years, excluding graduate medical education.


    Students of the Graduate School of Nursing must be commissioned officers of the Army, Navy, Air Force, or Public

    Health Service prior to application. Graduate nursing students must serve a commitment determined by their

    respective service.

    http://www.usuhs.mil

        For further information, contact the President, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, 4301
        Jones Bridge Road, Bethesda, MD 20814-4799. Phone, 301-295-3013.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                Department of Education
                                              Federally Aided Corporations
                                        American Printing House for the Blind
                                                   Gallaudet University
                                                    Howard University
                      National Technical Institute for the Deaf / Rochester Institute of Technology




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
    400 Maryland Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20202


    202-401-2000

    TTY, 800-437-0833

    http://www.ed.gov
SECRETARY OF EDUCATION                                                            Linda McMahon


Deputy Secretary                                                                  Mitchell Zais


Under Secretary                                                                   (Vacancy)




OFFICE OF THE SECRETARY


Assistant Deputy Secretary and Director, Office of English Language Acquisition   Jose Viana


Assistant Deputy Secretary, Office of Innovation and Improvement                  Jim Blew, Acting


Assistant Secretary, Office for Civil Rights                                      Kenneth Marcus


Assistant Secretary, Office of Communication and Outreach                         (Vacancy)


Assistant Secretary, Office of Elementary and Secondary Education                 Frank Brogan


Assistant Secretary, Office of Legislation and Congressional Affairs              Peter Oppenheim


Assistant Secretary, Office of Planning, Evaluation and Policy Development        Jim Blew


Assistant Secretary, Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services      Johnny Collett


Chief of Staff                                                                    Joshua Venable


Director, International Affairs Office                                            Maureen A. McLaughlin


Director, Institute of Education Sciences                                         Mark Schneider


Inspector General                                                                 Kathleen S. Tighe




OFFICE OF THE DEPUTY SECRETARY


Assistant Secretary, Office of Management                                         Denise Carter, Acting


Chief Financial Officer                                                           Douglas Webster


Chief Information Officer                                                         Jason K. Gray


Director, Office of Educational Technology                                        (Vacancy)
  General Counsel                                                                       Carlos Muniz




  OFFICE OF THE UNDER SECRETARY


  Assistant Secretary, Office of Career, Technical, and Adult Education                 Scott Stump


  Assistant Secretary, Office of Postsecondary Education                                (Vacancy)


  Chief Operating Officer for Federal Student Aid                                       James Manning, Acting


  Director, Center for Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships                        Andrea Ramirez


  Executive Director, White House Initiative on American Indian and Alaska Native
                                                                                        (Vacancy)
  Education


  Executive Director, White House Initiative on Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders   Holly Ham


  Executive Director, White House Initiative on Educational Excellence for African
                                                                                        (Vacancy)
  Americans


  Executive Director, White House Initiative on Educational Excellence for Hispanic
                                                                                        Aimee Viana
  Americans


  Executive Director, White House Initiative on Historically Black Colleges and
                                                                                        Johnathan Holifield
  Universities



The Department of Education ensures equal access to education; promotes educational excellence; and administers,

coordinates, and makes policy for most Federal assistance to education with the aim of raising levels of student

achievement and readiness for the global future.

Organizational Chart
The Department of Education was created by the Department of Education Organization Act (20 U.S.C. 3411) and is

administered under the supervision and direction of the Secretary of Education.

http://www2.ed.gov/about/landing.jhtml?src=ln

Secretary
The Secretary of Education advises the President on education plans, policies, and programs of the Federal

Government and serves as the chief executive officer of the Department, supervising all Department activities,

providing support to States and localities, and focusing resources to ensure equal access to educational excellence

throughout the Nation.

http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/os/index.html?src=oc



ACTIVITIES
Career, Technical, and Adult Education
The Office of Career, Technical, and Adult Education (OCTAE) administers grant, contract, and technical assistance

programs for vocational-technical education and for adult education and literacy. It promotes programs that enable

adults to acquire the basic literacy skills necessary to function in today's society. The Office also helps students acquire

challenging academic and technical skills and prepare for high-skill, high-wage, and high-demand occupations in the

21st-century global economy. OCTAE provides national leadership and works to strengthen the role of community

colleges in expanding access to postsecondary education for youth and adults in advancing workforce development.

http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ovae/index.html

Education Sciences
The Institute of Education Sciences was formally established by the Education Sciences Reform Act of 2002 (20 U.S.C.

9501 note). The Institute includes national education centers focused on research, special education, statistics, and

evaluation and is the mechanism through which the Department supports the research activities needed to improve

education policy and practice.

https://ies.ed.gov

Elementary and Secondary Education
The Office of Elementary and Secondary Education directs, coordinates, and formulates policy relating to early

childhood, elementary, and secondary education. Included are grants and contracts to State educational agencies and

local school districts, postsecondary schools, and nonprofit organizations for disadvantaged, migrant, and Indian

children; enhancement of State student achievement assessment systems; improvement of reading instruction;

economic impact aid; technology; safe and healthy schools; and after-school learning programs. The Office also

focuses on improving K–12 education, providing children with language and cognitive development, early reading, and

other readiness skills, and improving the quality of teachers and other instructional staff.

http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oese/index.html

English Language Acquisition
The Office of English Language Acquisition helps children who are limited in their English, including immigrant children

and youth, attain English proficiency, develop high levels of academic attainment in English, and meet the same

challenging State academic content and student academic achievement standards that all children are expected to

meet.

http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oela/index.html

Federal Student Aid
Federal Student Aid partners with postsecondary schools and financial institutions to deliver programs and services

that help students finance their education beyond high school. This includes administering postsecondary student

financial assistance programs authorized under Title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965, as amended.

https://studentaid.ed.gov

Innovation and Improvement
The Office of Innovation and Improvement (OII) oversees competitive grant programs that support innovations in the
educational system and disseminates the lessons learned from these innovative practices. OII administers, coordinates,

and recommends programs and policy for improving the quality of activities designed to support and test innovations

throughout the K–12 system in areas such as parental choice, teacher quality, use of technology in education, and arts

in education. OII encourages the establishment of charter schools through planning, start-up funding, and approaches

to credit enhancement for charter school facilities. OII also serves as the Department's liaison and resource to the

nonpublic education community.

http://innovation.ed.gov

Postsecondary Education
The Office of Postsecondary Education (OPE) formulates Federal postsecondary education policy and administers

programs that address critical national needs in support of the mission to increase access to quality postsecondary

education. OPE develops policy for Federal student financial programs and support programs that reach out to low-

income, first-generation college students and communities. OPE also supports programs that strengthen the capacity

of colleges and universities serving a high percentage of disadvantaged students and improve teacher quality. OPE

recognizes accrediting agencies that monitor academic quality, promote innovation in higher education, and expand

American educational resources for international studies and services.

http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ope/index.html

Special Education and Rehabilitative Services
The Office of Special Education and Rehabilitative Services (OSERS) provides leadership and resources to help ensure

that people with disabilities have equal opportunities to learn, work, and live as fully integrated and contributing

members of society. OSERS has three components: The Office of Special Education Programs administers the

Individuals with Disabilities Education Act legislation, which helps States meet the early intervention and educational

needs of infants, toddlers, children, and youth with disabilities. The Rehabilitation Services Administration supports

State vocational rehabilitation, independent living, and assistive technology programs that provide people with

disabilities the services, technology, and job training and placement assistance they need to gain meaningful

employment and lead independent lives. The National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research supports

research and development programs that improve the ability of individuals with disabilities to work and live in a

barrier-free, inclusive society. OSERS also supports Gallaudet University, the National Technical Institute for the Deaf,

the American Printing House for the Blind, and the Helen Keller National Center.

http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/osers/index.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Blog
"Homeroom" is the official blog of the Department of Education.

http://blog.ed.gov

Business Opportunities
Contact the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization. Phone, 202-245-6301.
http://www.ed.gov/fund/contract-opportunities.html

College Scorecard
The Department of Education's Web site features a tool to help college bound students find colleges and universities

based upon their location, size, and the programs and degrees that they offer.

https://collegescorecard.ed.gov

Data / Statistics
Information on school accreditation and data on the academic achievement of U.S. students are available on the "Data

and Research" Web page. The National Center for Education Statistics collects and analyzes data related to education.

Phone, 202-403-5551.

http://www2.ed.gov/rschstat/landing.jhtml?src=pn
http://nces.ed.gov

Career Opportunities
For information on employment and the college recruitment program, contact Human Capital and Client Services.

Phone, 202-401-0553.

http://www.ed.gov/jobs

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA generally provides that any person has the right to request access to Federal agency records or information;

all agencies of the Government are required to disclose records upon receiving a written request for them; nine

exemptions to the FOIA protect certain records from disclosure; and three special protection provisions or record

exclusions authorize Federal law enforcement agencies, under exceptional circumstances, to exclude records from

FIOA requirements. The Federal FOIA does not provide access to records held by State or local government agencies,

or by private businesses or individuals.

http://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/leg/foia/foiatoc.html?src=ft
Before submitting a request, browse the electronic FOIA Library and search the Department of Education's Web site.

The desired records and information may be immediately available online and not require a FOIA request to access

them.

http://www2.ed.gov/policy/gen/leg/foia/readingroom.html

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Department of Education provides answers to FAQs on its Web site.

https://answers.ed.gov/ics/support/default.asp?deptID=28025&_referrer=http://www.ed.gov/&src=ft

Glossaries
The Department of Education's Web site features a glossary of reading terms.

https://lincs.ed.gov/research/Glossary.html
The Department of Education's Web site features a glossary of terms related to Federal student aid.

https://studentaid.ed.gov/sa/glossary
The Department of Education's Web site features a glossary of terms related to education research.
http://www.ies.ed.gov/ncee/wwc/Glossary
The Department of Education's Web site features a glossary of terms related to education statistical standards.

http://nces.ed.gov/statprog/2002/glossary.asp

Language Assistance
Education resources for Spanish speakers are available on the Department's Web site.

http://www2.ed.gov/espanol/bienvenidos/es/index.html?src=ft
Free language assistance services—Chinese, Korean, Spanish, Vietnamese, Tagalog—are available to the public.

Phone, 800-872-5327.

http://www.ed.gov/notices/english-la | Email: Ed.Language.Assistance@ed.gov

News
The Department of Education posts media advisories, press releases, and speeches on its Web site.

http://www.ed.gov/news
Press releases in Spanish are also available on the Department's Web site.

http://www2.ed.gov/espanol/news/pressreleases/index.html

Open Government
The Department of Education supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration,

participation, and transparency.

http://www2.ed.gov/about/open.html | Email: opengov@ed.gov

Plain Language
Department of Education writers and editors are committed to using Federal plain language guidelines. Publishing

clear, useful information on programs and services is a priority and an ongoing effort. To comment on the clarity of a

written product or to offer a suggestion for improvement, please communicate via email.

http://www.ed.gov/plain-language | Email: plainwriting@ed.gov

Regional Offices
Each regional office serves as a center for the dissemination of information and provides technical assistance to State

and local educational agencies and other institutions and individuals interested in Federal educational activities. Offices

are located in Boston, MA; New York, NY; Philadelphia, PA; Atlanta, GA; Chicago, IL; Cleveland, OH; Dallas, TX; Kansas

City, MO; Denver, CO; San Francisco, CA; and Seattle, WA.

http://www2.ed.gov/about/contacts/gen/regions.html

Site Map
The Web site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

http://www2.ed.gov/help/site/map/sitemap.jsp

Student Loans
Information on student loans is available online.
http://www2.ed.gov/fund/grants-college.html?src=pn
http://www2.ed.gov/about/contacts/gen/index.html
For further information, contact the Information Resources Center, Department of Education, Room 5E248 (FB–6), 400

Maryland Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20202. Phone, 800-872-5327.



Federally Aided Corporations
American Printing House for the Blind
P.O. Box 6085, Louisville, KY 40206


502-895-2405

http://www.aph.org


  PRESIDENT                                             Craig Meador


  Chair of the Board                                    Jane Hardy



Founded in 1858 as a nonprofit organization, the American Printing House for the Blind (APH) received its

Federal charter in 1879 when Congress passed the Act to Promote Education of the Blind. This Act

designates APH as the official supplier of educational materials adapted for students who are legally blind

and who are enrolled in formal educational programs below the college level. Materials produced and

distributed by APH include textbooks in Braille and large type, educational tools such as Braille typewriters

and computer software and hardware, teaching aides such as tests and performance measures, and other

special supplies. The materials are distributed through allotments to the States to programs serving

individuals who are blind.

http://www.aph.org/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
Requests for proposals are posted online.

http://www.aph.org/rfp

Employment
The APH is the world's largest manufacturer of products for people who are blind and visually impaired. It

is a drug-free workplace: New hires must pass a drug screening test and background check.

http://www.aph.org/careers
http://www.aph.org/contact
For further information, contact the American Printing House for the Blind, P.O. Box 6085, Louisville, KY

40206. Phone, 502-895-2405.
Gallaudet University
800 Florida Avenue NE., Washington, DC 20002


202-651-5000

http://www.gallaudet.edu


  PRESIDENT                                             T. Alan Hurwitz


  Chair, Board of Trustees                              Heather Harker



Gallaudet University received its Federal charter in 1864 and is currently authorized by the Education of the

Deaf Act of 1986, as amended. Gallaudet is a private, nonprofit educational institution providing

elementary, secondary, undergraduate, and continuing education programs for persons who are deaf. The

University offers a traditional liberal arts curriculum for students who are deaf and graduate programs in

fields related to deafness for students who are deaf and students who are hearing. Gallaudet also conducts

a wide variety of basic and applied deafness research and provides public service programs for persons

who are deaf and for professionals who work with persons who are deaf.


Gallaudet University is accredited by a number of organizations, among which are the Middle States

Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher

Education, and the Conference of Educational Administrators of Schools and Programs for the Deaf.

http://www2.gallaudet.edu/attend-gallaudet/about-gallaudet

Laurent Clerc National Deaf Education Center
Gallaudet's Laurent Clerc National Deaf Education Center operates elementary and secondary education

programs on the main campus of the University. These programs are authorized by the Education of the

Deaf Act of 1986 (20 U.S.C. 4304, as amended) for the primary purpose of developing, evaluating, and

disseminating model curricula, instructional strategies, and materials in order to serve individuals who are

deaf or hard of hearing. The Education of the Deaf Act requires the programs to include students

preparing for postsecondary opportunities other than college and students with a broad spectrum of

needs, such as students who are academically challenged, come from non-English-speaking homes, have

secondary disabilities, are members of minority groups, or are from rural areas.

http://www.gallaudet.edu/clerc-center.html

Model Secondary School for the Deaf
The school was established by act of October 15, 1966, which was superseded by the Education of the

Deaf Act of 1986. The school provides day and residential facilities for secondary-age students from across

the United States from grades 9 to 12, inclusively.

http://www.gallaudet.edu/mssd.html

Kendall Demonstration Elementary School
The school became the Nation's first demonstration elementary school for the deaf by the act of
December 24, 1970 (20 U.S.C. 695), which was also later superseded by the Education of the Deaf Act of

1986. The school is a day program for students from the Washington, DC, metropolitan area from the age

of onset of deafness to age 15, inclusively, but not beyond the eighth grade or its equivalent.

http://www.gallaudet.edu/kdes.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Campus Tour
A virtual tour of the University's campus is available online.

http://www.gallaudet.edu/visitors-center/virtual-tour.html
http://www.gallaudet.edu/about-gallaudet/contact-us.html
For further information, contact the Public Relations Office, Gallaudet University, 800 Florida Avenue NE.,

Washington, DC 20002. Phone, 202-651-5505.



Howard University
2400 Sixth Street NW., Washington, DC 20059


202-806-6100

http://www.howard.edu


  PRESIDENT                                               Wayne A.I. Frederick



Howard University was established by Congress by the act of March 2, 1867 (14 Stat. 438). It offers

instruction in 12 schools and colleges, as follows: the colleges of arts and sciences; dentistry; engineering,

architecture, and computer sciences; medicine; pharmacy, nursing, and allied health sciences; the graduate

school; the schools of business; communications; divinity; education; law; and social work. In addition,
Howard University has research institutes, centers, and special programs in the following areas: cancer,

child development, computational science and engineering, international affairs, sickle cell disease, and the

national human genome project.

https://www2.howard.edu/about/howard-glance



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
Information is available on the "Career Opportunities" Web page.

https://www2.howard.edu/about/careers

Libraries
The Howard University Libraries are accessible online.
http://library.howard.edu/library
https://www2.howard.edu/contact
For further information, contact the Office of University Communications, Howard University, 2400 Sixth

Street NW., Washington, DC 20059. Phone, 202-806-0970.



National Technical Institute for the Deaf /
Rochester Institute of Technology
52 Lomb Memorial Drive, Rochester, NY 14623


585-475-6317

http://www.ntid.rit.edu


  PRESIDENT, ROCHESTER              INSTITUTE      OF
                                                        William W. Destler
  TECHNOLOGY


  President, National Technical Institute for the Deaf
                                                       Gerard J. Buckley
  / Vice President, Rochester Institute of Technology



The National Technical Institute for the Deaf (NTID) was established by act of June 8, 1965 (20 U.S.C. 681)

to promote the employment of persons who are deaf by providing technical and professional education.

The National Technical Institute for the Deaf Act was superseded by the Education of the Deaf Act of 1986

(20 U.S.C. 4431, as amended). The U.S. Department of Education contracts with the Rochester Institute of

Technology (RIT) for the operation of a residential facility for postsecondary technical training and

education for individuals who are deaf. The purpose of the special relationship with the host institution is

to give NTID's faculty and students access to more facilities, institutional services, and career preparation

options than could be provided otherwise by a national technical institute for the deaf operating

independently.


NTID offers a variety of technical programs at the certificate, diploma, and associate degree levels. Degree

programs include majors in business, engineering, science, and visual communications. In addition, NTID

students may participate in approximately 200 educational programs available through RIT.


NTID also conducts applied research in occupational- and employment-related aspects of deafness,

communication assessment, demographics of NTID's target population, and learning processes in

postsecondary education. In addition, NTID conducts training workshops and seminars related to

deafness. These workshops and seminars are offered nationwide to professionals who employ, work with,

teach, or serve persons who are deaf.

http://www.ntid.rit.edu/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Campus Tour
     A virtual tour of the college's campus is available online.

     http://www.ntid.rit.edu/virtual-tour
     http://www.ntid.rit.edu/contact
     For further information, contact the Rochester Institute of Technology, National Technical Institute for the

     Deaf, Department of Recruitment and Admissions, Lyndon Baines Johnson Building, 52 Lomb Memorial

     Drive, Rochester, NY 14623-5604. Phone, 716-475-6700.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                     Search
                                                                                           Search




                                              Federally Aided Corporations
                                        American Printing House for the Blind
                                                   Gallaudet University
                                                    Howard University
                      National Technical Institute for the Deaf / Rochester Institute of Technology




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERALLY AIDED CORPORATIONS

    American Printing House for the Blind
    P.O. Box 6085, Louisville, KY 40206


    502-895-2405

    http://www.aph.org
  PRESIDENT                                                Craig Meador


  Chair of the Board                                       Jane Hardy



Founded in 1858 as a nonprofit organization, the American Printing House for the Blind (APH) received its

Federal charter in 1879 when Congress passed the Act to Promote Education of the Blind. This Act designates

APH as the official supplier of educational materials adapted for students who are legally blind and who are

enrolled in formal educational programs below the college level. Materials produced and distributed by APH

include textbooks in Braille and large type, educational tools such as Braille typewriters and computer software

and hardware, teaching aides such as tests and performance measures, and other special supplies. The materials

are distributed through allotments to the States to programs serving individuals who are blind.

http://www.aph.org/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
Requests for proposals are posted online.

http://www.aph.org/rfp

Employment
The APH is the world's largest manufacturer of products for people who are blind and visually impaired. It is a

drug-free workplace: New hires must pass a drug screening test and background check.

http://www.aph.org/careers
http://www.aph.org/contact
For further information, contact the American Printing House for the Blind, P.O. Box 6085, Louisville, KY 40206.

Phone, 502-895-2405.



Gallaudet University
800 Florida Avenue NE., Washington, DC 20002


202-651-5000

http://www.gallaudet.edu


  PRESIDENT                                                T. Alan Hurwitz


  Chair, Board of Trustees                                 Heather Harker



Gallaudet University received its Federal charter in 1864 and is currently authorized by the Education of the Deaf

Act of 1986, as amended. Gallaudet is a private, nonprofit educational institution providing elementary,

secondary, undergraduate, and continuing education programs for persons who are deaf. The University offers a
traditional liberal arts curriculum for students who are deaf and graduate programs in fields related to deafness

for students who are deaf and students who are hearing. Gallaudet also conducts a wide variety of basic and

applied deafness research and provides public service programs for persons who are deaf and for professionals

who work with persons who are deaf.


Gallaudet University is accredited by a number of organizations, among which are the Middle States Association

of Colleges and Secondary Schools, the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education, and the

Conference of Educational Administrators of Schools and Programs for the Deaf.

http://www2.gallaudet.edu/attend-gallaudet/about-gallaudet

Laurent Clerc National Deaf Education Center
Gallaudet's Laurent Clerc National Deaf Education Center operates elementary and secondary education

programs on the main campus of the University. These programs are authorized by the Education of the Deaf

Act of 1986 (20 U.S.C. 4304, as amended) for the primary purpose of developing, evaluating, and disseminating

model curricula, instructional strategies, and materials in order to serve individuals who are deaf or hard of

hearing. The Education of the Deaf Act requires the programs to include students preparing for postsecondary

opportunities other than college and students with a broad spectrum of needs, such as students who are

academically challenged, come from non-English-speaking homes, have secondary disabilities, are members of

minority groups, or are from rural areas.

http://www.gallaudet.edu/clerc-center.html

Model Secondary School for the Deaf
The school was established by act of October 15, 1966, which was superseded by the Education of the Deaf Act

of 1986. The school provides day and residential facilities for secondary-age students from across the United

States from grades 9 to 12, inclusively.

http://www.gallaudet.edu/mssd.html

Kendall Demonstration Elementary School
The school became the Nation's first demonstration elementary school for the deaf by the act of December 24,

1970 (20 U.S.C. 695), which was also later superseded by the Education of the Deaf Act of 1986. The school is a

day program for students from the Washington, DC, metropolitan area from the age of onset of deafness to age

15, inclusively, but not beyond the eighth grade or its equivalent.

http://www.gallaudet.edu/kdes.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Campus Tour
A virtual tour of the University's campus is available online.

http://www.gallaudet.edu/visitors-center/virtual-tour.html
http://www.gallaudet.edu/about-gallaudet/contact-us.html
For further information, contact the Public Relations Office, Gallaudet University, 800 Florida Avenue NE.,
Washington, DC 20002. Phone, 202-651-5505.



Howard University
2400 Sixth Street NW., Washington, DC 20059


202-806-6100

http://www.howard.edu


  PRESIDENT                                                Wayne A.I. Frederick



Howard University was established by Congress by the act of March 2, 1867 (14 Stat. 438). It offers instruction in

12 schools and colleges, as follows: the colleges of arts and sciences; dentistry; engineering, architecture, and

computer sciences; medicine; pharmacy, nursing, and allied health sciences; the graduate school; the schools of

business; communications; divinity; education; law; and social work. In addition, Howard University has research

institutes, centers, and special programs in the following areas: cancer, child development, computational

science and engineering, international affairs, sickle cell disease, and the national human genome project.

https://www2.howard.edu/about/howard-glance



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
Information is available on the "Career Opportunities" Web page.

https://www2.howard.edu/about/careers

Libraries
The Howard University Libraries are accessible online.

http://library.howard.edu/library
https://www2.howard.edu/contact
For further information, contact the Office of University Communications, Howard University, 2400 Sixth Street

NW., Washington, DC 20059. Phone, 202-806-0970.



National Technical Institute for the Deaf /
Rochester Institute of Technology
52 Lomb Memorial Drive, Rochester, NY 14623


585-475-6317

http://www.ntid.rit.edu


  PRESIDENT,       ROCHESTER         INSTITUTE       OF
                                                           William W. Destler
  TECHNOLOGY
        President, National Technical Institute for the Deaf /
                                                               Gerard J. Buckley
        Vice President, Rochester Institute of Technology



    The National Technical Institute for the Deaf (NTID) was established by act of June 8, 1965 (20 U.S.C. 681) to

    promote the employment of persons who are deaf by providing technical and professional education. The

    National Technical Institute for the Deaf Act was superseded by the Education of the Deaf Act of 1986 (20 U.S.C.

    4431, as amended). The U.S. Department of Education contracts with the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT)

    for the operation of a residential facility for postsecondary technical training and education for individuals who

    are deaf. The purpose of the special relationship with the host institution is to give NTID's faculty and students

    access to more facilities, institutional services, and career preparation options than could be provided otherwise

    by a national technical institute for the deaf operating independently.


    NTID offers a variety of technical programs at the certificate, diploma, and associate degree levels. Degree

    programs include majors in business, engineering, science, and visual communications. In addition, NTID

    students may participate in approximately 200 educational programs available through RIT.


    NTID also conducts applied research in occupational- and employment-related aspects of deafness,

    communication assessment, demographics of NTID's target population, and learning processes in postsecondary

    education. In addition, NTID conducts training workshops and seminars related to deafness. These workshops

    and seminars are offered nationwide to professionals who employ, work with, teach, or serve persons who are

    deaf.

    http://www.ntid.rit.edu/about



    SOURCES OF INFORMATION

    Campus Tour
    A virtual tour of the college's campus is available online.

    http://www.ntid.rit.edu/virtual-tour
    http://www.ntid.rit.edu/contact
    For further information, contact the Rochester Institute of Technology, National Technical Institute for the Deaf,

    Department of Recruitment and Admissions, Lyndon Baines Johnson Building, 52 Lomb Memorial Drive,

    Rochester, NY 14623-5604. Phone, 716-475-6700.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy
Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                     Search
                                                                                           Search




                                            American Printing House for the Blind




The United States Government Manual




     AMERICAN PRINTING HOUSE FOR THE BLIND
    P.O. Box 6085, Louisville, KY 40206


    502-895-2405

    http://www.aph.org


      PRESIDENT                                                                              Craig Meador


      Chair of the Board                                                                     Jane Hardy
     Founded in 1858 as a nonprofit organization, the American Printing House for the Blind (APH) received its Federal

     charter in 1879 when Congress passed the Act to Promote Education of the Blind. This Act designates APH as the

     official supplier of educational materials adapted for students who are legally blind and who are enrolled in formal

     educational programs below the college level. Materials produced and distributed by APH include textbooks in Braille

     and large type, educational tools such as Braille typewriters and computer software and hardware, teaching aides such

     as tests and performance measures, and other special supplies. The materials are distributed through allotments to the

     States to programs serving individuals who are blind.

     http://www.aph.org/about



     SOURCES OF INFORMATION

     Business Opportunities
     Requests for proposals are posted online.

     http://www.aph.org/rfp

     Employment
     The APH is the world's largest manufacturer of products for people who are blind and visually impaired. It is a drug-

     free workplace: New hires must pass a drug screening test and background check.

     http://www.aph.org/careers
     http://www.aph.org/contact

        For further information, contact the American Printing House for the Blind, P.O. Box 6085, Louisville, KY
        40206. Phone, 502-895-2405.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                                      Gallaudet University




The United States Government Manual




     GALLAUDET UNIVERSITY
    800 Florida Avenue NE., Washington, DC 20002


    202-651-5000

    http://www.gallaudet.edu


      PRESIDENT                                                                              T. Alan Hurwitz


      Chair, Board of Trustees                                                               Heather Harker
Gallaudet University received its Federal charter in 1864 and is currently authorized by the Education of the Deaf Act of

1986, as amended. Gallaudet is a private, nonprofit educational institution providing elementary, secondary,

undergraduate, and continuing education programs for persons who are deaf. The University offers a traditional liberal

arts curriculum for students who are deaf and graduate programs in fields related to deafness for students who are

deaf and students who are hearing. Gallaudet also conducts a wide variety of basic and applied deafness research and

provides public service programs for persons who are deaf and for professionals who work with persons who are deaf.


Gallaudet University is accredited by a number of organizations, among which are the Middle States Association of

Colleges and Secondary Schools, the National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education, and the Conference of

Educational Administrators of Schools and Programs for the Deaf.

http://www2.gallaudet.edu/attend-gallaudet/about-gallaudet

Laurent Clerc National Deaf Education Center
Gallaudet's Laurent Clerc National Deaf Education Center operates elementary and secondary education programs on

the main campus of the University. These programs are authorized by the Education of the Deaf Act of 1986 (20 U.S.C.

4304, as amended) for the primary purpose of developing, evaluating, and disseminating model curricula, instructional

strategies, and materials in order to serve individuals who are deaf or hard of hearing. The Education of the Deaf Act

requires the programs to include students preparing for postsecondary opportunities other than college and students

with a broad spectrum of needs, such as students who are academically challenged, come from non-English-speaking

homes, have secondary disabilities, are members of minority groups, or are from rural areas.

http://www.gallaudet.edu/clerc-center.html

Model Secondary School for the Deaf
The school was established by act of October 15, 1966, which was superseded by the Education of the Deaf Act of

1986. The school provides day and residential facilities for secondary-age students from across the United States from

grades 9 to 12, inclusively.

http://www.gallaudet.edu/mssd.html

Kendall Demonstration Elementary School
The school became the Nation's first demonstration elementary school for the deaf by the act of December 24, 1970

(20 U.S.C. 695), which was also later superseded by the Education of the Deaf Act of 1986. The school is a day

program for students from the Washington, DC, metropolitan area from the age of onset of deafness to age 15,

inclusively, but not beyond the eighth grade or its equivalent.

http://www.gallaudet.edu/kdes.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Campus Tour
A virtual tour of the University's campus is available online.

http://www.gallaudet.edu/visitors-center/virtual-tour.html
http://www.gallaudet.edu/about-gallaudet/contact-us.html
        For further information, contact the Public Relations Office, Gallaudet University, 800 Florida Avenue NE.,
        Washington, DC 20002. Phone, 202-651-5505.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                     Howard University




The United States Government Manual




     HOWARD UNIVERSITY
    2400 Sixth Street NW., Washington, DC 20059


    202-806-6100

    http://www.howard.edu


      PRESIDENT                                                                             Wayne A.I. Frederick



    Howard University was established by Congress by the act of March 2, 1867 (14 Stat. 438). It offers instruction in 12

    schools and colleges, as follows: the colleges of arts and sciences; dentistry; engineering, architecture, and computer
     sciences; medicine; pharmacy, nursing, and allied health sciences; the graduate school; the schools of business;

     communications; divinity; education; law; and social work. In addition, Howard University has research institutes,

     centers, and special programs in the following areas: cancer, child development, computational science and

     engineering, international affairs, sickle cell disease, and the national human genome project.

     https://www2.howard.edu/about/howard-glance



     SOURCES OF INFORMATION

     Employment
     Information is available on the "Career Opportunities" Web page.

     https://www2.howard.edu/about/careers

     Libraries
     The Howard University Libraries are accessible online.

     http://library.howard.edu/library
     https://www2.howard.edu/contact

        For further information, contact the Office of University Communications, Howard University, 2400 Sixth
        Street NW., Washington, DC 20059. Phone, 202-806-0970.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                      National Technical Institute for the Deaf / Rochester Institute of Technology




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL TECHNICAL INSTITUTE FOR THE DEAF / ROCHESTER INSTITUTE OF
     TECHNOLOGY
    52 Lomb Memorial Drive, Rochester, NY 14623


    585-475-6317

    http://www.ntid.rit.edu


      PRESIDENT, ROCHESTER INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY                                           William W. Destler


      President, National Technical Institute for the Deaf / Vice President, Rochester
                                                                                             Gerard J. Buckley
      Institute of Technology
     The National Technical Institute for the Deaf (NTID) was established by act of June 8, 1965 (20 U.S.C. 681) to promote

     the employment of persons who are deaf by providing technical and professional education. The National Technical

     Institute for the Deaf Act was superseded by the Education of the Deaf Act of 1986 (20 U.S.C. 4431, as amended). The

     U.S. Department of Education contracts with the Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT) for the operation of a

     residential facility for postsecondary technical training and education for individuals who are deaf. The purpose of the

     special relationship with the host institution is to give NTID's faculty and students access to more facilities, institutional

     services, and career preparation options than could be provided otherwise by a national technical institute for the deaf

     operating independently.


     NTID offers a variety of technical programs at the certificate, diploma, and associate degree levels. Degree programs

     include majors in business, engineering, science, and visual communications. In addition, NTID students may

     participate in approximately 200 educational programs available through RIT.


     NTID also conducts applied research in occupational- and employment-related aspects of deafness, communication

     assessment, demographics of NTID's target population, and learning processes in postsecondary education. In

     addition, NTID conducts training workshops and seminars related to deafness. These workshops and seminars are

     offered nationwide to professionals who employ, work with, teach, or serve persons who are deaf.

     http://www.ntid.rit.edu/about



     SOURCES OF INFORMATION

     Campus Tour
     A virtual tour of the college's campus is available online.

     http://www.ntid.rit.edu/virtual-tour
     http://www.ntid.rit.edu/contact

        For further information, contact the Rochester Institute of Technology, National Technical Institute for
        the Deaf, Department of Recruitment and Admissions, Lyndon Baines Johnson Building, 52 Lomb
        Memorial Drive, Rochester, NY 14623-5604. Phone, 716-475-6700.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility
Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                  Department of Energy
                                          Federal Energy Regulatory Commission




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
    1000 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20585


    202-586-5000

    http://www.energy.gov


      SECRETARY OF ENERGY                                                                   Christopher Wright


      Deputy Secretary                                                                      David M. Turk
 Chief of Staff                                                           Tarak Shah


 Ombudsman                                                                (vacancy)


https://www.energy.gov/leadership

 UNDER SECRETARY OF ENERGY                                                (vacancy)




 Associate Under Secretary for Environment, Health, Safety and Security   Matthew Moury




 Director of Project Management                                           Paul Bosco




NUCLEAR SECURITY


 UNDER SECRETARY                                                          Jill Hruby




National Nuclear Security Administration


 ADMINISTRATOR                                                            Jill Hruby


 Principal Deputy Administrator                                           Frank A. Rose




 DEPUTY ADMINISTRATORS


 Defense Nuclear Nonproliferation                                         Corey Hinderstein


 Defense Programs                                                         Charles P. Verdon


 Naval Reactors                                                           Adm. James F. Caldwell, USN




 ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATORS


 Acquisition and Project Management                                       Robert B. Raines
 Counterterrorism and Counterproliferation                Jay Tilden


 Defense Nuclear Security                                 Jeffrey R. Johnson


 Emergency Operations                                     John Juskie, Acting


 External Affairs                                         Howard Dickenson, Acting


 Information Management                                   James Wolff


 Management and Budget                                    Frank J. Lowery


 Safety, Infrastructure and Operations                    Kenneth Sheely, Acting




 Chief Information Officer                                James Wolff


 Chief of Defense Nuclear Security                        Jeffrey R. Johnson




 General Counsel                                          Timothy P. Fischer

https://www.energy.gov/nnsa/person/jill-hruby



SCIENCE AND ENERGY


 UNDER SECRETARY                                          Kathleen Hogan, Acting




 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Cybersecurity, Energy Security, and Emergency Response   (vacancy)


 Electricity                                              Patricia Hoffman, Acting


 Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy                   (vacancy)


 Fossil Energy and Carbon Management                      Jennifer Wilcox, Acting


 Nuclear Energy                                           Kathryn D. Huff, Acting




 Chief Commercialization Officer                          Vanessa Z. Chan
 DIRECTORS OF OFFICES


 Arctic Energy                                 George Roe


 Artificial Intelligence and Technology        Cheryl Ingstad


 Clean Energy Demonstrations                   (vacancy)


 Indian Energy Policy and Programs             Wahleah Johns


 Loan Programs                                 Jigar Shah


 Science                                       J. Stephen Binkley, Acting


 Technology Transitions                        Vanessa Z. Chan




Office of Electricity


 ASSISTANT SECRETARY                           Patricia Hoffman, Acting




 POWER MARKETING ADMINISTRATORS


 Bonneville                                    John Hairston


 Southeastern                                  Virgil G. Hobbs III


 Southwestern                                  Michael Wech


 Western Area                                  Tracey LeBeau

https://www.energy.gov/oe/our-organization



STAFF AND PROGRAM OFFICES


 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs   Ali Nouri


 Environmental Management                      (vacancy)


 International Affairs                         Andrew Light
 Chief Administrative Judge                     Poli A. Marmolejos




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Financial                                      (vacancy)


 Human Capital                                  Erin Moore


 Information                                    Ann Dunkin




 DIRECTORS OF OFFICES


 Advanced Research Projects Agency—Energy       (vacancy)


 Economic Impact and Diversity                  Ann Augustyn, Acting


 Enterprise Assessments                         John E. Dupuy


 Hearings and Appeals                           Poli A. Marmolejos


 Intelligence and Counterintelligence           Steven K. Black


 Legacy Management                              Carmelo Melendez


 Management                                     Ingrid C. Kolb


 Policy                                         Carla Frisch, Acting *


 Public Affairs                                 David A. Mayorga


 Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization   Paul E. Ross, Acting




 General Counsel                                (vacancy)


 * Acting Executive Director


https://www.energy.gov/offices



U.S. Energy Information Administration
  ADMINISTRATOR                                                                          Stephen Nalley, Acting


  Deputy Administrator                                                                   Stephen Nalley

https://www.eia.gov/about/senior_executive_bios.php

  Inspector General                                                                      Teri L. Donaldson


https://www.energy.gov/ig/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 1–2022.



The Department of Energy addresses the Nation's energy, environmental, and nuclear challenges, using transformative

science and technology to ensure national security and prosperity.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On August 4, 1977, President James E. Carter approved Public Law 95–91, which also is cited as the "Department of

Energy Organization Act." President Carter made remarks about the new law (S. 826) on the same day that he

approved it.

https://www.energy.gov/management/august-4-1977-president-carter-signs-department-energy-organization-act
The President's remarks on signing S. 826, which also is cited as the "Department of Energy Organizational Act," were

included in the "Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States." The public papers of "Jimmy Carter" for the year

1977 are collected in two books. Book II (25 JUN–31 DEC) is available on the Government Publishing Office's govinfo

website in Portable Document Format (PDF) for downloading. The relevant section of the remarks is found on pages

1411 and 1412.

https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/PPP-1977-book2
The new statute consolidated the major Federal energy functions into one Cabinet-level department. It established "a

Department of Energy in the executive branch by the reorganization of energy functions within the Federal

Government in order secure effective management to assure a coordinated national energy policy" (91 Stat. 565).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-91/pdf/STATUTE-91-Pg565.pdf
On September 13, 1977, President Carter signed Executive Order 12009, which was published 2 days later in the

Federal Register (42 FR 46267). Pursuant to the order, the Department of Energy Organization Act became effective

on October 1st of that same year.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1977-09-15/pdf/FR-1977-09-15.pdf
By the advice and with the consent of the Senate, the President appoints the Secretary who serves as the top

administrator at the Department of Energy.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title42-section7131&num=0&edition=prelim
The "Offices" web page provides convenient access to information on DOE offices, centers, power administrations, and

component agencies, as well as to online resources that are associated with some of them.
https://www.energy.gov/offices
On the "About Us" web page, below the contact information, a hyperlink for the DOE's organization chart is available.

The organization chart also may be viewed in Portable Document Format (PDF) and downloaded as a PDF file.

https://www.energy.gov/about-us

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Title 42 of the United States Code (U.S.C.) is dedicated to the topic of "The Public Health and Welfare." Statutory

material that affects the Department of Energy has been codified and assigned to Chapter 84 of 42 U.S.C. Chapter 84

runs from sections 7101 to 7385s-16.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title42/chapter84&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that address the topic of energy have been codified and assigned to Title 10 of the Code of

Federal Regulations (10 CFR 1–1899).

https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-10
Rules and regulations that are associated with the Department of Energy have been assigned to Chapter II of 10 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-10/chapter-II
Additional rules and regulations that are associated with the Department of Energy have been assigned to Chapter III

of 10 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-10/chapter-III
The general provisions of the Department of Energy have been codified and assigned to Chapter X of 10 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-10/chapter-X



ACTIVITIES AND PROGRAMS
In 2022, the DOE will mark its 45th anniversary. The DOE is a cabinet-level department whose activities and programs

are as important as they are diverse. The DOE brought together for the first time, within one Federal agency, two

programmatic traditions that had coexisted within the Government. One tradition constituted the defense

responsibilities that included the design, construction, and testing of nuclear weapons originating with the effort to

build the first atomic bomb during the Second World War. The other tradition comprised a loose amalgamation of

energy-related programs that were scattered throughout the Federal Government. The presence of these two

traditions remains palpable in the range of activities and programs of today's DOE.


Energy Economy
The national economy benefits from robust investments in energy technologies. These investments stimulate the

creation of new jobs. The DOE both supports proven energy technologies and funds and promotes energy

technologies of the future. It also partners with private- and public-sector organizations to spread and accelerate the

implementation of these technologies.

https://www.energy.gov/energy-economy
The DOE guides legislators and policymakers through the complexities and details of energy related issues. It serves as

a liaison among Federal agencies, Members of Congress, and State, local, and tribal governments. It also assists
American Indian Tribes and Alaska Native villages with energy development, capacity building, electrification of lands

and homes, and reducing energy costs.

https://www.energy.gov/energy-economy/state-local-government

Research / Innovation
The DOE is aptly described as a research and science agency that participates aggressively in the innovation economy.

The Department stimulates the growth of basic and applied scientific research and the discovery and the development

of new clean energy technologies. The DOE regards scientific innovation as a cornerstone of the Nation's economic

prosperity and, therefore, prioritizes innovation in its research and science programs. It also fosters collaboration and

cooperation among governmental organizations, industries, and universities to create a capacious scientific ecosystem

and to invigorate it.

https://www.energy.gov/science-innovation
The DOE's Loan Programs Office finances comprehensive and large-scale energy infrastructure projects nationwide.

https://www.energy.gov/lpo/about-us-home
The Advanced Research Projects Agency–Energy (ARPA–E) supports the development of energy technologies that

have high potential and broad application before they are ready for investment from the private sector.

https://arpa-e.energy.gov/about
The DOE's 17 National Laboratories serve as regional drivers of economic growth for States and communities

nationwide. Among the world's science institutions, the National Laboratories constitute a unique ecosystem of

intellectual assets and pooled knowledge.

https://www.energy.gov/national-laboratories

Safety / Security
The DOE helps to protect national security. Its responsibilities include cleaning up the adverse environmental

consequences of developing nuclear weapons and of nuclear energy research, supporting nuclear nonproliferation,

ensuring the security of the Nation's nuclear weapons stockpile, providing training tools and procedures for

emergency response and preparedness, managing the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, investing in protections against

cyber and physical attacks on energy infrastructure, and conducting programs to ensure worker health and safety.

https://www.energy.gov/national-security-safety
The DOE safely and cost-effectively transports and disposes of low-level wastes, decommissions and decontaminates

old facilities, remediates contaminated soil and groundwater, and secures and stores nuclear material in stable and

secure locations to protect national security.

https://www.energy.gov/national-security-safety/environmental-cleanup
The National Nuclear Security Administration ensures the integrity and safety of the Nation’s nuclear weapons,

advances nuclear nonproliferation, and promotes international nuclear safety.

https://www.energy.gov/nnsa/nuclear-security-nonproliferation
The DOE works closely with its public and private sector partners to secure the Nation’s critical energy infrastructure

against all hazards, to reduce the risk of disruptive events, and to respond to energy disruptions that could jeopardize

national security, public health and safety, and the national economy. DOE response activities include hurricane
response, extreme weather and wildfire response, and cyber incident response.

https://www.energy.gov/ceser/emergency-response-hub
The DOE has continency plans for mitigating the effects of extreme petroleum supply interruptions. The Office of

Petroleum Reserves (OPR) acquires, stores, distributes, and manages emergency petroleum stocks. The OPR maintains

the operational readiness of three emergency stockpiles: the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, the Northeast Home

Heating Oil Reserve, and the Northeast Gasoline Supply Reserve (NGSR). In the event of a natural disaster or other

national emergency, the Nation can draw from these emergency stockpiles to keep crude oil and other petroleum

products in steady supply.

https://www.energy.gov/fecm/office-petroleum-reserves
The DOE leads the Federal Government’s effort to mitigate the potentially catastrophic effects of cybersecurity attacks

on the energy sector. It also ensures the cybersecurity and resilience of all energy infrastructure that is associated with

the DOE enterprise.

https://www.energy.gov/national-security-safety/cybersecurity
DOE health and safety programs help to protect workers and the public from the hazards associated with

departmental operations. Former and current DOE Federal, contract, and subcontract workers benefit from health and

safety policies, program tools, and assistance resources.

https://www.energy.gov/ehss/health-and-safety
The Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Program Act (EEOICPA) provides compensation and

medical benefits to employees—including contractors, subcontractors, and some vendors—who worked at certain

DOE facilities. The Department of Labor (DOL) handles the adjudication of issues involving all claims for benefits under

the EEOICPA . Alongside the Departments of Justice (DOJ) and Health and Human Services (HHS), the DOE supports

the DOL as it adjudicates these issues.

https://www.energy.gov/ehss/services/worker-health-and-safety/energy-employees-occupational-illness-
compensation-program

Saving Money / Lowering Energy Consumption
The DOE maintains a website that is dedicated to helping consumers to use energy more efficiently and to adopt

renewable forms of energy. These consumers include builders and renovators, commuters and drivers, families,

homeowners, landscapers, and renters. Energy Saver is the DOE's premier consumer resource for ideas on how to

lower energy consumption and save money and for learning about renewable energy technologies that are applicable

at home.

https://www.energy.gov/energysaver/energy-saver



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Analysis / Statistics
The U.S. Energy Information Administration is the statistical and analytical agency within the DOE. It is the Nation's

premier source of energy information. By law, its data, analyses, and forecasts are independent of approval by any

other officer or employee of the Federal Government.
https://www.eia.gov/about/mission_overview.php

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that DOE records have been

assigned to record group 434.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/434.html

Business Opportunities
To learn about the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization and its mission or to find information on the

services that it offers and its programs, visit its website. Phone, 202-586-7377.

http://www.energy.gov/osdbu/office-small-and-disadvantaged-business-utilization | Email: smallbusiness@hq.doe.gov
Useful external links for small businesses are available on the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization's

website in its "Small Business Toolbox."

https://www.energy.gov/osdbu/small-business-toolbox/useful-links-and-faq

Career Opportunities
The DOE offers career opportunities that span a broad, diverse range of professions: accounting and contracting,

administration, business, communications and information technology, computer science, engineering, mathematics,

national security and international affairs, public affairs, science and technology, and more. Most Federal jobs require

U.S. citizenship; however, noncitizens may apply for some opportunities at the National Laboratories.

http://www.energy.gov/jobs/jobs
Information on opportunities for students and recent graduates, veterans, and those with disabilities is available on the

DOE website. For more information, contact the Chief Human Capital Officer. Phone, 202-586-1234.

http://www.energy.gov/jobs/services/students-recent-graduates
In 2020, the DOE ranked 11th among 25 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DN00

Climate Change
Mitigating the effects of climate change is on the DOE's top-priorities list. Global temperatures continue to rise;

therefore, drought, heat waves, wildfires, and high demand for electricity will put additional stress on the Nation's

energy infrastructure. The leading cause of power outages and fuel supply disruption in the United States is severe

weather. As the Earth System continues on this current heating trajectory, Climate scientists predict that severe

weather events will become more destructive and disruptive. Visit the "Climate Change" web pages to learn more

about how the DOE is responding to this growing threat.

https://www.energy.gov/science-innovation/climate-change
The Energy Exascale Earth System Model (E3SM) Project is a state-of-the-science Earth system modeling, simulation,

and prediction project. Relying on DOE laboratory resources, the E3SM Project helps to meet the science needs of the

Nation and the mission needs of the DOE.

https://e3sm.org
Title 10 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) is dedicated to rules and regulations that are associated with energy.
Chapter II of that title is dedicated to the "Department of Energy." Subchapter B, which runs from section 300.01 to

300.13, is dedicated to "Climate Change."

https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-10/chapter-II/subchapter-B/part-300?toc=1

Contact Information
Email addresses, phone numbers, and the DOE's postal address are available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.energy.gov/contact-us

Energy Calculator
When deciding whether or not to invest in more energy efficiency, a consumer can benefit from knowing electricity

usages and the associated costs. The online energy use calculator estimates annual energy use and costs associated

with operating appliances and home electronics.

http://energy.gov/energysaver/estimating-appliance-and-home-electronic-energy-use

Energy Explained
The U.S. Energy Information Administration has an online guide for understanding energy.

https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/index.php

Energy Kids
The U.S. Energy Information Administration maintains an award-winning website for children and teachers. The

website "energy KIDS" answers the question: What is energy? It has web pages that describe sources of energy and

that provide a historical overview of energy. A glossary, energy calculators, games and activities, and a section for

teachers are also available on "energy KIDS."

https://www.eia.gov/kids

Energy Simulation Software
EnergyPlus is cross-platform, free, and open-source software that runs on the Windows, Mac OS X, and Linux

operating systems. It is a whole building energy simulation program that architects, engineers, and researchers use to

model energy consumption and water use in buildings. The DOE's Building Technologies Office funded the

development of EnergyPlus, and the National Renewable Energy Laboratory manages it.

https://energyplus.net

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the DOE recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/energy-department

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The Office of Management administers policies, procedures, and programs to ensure DOE compliance with the FOlA.

The FOIA gives information seekers a right to access DOE records; however, the Department may determine that

releasing certain information would harm an interest that one or more of the nine FOIA exemptions shields or that

doing so would violate the law. After receiving a properly submitted FOIA request, the DOE must provide the

requester with copies of the relevant documents and records, or portions of them, that he or she is entitled to access
under the law.

https://www.energy.gov/management/freedom-information-act
The FOIA requires that certain documents be made available to the public for inspection and copying. This

requirement pertains to agencies of the executive branch of the Federal Government. If the FOIA Reading Room does

not contain the document, or record, that you seek, please be at liberty to submit an official FOIA request. Before

submitting that request, please make sure that the desired information is not part of the electronic reading room's

collection and, therefore, already immediately available online without a fee.

https://www.energy.gov/management/foia-reading-room | Email: foia-central@hq.doe.gov

Genomics
A very important development in the field of biology within the past 100 years was the Human Genome Project (HGP),

the 10-year Government-led effort that culminated in the first complete sequencing of a human genome in 2000. The

HGP launched the field of genomics, transformed medicine, and pretty much birthed the modern biotechnology

industry. The original idea and impetus for the HGP came from the DOE's Office of Science, which was then known as

the Office of Energy Research. At the time, the sequencing of a whole human genome was considered a nearly

impossible task. With the historical experience of large scientific endeavors that had started with the Manhattan

Project, Office of Science personnel had the confidence that the task could be accomplished with sufficient

Government resources. Interest in better understanding the genetic effects of radiation exposure stimulated the DOE's

initial interest in undertaking this bold initiative.

https://www.energy.gov/science/initiatives/genomics

Geothermal Energy
The Geothermal Technologies Office released the report "GeoVision: Harnessing the Heat Beneath Our Feet (MAY

2019)."

https://www.energy.gov/eere/geothermal/geovision | Email: GeoVision@ee.doe.gov

Glossaries
The Bioenergy Technologies Office maintains an online biomass glossary. Its short descriptions are intended to help

students and researchers understand biomass terminology.

http://www.energy.gov/eere/bioenergy/glossary
The waterpower program maintains an online hydropower glossary. It is intended to help readers understand

terminology associated with hydroturbine and hydropower plant components.

http://www.energy.gov/eere/water/glossary-hydropower-terms
The Office of Legacy management maintains an online glossary.

https://www.energy.gov/lm/glossary
The U.S. Energy Information Administration maintains a glossary on its website.

https://www.eia.gov/tools/glossary

History
The DOE history timeline allows easy access to information on the Department's history and its predecessor agencies.
The timeline includes links to press releases, reports, speeches, and other documentation.

https://www.energy.gov/lm/doe-history/doe-history-timeline

Landscaping for Energy Efficiency
A well-designed landscape adds beauty to a home. Landscaping also can reduce cooling and heating costs. A shrub,

tree, or vine can bring the coolness of shade, absorb the force of wind, and lower energy bills. Thoughtfully positioned

trees can reduce the energy that a typical household uses by as much as 25 percent.

https://www.energy.gov/energysaver/landscaping-energy-efficient-homes

Maps
The Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy posts National Renewable Energy Laboratory maps that

illustrate a variety of energy-related topics and trends: alternative fueling stations, carbon capture, climate

vulnerabilities, per capita energy expenditure, renewable energy production, solar energy potential, and more.

https://www.energy.gov/eere/photos/collection-nrel-maps
Climate change is a threat to America's energy infrastructure in every region of the country: Alaska, Hawaii, Midwest,

Northeast, Northern Great Plains, Northwest, Southeast, Southern Great Plains, Southwest, and Puerto Rico. The DOE

website has an interactive map that illustrates the potential of climate change to disrupt the Nation’s energy systems.

https://www.energy.gov/articles/map-how-climate-change-threatens-america-s-energy-infrastructure-every-region

National Laboratories
For more than 60 years, these Laboratories have been leading institutions for scientific innovation in the United States.

To learn more about the Ames Laboratory, Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory, Thomas Jefferson National

Accelerator Facility, and the other 14 National Laboratories, visit the DOE's "About the National Labs" web page.

https://www.energy.gov/national-laboratories

News
The newsroom web page offers easy access to news and speeches, as well as to the "Energy Blog" and the "Direct

Current" podcast.

https://www.energy.gov/newsroom

Office of Inspector General (OIG)
The early alert system uses a distribution list for informing subscribers of significant press releases, publications, and

reports the moment that the OIG posts them online. Subscription is free and available to anyone who has an interest

in the OIG's work and an email address.

http://www.energy.gov/ig/subscription-information | Email: ignewmedia@hq.doe.gov

Open Government
The DOE supports the Open Government initiative to create a more open and transparent Government by promoting

the principles of collaboration, participation, and transparency.

http://www.energy.gov/open-government | Email: open@hq.doe.gov

Postclosure Responsibilities
The Office of Legacy Management serves the public interest by fulfilling the DOE’s postclosure responsibilities and

ensuring the future protection of human health and the environment.

https://www.energy.gov/lm/services

Renewable Energy
The steady expansion of the U.S. renewable energy sector suggests that a clean energy revolution is underway

nationwide.

https://www.energy.gov/clean-energy

Scientific and Technical Information
The Office of Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI) advances science and sustains technological creativity by

making research and development findings available to and useful for DOE researchers and the public. The OSTI

website provides access to DOE science resources and to U.S. Federal science (Science.gov) and global science

(WorldWideScience.org) information.

https://www.osti.gov/search-tools

Social Media
The DOE has a Facebook page.

https://www.facebook.com/energygov
The DOE tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/energy
The DOE posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/USdepartmentofenergy
Each of the 17 National Laboratories has its own YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/c/EnergyGov/channels?view=49&shelf_id=1

 The Sources of Information were updated 02–2022.




Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
888 First Street NE., Washington, DC 20426


202-502-8004

http://www.ferc.gov




Commissioners


 CHAIR                                                   Richard Glick
                                                     Mark C. Christie


                                                     Allison Clements


                                                     James Danly


                                                     Willie L. Phillips

https://www.ferc.gov/about/commission-members



 The above list of Commissioners was updated 12–2021.




Senior Staff


 Chief Administrative Law Judge                      Carmen A. Cintron


 General Counsel                                     Matthew Christiansen




 OFFICE DIRECTORS


 Administrative Litigation                           John Kroeger


 Electric Reliability                                David Ortiz, Acting


 Energy Infrastructure Security                      Joseph H. McClelland


 Energy Market Regulation                            Jette Gebhart


 Energy Policy and Innovation                        Jignasa Gadani


 Energy Projects                                     Terry L. Turpin


 Enforcement                                         JanelBurdick


 Executive Director                                  Anton C. Porter


 External Affairs                                    Sarah Venuto




 Secretary                                           Kimberly D. Bose

https://www.ferc.gov/commission-members-senior-staff/commission-members-and-senior-staff
  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2021.



The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission helps consumers obtain efficient, reliable, and sustainable energy

services at fair and reasonable rates through regulatory and market means.




ORGANIZATION
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) is an independent agency within the Department of Energy

that regulates the interstate transmission of electricity, natural gas, and oil. The Commission comprises five

members whom the President appoints with the advice and consent of the Senate. FERC Commissioners serve

5-year terms and have an equal vote on regulatory matters. The President designates one member to serve as

both the Commission's Chair and its administrative head.

https://www.ferc.gov/what-ferc
An organizational chart and brief descriptions of the main activities of each office are posted online.

https://www.ferc.gov/offices



ACTIVITIES
Under the authority of the Federal Power, the Natural Gas, and the Interstate Commerce Acts, the FERC

regulates the interstate transmission of electricity, natural gas, and oil. That authority also includes review of

proposals to build interstate natural gas pipelines, natural gas storage facilities, and liquefied natural gas

terminals, and licensing of nonfederal hydropower dams.


The FERC enforces regulatory requirements by imposing civil penalties and other means, monitors and

investigates energy markets, and protects the reliability of the high voltage interstate transmission system

through mandatory reliability standards.

https://www.ferc.gov/about/what-ferc/what-ferc-does



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FERC records have

been assigned to record group 138.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/138.html

Career Opportunities
The FERC relies on accountants and auditors, attorneys, economists, energy industry analysts, engineers,

environmental biologists, human resources specialists, information technology specialists, management analysts,

and other professionals to carry out its mission.
https://www.ferc.gov/about/careers
In 2020, the FERC ranked 3d among 25 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DR00

Contact Information
Email addresses and phone and fax numbers are available on the "Key Contacts" web page.

https://www.ferc.gov/about/contact-us/key-contacts

Data Sources
The FERC posts sources of data on its website.

https://www.ferc.gov/industries-data/resources/data-sources

Document Classes Table
The FERC has a critical energy/electric infrastructure information (CEII) related document classes table on its

website.

https://www.ferc.gov/enforcement-legal/ceii/related-document-classes

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the FERC recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-energy-regulatory-commission

FERC Online
This electronic portal to dockets and documents provides an easy and efficient way to communicate and to do

business with the FERC.

https://www.ferc.gov/ferc-online/overview

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives a person the right to request public access to Federal agency records and information. The

agency must release the records upon receiving a written FOIA request, except in cases that one of nine FOIA

exemptions or one of three FOIA exclusions shields the records or parts of them from disclosure.

https://www.ferc.gov/enforcement-legal/foia | Email: foia-ceii@ferc.gov
The FERC maintains an electronic reading room. Before submitting a formal FOIA request in writing, an

information seeker should review the contents of the reading room to determine whether or not the information

or record that they seek has been released in the public domain.

https://www.ferc.gov/enforcement-legal/foia/reading-room-material

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The FERC posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.ferc.gov/about/what-ferc/frequently-asked-questions-faqs
    Glossary
    The FERC maintains a glossary of terms that are frequently used on its website.

    https://www.ferc.gov/about/what-ferc/about/glossary
    The FERC maintains a market assessments glossary.

    https://www.ferc.gov/industries-data/market-assessments/overview/glossary
    The FERC maintains an online list of acronyms and initialisms.

    https://www.ferc.gov/about/what-ferc/about/acronyms

    News Releases
    The FERC posts news releases and headlines.

    https://www.ferc.gov/news-events/news/news-releases-headlines

    Public Participation
    Citizens who may be affected by a proposed natural gas or hydroelectric project that the Commission regulates

    have certain rights. These rights range from seeing project correspondence to becoming an intervener and

    appealing FERC decisions in Federal court.

    https://www.ferc.gov/industries-data/resources/how-get-involved

    Request a Speaker
    The FERC website has an electronic form on its "Speaker Request" web page.

    https://www.ferc.gov/about/contact-us/speaker-request

    Site Map
    The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

    https://www.ferc.gov/sitemap

    Social Media
    The FERC has a Facebook account.

    https://www.facebook.com/FERC.gov
    The FERC tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/ferc
    The FERC posts videos on its YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/c/FercGov-energy

       The Sources of Information were updated 12–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States
About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                          Federal Energy Regulatory Commission




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL ENERGY REGULATORY COMMISSION
    888 First Street NE., Washington, DC 20426


    202-502-8004

    http://www.ferc.gov




    Commissioners
 CHAIR                                                  Richard Glick




                                                        Mark C. Christie


                                                        Allison Clements


                                                        James Danly


                                                        Willie L. Phillips

https://www.ferc.gov/about/commission-members



 The above list of Commissioners was updated 12–2021.




Senior Staff


 Chief Administrative Law Judge                         Carmen A. Cintron


 General Counsel                                        Matthew Christiansen




 OFFICE DIRECTORS


 Administrative Litigation                              John Kroeger


 Electric Reliability                                   David Ortiz, Acting


 Energy Infrastructure Security                         Joseph H. McClelland


 Energy Market Regulation                               Jette Gebhart


 Energy Policy and Innovation                           Jignasa Gadani


 Energy Projects                                        Terry L. Turpin


 Enforcement                                            JanelBurdick


 Executive Director                                     Anton C. Porter


 External Affairs                                       Sarah Venuto
  Secretary                                                                                Kimberly D. Bose

https://www.ferc.gov/commission-members-senior-staff/commission-members-and-senior-staff



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2021.



The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission helps consumers obtain efficient, reliable, and sustainable energy services at

fair and reasonable rates through regulatory and market means.




ORGANIZATION
The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) is an independent agency within the Department of Energy that

regulates the interstate transmission of electricity, natural gas, and oil. The Commission comprises five members whom

the President appoints with the advice and consent of the Senate. FERC Commissioners serve 5-year terms and have

an equal vote on regulatory matters. The President designates one member to serve as both the Commission's Chair

and its administrative head.

https://www.ferc.gov/what-ferc
An organizational chart and brief descriptions of the main activities of each office are posted online.

https://www.ferc.gov/offices



ACTIVITIES
Under the authority of the Federal Power, the Natural Gas, and the Interstate Commerce Acts, the FERC regulates the

interstate transmission of electricity, natural gas, and oil. That authority also includes review of proposals to build

interstate natural gas pipelines, natural gas storage facilities, and liquefied natural gas terminals, and licensing of

nonfederal hydropower dams.


The FERC enforces regulatory requirements by imposing civil penalties and other means, monitors and investigates

energy markets, and protects the reliability of the high voltage interstate transmission system through mandatory

reliability standards.

https://www.ferc.gov/about/what-ferc/what-ferc-does



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FERC records have been

assigned to record group 138.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/138.html

Career Opportunities
The FERC relies on accountants and auditors, attorneys, economists, energy industry analysts, engineers,

environmental biologists, human resources specialists, information technology specialists, management analysts, and

other professionals to carry out its mission.

https://www.ferc.gov/about/careers
In 2020, the FERC ranked 3d among 25 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DR00

Contact Information
Email addresses and phone and fax numbers are available on the "Key Contacts" web page.

https://www.ferc.gov/about/contact-us/key-contacts

Data Sources
The FERC posts sources of data on its website.

https://www.ferc.gov/industries-data/resources/data-sources

Document Classes Table
The FERC has a critical energy/electric infrastructure information (CEII) related document classes table on its website.

https://www.ferc.gov/enforcement-legal/ceii/related-document-classes

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the FERC recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-energy-regulatory-commission

FERC Online
This electronic portal to dockets and documents provides an easy and efficient way to communicate and to do

business with the FERC.

https://www.ferc.gov/ferc-online/overview

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives a person the right to request public access to Federal agency records and information. The agency

must release the records upon receiving a written FOIA request, except in cases that one of nine FOIA exemptions or

one of three FOIA exclusions shields the records or parts of them from disclosure.

https://www.ferc.gov/enforcement-legal/foia | Email: foia-ceii@ferc.gov
The FERC maintains an electronic reading room. Before submitting a formal FOIA request in writing, an information

seeker should review the contents of the reading room to determine whether or not the information or record that

they seek has been released in the public domain.

https://www.ferc.gov/enforcement-legal/foia/reading-room-material

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The FERC posts answers to FAQs.
    https://www.ferc.gov/about/what-ferc/frequently-asked-questions-faqs

    Glossary
    The FERC maintains a glossary of terms that are frequently used on its website.

    https://www.ferc.gov/about/what-ferc/about/glossary
    The FERC maintains a market assessments glossary.

    https://www.ferc.gov/industries-data/market-assessments/overview/glossary
    The FERC maintains an online list of acronyms and initialisms.

    https://www.ferc.gov/about/what-ferc/about/acronyms

    News Releases
    The FERC posts news releases and headlines.

    https://www.ferc.gov/news-events/news/news-releases-headlines

    Public Participation
    Citizens who may be affected by a proposed natural gas or hydroelectric project that the Commission regulates have

    certain rights. These rights range from seeing project correspondence to becoming an intervener and appealing FERC

    decisions in Federal court.

    https://www.ferc.gov/industries-data/resources/how-get-involved

    Request a Speaker
    The FERC website has an electronic form on its "Speaker Request" web page.

    https://www.ferc.gov/about/contact-us/speaker-request

    Site Map
    The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

    https://www.ferc.gov/sitemap

    Social Media
    The FERC has a Facebook account.

    https://www.facebook.com/FERC.gov
    The FERC tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/ferc
    The FERC posts videos on its YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/c/FercGov-energy

       The Sources of Information were updated 12–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States
About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                    Search
                                                                                            Search




                                        Department of Health and Human Services
                                         Administration for Children and Families
                                           Administration for Community Living
                                       Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
                                     Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
                                        Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
                                        Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
                                              Food and Drug Administration
                                       Health Resources and Services Administration
                                                    Indian Health Service
                                                National Institutes of Health
                                Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
200 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20201


202-690-6343

http://www.hhs.gov


 SECRETARY OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES                                               Robert F. Kennedy, Jr.


https://www.hhs.gov/about/leadership/xavier-becerra.html



Immediate Office of the Secretary


 DEPUTY SECRETARY                                                                     Andrea Palm


 Chief of Staff                                                                       Sean McCluskie

https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/staff-divisions/immediate-office-secretary/index.html



Office of Intergovernmental and External Affairs


 Director                                                                             Marvin B. Figueroa

https://www.hhs.gov/about/leadership/marvin-figueroa/index.html



ADDITIONAL OFFICES REPORTING TO THE SECRETARY—


 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Administration                                                                       Cheryl Campbell


 Financial Resources                                                                  Norris Cochran, Acting


 Global Affairs                                                                       Loyce Pace


 Health                                                                               Adm. Rachel L. Levine


 Legislation                                                                          Melanie Egorin


 Planning and Evaluation                                                              (vacancy)


 Preparedness and Response                                                            Dawn O’Connell


 Public Affairs                                                                       Sarah Lovenheim
 CHIEF OFFICER


 Information                                                                      Karl S. Mathias




 DIRECTOR


 Civil Rights                                                                     Lisa J. Pino




 General Counsel                                                                  Daniel Barry




 NATIONAL COORDINATOR


 Health Information Technology                                                    Micky Tripathi

https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/orgchart/index.html



Departmental Appeals Board


 Chair                                                                            Constance B. Tobias

https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/dab/about-dab/who-are-the-board-members-and-judges/index.html



Medicare Hearings and Appeals Office


 Chief Administrative Law Judge                                                   McArthur Allen

https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/omha/about/organizational-chart/meet-the-executive-leadership-
team/index.html



Office of Inspector General


 Inspector General                                                                Christi A. Grimm

https://oig.hhs.gov/about-oig/leadership



OPERATING DIVISIONS—
https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/hhs-agencies-and-offices/index.html



Administrators


 Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services                              Chiquita Brooks-LaSure


 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry                        Rochelle P. Walensky


 Health Resources and Services Administration                            Carole Johnson




Assistant Secretaries


 Children and Families                                                   January Contreras


 Aging                                                                   Alison Barkoff, Acting


 Mental Health and Substance Use                                         Miriam E. Delphin-Rittmon




Commissioner


 Food and Drugs                                                          Robert M. Califf




Directors


 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality                              Robert O. Valdez


 Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry                        Patrick Breysse


 Centers of Disease Control and Prevention                               Rochelle P. Walensky


 Indian Health Service                                                   Elizabeth A. Fowler, Acting


 National Institutes of Health                                           Lawrence A. Tabak, Acting

https://www.hhs.gov/about/leadership/index.html



 The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.
The Department of Health and Human Services strengthens the public health and welfare of the American people by

making affordable and quality health care and childcare accessible, ensuring the safety of food products, preparing for

public health emergencies, and advancing the diagnosis, treatment, and curing of life-threatening illnesses.


The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) was created as the Department of Health, Education, and

Welfare on April 11, 1953 (5 U.S.C. app.).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title5a-node84-leaf134&num=0&edition=prelim
The HHS posts its organizational chart online.

https://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/orgchart/index.html

Secretary
The Secretary of Health and Human Services advises the President on health, welfare, and income security plans,

policies, and programs of the Federal Government and directs Department staff in carrying out the programs and

activities of the Department and promotes general public understanding of the Department's goals, programs, and

objectives.

http://www.hhs.gov/about/leadership/index.html#secretary

Office of Intergovernmental and External Affairs
The Office of Intergovernmental and External Affairs (IEA) supports the Secretary by serving as the primary liaison

between the Department and external stakeholders and governments at the State, local, territorial, and tribal levels.

The Office facilitates communication regarding HHS initiatives as they relate to external stakeholders and governments

at the State, local, territorial, and tribal levels. The IEA both represents the State, territorial, and tribal perspective in the

process of Federal policymaking and clarifies the Federal perspective to State, territorial and tribal representatives.

http://www.hhs.gov/intergovernmental

  For further information, contact the Office of Intergovernmental and External Affairs. Phone, 202-690-
  6060.




OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR PREPAREDNESS AND
RESPONSE
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR) provides national leadership in the

prevention of, preparation for, and response to the adverse health effects of public health emergencies and disasters.

It acts as the primary advisor to the HHS Secretary on bioterrorism and other public health emergency matters,

strengthens the Nation’s health and response systems, and enhances national health security. The ASPR leads a

collaborative policy approach to the Department’s preparedness, response, and recovery portfolio. It works with

partners across Federal, State, local, tribal, and international bodies, in communities, and in the private sector to

promote a unified and strategic approach to the challenges of public health and medical preparedness, response, and

recovery through programs like the Hospital Preparedness Program. The ASPR coordinates public health and medical

support available from across the Federal Government to help prepare communities and to augment local capabilities

of overwhelmed communities during and after disasters, which includes providing medical professionals through the
ASPR’s National Disaster Medical System and the Medical Reserve Corps. The ASPR provides an integrated, systematic

approach to the advanced development and acquisition of the necessary vaccines, drugs, therapies, and diagnostic

tools for public health medical emergencies. It also coordinates within the Department and among Federal partners on

the policy, prioritization, funding, acquisition, and distribution of these medical countermeasures. In addition, offices

within the ASPR coordinate within the division, within the Department and with Federal, State, local, territorial, tribal

and international bodies on emergency communications, science preparedness, and administrative management to

support decisionmakers in emergencies.

http://www.phe.gov/preparedness/pages/default.aspx

  For further information, contact the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response.
  Phone, 202-205-2882.




OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR HEALTH
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health (ASH) comprises 12 offices and 10 Presidential and secretarial advisory

committees. The Assistant Secretary for Health heads the Office and serves as the Secretary's senior public health

advisor. ASH provides assistance in implementing and coordinating secretarial decisions for the Public Health Service

and coordination of population-based health clinical divisions; provides oversight of research conducted or supported

by the Department; implements programs that provide population-based public health services; and provides

direction and policy oversight, through the Office of the Surgeon General, for the Public Health Service Commissioned

Corps. ASH administers a wide array of interdisciplinary programs related to disease prevention, health promotion, the

reduction of health disparities, women’s health, HIV/AIDS, vaccine programs, physical fitness and sports, bioethics,

population affairs, blood supply, research integrity, and human research protections.

http://www.hhs.gov/ash

  For further information, contact the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health. Phone, 202-690-7694.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The HHS website has an alphabetical index to help visitors search for specific topics or browse content that aligns with

their interests.

http://www.hhs.gov/az/a/index.html

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that HHS records have been

assigned to record group 468. The guide does not contain, however, a description that is associated with this record

group. In anticipation of the transfer of archival records, record group 468 was created; however, no transfer had

occurred before the guide was last updated.
https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/401-to-500.html?
_ga=2.9600432.489972831.1652302153-1283406641.1650907417

Bullying
The HHS manages the website StopBullying.gov, which provides resources for defining, preventing, and responding to

bullying, and for identifying who may be at risk. The website also features sections for children and teens, educators,

parents, and communities.

https://www.stopbullying.gov

Business Opportunities
The HHS relies on its contractors and grantees to help protect the health of Americans and provide essential human

services.

http://www.hhs.gov/grants/index.html#contract
The Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization helps develop and implement outreach programs to raise

awareness of HHS contracting opportunities within the small business community. For information on programs,

contact the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization. Phone, 202-690-7300.

http://www.hhs.gov/asfr/ogapa/osbdu

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has the main phone number and mailing address for HHS Headquarters. I also has useful

phone numbers and links to informative information resources

https://www.hhs.gov/about/contact-us/index.html

Career Opportunities
For information on training opportunities and opportunities for recent graduates and students or to view current job

openings, visit the "Why a Career at HHS?" web page.

http://www.hhs.gov/about/careers/index.html
In 2020, the HHS ranked 4th among 17 large Government agencies in the Best Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE00

Climate Change
Keep abreast of the HHS's efforts to address the climate crisis by visiting its "What's New?" web page, which is one of

the "Climate Change & Heath Equity, and Environmental Justice" web pages.

https://www.hhs.gov/climate-change-health-equity-environmental-justice/climate-change-health-
equity/news/index.html | Email: GoGreen@hhs.gov

Departmental Appeals Board
For information, contact the Departmental Appeals Board Immediate Office, MS 6127, Wilbur J. Cohen Building, 330

Independence Avenue SW., Room G–644, Washington, DC 20201. Phone, 202-565-0200.

http://www.hhs.gov/dab

Employee Directory
The HHS maintains a searchable employee directory on its website.

https://directory.psc.gov/employee.htm

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the HHS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/health-and-human-services-department

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA allows individuals to request access to Federal agency records. The statute contains, however, nine

exemptions that exempt some records or portions of them from disclosure. The Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs

also serves as the Agency Chief FOIA Officer.

http://www.hhs.gov/foia | Email: hhs.acfo@hhs.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The HHS posts answers to FAQs on its website.

http://www.hhs.gov/answers

Glossaries
In the world of organ donation and transplantation, terms are used and topics discussed that many may not

recognize. The OrganDonor.gov website features a glossary of organ donation terms.

https://www.organdonor.gov/learn/glossary
The HHS maintains a glossary of terms that are associated with environmental justice. The glossary is one of the

"Climate Change & Heath Equity, and Environmental Justice" web pages.

https://www.hhs.gov/climate-change-health-equity-environmental-justice/glossary/index.html

Health Insurance
Need to enroll in a health insurance plan? Visit HealthCare.gov to learn about available options.

https://www.healthcare.gov

Medicare Hearings / Appeals
For information on Medicare hearings before administrative law judges, regarding Medicare coverage and payment

determinations that Medicare contractors, Medicare Advantage Organizations, or Part D plan sponsors have made, as

well as information on determinations related to Medicare beneficiary eligibility and entitlement, Part B late enrollment

penalties, and income-related monthly adjustment amounts that the Social Security Administration has made, contact

the Office of Medicare Hearings and Appeals. Phone, 703-235-0635 or 855-556-8475.

http://www.hhs.gov/omha | Email: medicare.appeals@hhs.gov

Open Government
The HHS supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

http://www.hhs.gov/open/index.html
Privacy Rights
For information on the HIPAA privacy, security, and breach notification rules or the Patient Safety Act, contact the

Office for Civil Rights. Phone, 800-368-1019. TDD, 800-537-7697.

https://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/index.html

Programs / Services
The HHS administers more than 100 programs departmentwide. Its programs protect the health of Americans and

provide essential human services, especially for Americans who are least able to help themselves.

https://www.hhs.gov/programs/index.html

Public Health Service Commissioned Corps Officer Program
Information on the Commissioned Corps Officer programs is available at the Public Health Service Commissioned

Corps Officer website.

http://www.usphs.gov

Regional Offices
Visit the "Regional Offices" web page for contact information.

http://www.hhs.gov/about/agencies/regional-offices

Social Media
The HHS has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/HHS
The HHS tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/hhsgov
The HHS posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/USGOVHHS

Support Services (Fee-for-Service Activities)
The Program Support Center provides support services to all components of the Department and Federal agencies

worldwide. For information concerning fee-for-service activities in the areas of acquisitions, occupational health,

information technology support and security, human resource systems, financial management, and administrative

operations, contact the Program Support Center, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857. Phone, 301-443-0034.

http://www.psc.gov

Surgeon General
For information on the benefits of active living, healthy eating, mental and emotional well-being, and tobacco-free

living, visit the "Surgeon General" website. Phone, 240-276-8853.

http://www.surgeongeneral.gov

Tick-Borne Diseases
Tick-borne diseases are a serious problem for public health. Lyme disease is the most common tick-borne disease, but
there are at least 20 different infections that are transmitted by ticks in the United States.

https://www.hhs.gov/ash/advisory-committees/tickbornedisease/index.html

Unimplemented Recommendations
The "Office of Inspector General's (OIG's) Top Unimplemented Recommendations: Solutions To Reduce Fraud, Waste,

and Abuse in HHS Programs" is an annual publication that the HHS posts online.

https://oig.hhs.gov/reports-and-publications/compendium/index.asp

  The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Administration for Children and Families
330 C Street SW., Washington, DC 20201


202-401-9200

http://www.acf.hhs.gov


  ASSISTANT      SECRETARY      FOR     CHILDREN      AND
                                                              January Contreras
  FAMILIES


  Deputy Assistant Secretary                                  S. Jeffrey Hild


https://www.acf.hhs.gov/about/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Administration posts an organizational chart on its "Offices" web page.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/about/offices
The Administration for Children and Families administers programs and provides advice to the Secretary on

issues relevant to children, youth, and families; child support enforcement; community services; developmental

disabilities; family assistance; Native American assistance; and refugee resettlement.

http://www.acf.hhs.gov/about/what-we-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Administration

records have been assigned to record group 292. The guide does not contain, however, a description that is

associated with this record group. In anticipation of the transfer of archival records, record group 292 was

created; however, no transfer had occurred before the guide was last updated.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/201-to-300.html?
_ga=2.136512308.524104603.1653670220-2108958244.1650495806

Career Opportunities
The Administration employs professionals with diverse academic and social backgrounds in a broad range of

career fields and positions.

http://www.acf.hhs.gov/about/jobs-contracts
In 2020, the Administration ranked 230th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public

Service's Best Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE90

Contact Information
The Administration's "Contact Us" web page is loaded with mailing addresses and phone numbers. Hotlines and

helplines, program and regional office contacts, and State and local agency contacts, are included on the web

page.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/about/contact-us

Data / Research
The Administration's data and reports highlight its various programs and grants for improving the lives of the

Nation's children, families, communities, and individuals.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/acf-data-research

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the Administration recently published in the Federal Register are

accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/children-and-families-administration

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded

from disclosure by one or more of nine exemptions that are contained within the statute.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/freedom-information-act

History
The Administration for Children and Families was created on April 15, 1991. A short history of the Administration

is available online.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/about/history

Homelessness
The Administration's website has information on its programs and services for the homeless and for those at risk

of becoming homeless.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/family-homelessness

Hotlines
The Administration supports nationwide crisis hotlines for child abuse, domestic violence, human trafficking, and

runaways. The Health Insurance Marketplace Call Center assists callers with choosing coverage that provides the

best protection and benefits for them and family members, as well as for their businesses.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/acf-hotlines

News
The Administration posts press releases.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/media/press

Resource Library
The Administration maintains an online library of resources.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/resource-library

Social Media
The Administration has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/ChildrenAndFamilies
The Administration tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/acfhhs
The Administration posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/usgovacf

State Human Services Agencies
The Administration posts contact information for human services agencies by State and territory, organized

according to region.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/state-human-services-agencies

  The above Sources of Information were updated 5–2022.




Administration for Community Living
330 C Street SW., Washington, DC 20201


202-401-4634

TTY, 800-877-8339

http://www.acl.gov


  ADMINISTRATOR                                            Alison Barkoff, Acting


  Principal Deputy Administrator                           Alison Barkoff


https://acl.gov/about-acl/organization/leadership
  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Administration posts its organizational chart online, which is accessible on the "Organization" web page.

https://acl.gov/about-acl/organization
The Administration for Community Living administers programs and advises the Secretary on issues relevant to

people with disabilities, their families and caregivers, and the independence, well-being, and health of older

adults.

https://acl.gov/about-acl



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Focus Areas, Networks, and Programs
An alphabetical index of areas of focus, networks, and programs is available online.

https://acl.gov/programs/acl-programs-z

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" does not indicate a record group to

which the Administration's records have been assigned.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records#search

Blog
The Administration's Blog presents diverse perspectives on trends and issues related to older adults and people

with disabilities.

https://acl.gov/news-and-events/acl-blog

Career Opportunities
For information on employment opportunities, visit the "Working at ACL" web page.

http://www.acl.gov/About_ACL/CareerOpportunities/Index.aspx
In 2020, the Administration ranked 368th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public

Service's Best Places To Work Agency Ranking.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE01

Contact Information
Phone numbers and an electronic message board are available on the "Contact Us" web page. Addresses for

regional administrators also are accessible on the same web page.

https://acl.gov/contact

Data / Research
Data and statistics on older adults, as well as on persons with intellectual, physical, and developmental

disabilities, are available on the Administration's website.
https://acl.gov/aging-and-disability-in-america/data-and-research

Elder Care Services
The elder care locator is a public service that provides information on services for older adults and their families.

Online chat with an information specialist is also available Monday–Friday, 9 a.m.–8 p.m., eastern time. Phone,

800-677-1116.

https://eldercare.acl.gov/Public/Index.aspx

Elder Justice
Visit the Elder Justice website to explore its online resources: data, research, response information, technical

assistance, and training.

https://elderjustice.acl.gov/#gsc.tab=0

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the Administration recently published in the Federal Register are

accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/community-living-administration

Finding Help
People often have questions about programs that are available in their States or communities, about which

programs would best suit their needs, and about program eligibility and how to enroll. A variety of resources are

available to help answer these questions and others.

https://acl.gov/help

Long-Term Care
Long-term care is a range of services and supports that help people meet their personal care needs—getting

dressed, driving to appointments, or making meals. Many people are not sure what services and supports are

covered by insurance, and they may be misinformed about Medicare coverage. The website LongTermCare.gov

has resources to bring clarity to insurance benefits, the services and supports that insurance covers, including

those services and supports that Medicare covers.

https://acl.gov/ltc

Older Indians
The "Older Indians" website delivers technical assistance resources to Title VI directors and serves as a Title VI

programs forum for increasing communication.

https://olderindians.acl.gov

Social Media
The Administration has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/aclgov
The Administration tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/ACLgov
The Administration posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/AoA25

 The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality
5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857


301-427-1364

http://www.ahrq.gov


 DIRECTOR                                                 Robert O. Valdez


 Deputy Director                                          David Meyers


https://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/about/organization/orgchart/organizational-chart.html



 The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Agency posts it organization chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/about/organization/orgchart/organizational-chart.html
The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality produces evidence to make healthcare affordable, equitable,

more accessible, of a higher quality, and safer. It also works within the Department of Health and Human

Services and with other partners to ensure that the evidence is understood and used.

http://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/about/profile/index.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Agency for

Healthcare Research and Quality records have been assigned to record group 510.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/510.html

Career Opportunities
For information on employment opportunities, visit the "Careers at the Agency for Healthcare Research and

Quality" web page.

https://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/about/careers/index.html
In 2020, the Agency ranked 86th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Ranking.
https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE33

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has a central mailing address and phone number for contacting the agency.

https://www.ahrq.gov/contact/index.html
The "AHRQ Key Contacts" web page has email addresses and phone numbers for contacting centers and offices.

https://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/about/organization/contacts/key-contacts.html

Core Competencies
The Agency seeks to improve the lives of patients and aims to help healthcare systems and professionals deliver

care that is safe and of high quality and value. The Agency accomplishes its mission by focusing on its three core

competencies: data and analytics, health systems research, and practice improvement.

https://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/corecompetencies/index.html

Data
Statistical portraits of health care delivery in the United States are available on the Agency's website.

https://www.ahrq.gov/data/index.html

Federal Register
Documents that the Agency recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/agency-for-healthcare-research-and-quality

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Agency posts answers to FAQs.

https://info.ahrq.gov

Most-Searched Topics
Information on the Agency's most-searched topics is organized alphabetically on the "Topics" web page.

https://www.ahrq.gov/topics/index.html

Other Websites
With the support of contracting staff, the Agency maintains additional subsites to fulfill its mission. A list of these

sites and a link to a description of each site's focus are provided on the "Other AHRQ Web Sites" web page.

https://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/about/otherwebsites/index.html

Social Media
The Agency has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/ahrq.gov
The Agency tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/ahrqnews
The Agency posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/AHRQHealthTV
Tools
The Agency has practical and research-based tools and other resources to help healthcare organizations,

providers, and others make care safer.

https://www.ahrq.gov/tools/index.html

  The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease
Registry
MS E–61, 4770 Buford Highway NE., Atlanta, GA 30341


770-488-0604

http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov


  DIRECTOR                                                  Patrick Breysse


https://www.cdc.gov/about/leadership/leaders/ncehatsdr.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) posted an organizational chart in Portable

Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/docs/ATSDR_Org_Chart_External-508.pdf
The ATSDR, as part of the Public Health Service, reduces exposure to toxic substances—exposure to substances

from wastesites, unplanned releases, and other pollution sources that are present in the environment—which
produce adverse health effects and diminish the quality of life.

https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/about/index.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The Agency's website has an alphabetical index to help visitors search for specific topics or browse content that

aligns with their interests.

https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/az/a.html

Archived Records
The alphabetical index to the "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" includes a

reference to the ATSDR in record group 090, but no record group has been created for its records. Public
Health Service records have been assigned to record group 090.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-alpha/t.html

ATSDR in 60 Seconds
The ATSDR protects people from the health effects of chemical exposures. The Agency posted the 60-second

video "Dangerous Discovery" to help communicate the importance of its mission.

https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/videos/dangerous_discovery.html

Career Opportunities
Information and other resources for applicants are posted on the "Careers at the CDC" web pages.

https://jobs.cdc.gov/index.html

Climate Change
The ATSDR website has an "Extreme Heat Adaptation" web page, which features an informative map showing

changes in heat wave days from 1979 through 2016.

https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/placeandhealth/share/onemap_heat-crsci/extreme_heat_home.html

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has phone numbers, including an emergency response number. A Spanish language

option is also available on the web page.

https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/contacts.html
The "Regional Offices Mailing Addresses" web page has additional contact information.

https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/dro/dro_contact.html

Federal Register
Documents that the Agency recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/agency-for-toxic-substances-and-disease-registry

Internships / Training
Information on internships and educational and training opportunities is available on the ATSDR website.

https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/environmentaleducation.html

News
The ATSDR posts media announcements on its "News Room" web page.

Email: ATSDRmediainquiries@cdc.gov

Toxicological Frequently Asked Questions (ToxFAQs)
The "ToxFAQs" web page has summaries on hazardous substances that the Agency's Division of Toxicology

developed. ATSDR toxicological profiles and public health statements are the sources of information on which

the series relies. Each factsheet serves as a guide that is quick to read and easy to understand. ToxFAQs also

answers FAQs on exposure to hazardous substances that are encountered near wastesites and their effects on

human health.
https://wwwn.cdc.gov/TSP/ToxFAQs/ToxFAQsLanding.aspx

Toxic Substances Portal
The portal provides easy access to the most relevant information on toxic substances and their effects on human

health. The portal's web pages have an alphabetical ordering of documents on specific substances, toxicological

information by health effect or chemical class, and toxicological information for specific audiences (community

members, emergency responders, toxicological and health professionals, and health care providers).

https://wwwn.cdc.gov/TSP/index.aspx

 The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
1600 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 30333


800-232-4636

http://www.cdc.gov


 DIRECTOR                                                 Rochelle P.Walensky


 Principal Deputy Director                                Debra Houry, Acting


https://www.cdc.gov/about/leadership.htm



 The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On July 1, 1946, the Communicable Disease Center opened its doors in Atlanta, GA, with the goal of stopping the

spread of malaria nationwide. With a budget of $10 million, its employees numbered fewer than 400. Shovels,

sprayers, and trucks were among the most important tools for slowing the disease's spread.

https://www.cdc.gov/about/history/index.html
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) posts an organizational chart online in Portable

Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.cdc.gov/about/pdf/organization/cdc-org-chart.pdf



ACTIVITIES
The CDC, as part of the Public Health Service, protects the public health of Americans by leading the national

effort to prevent and manage diseases and other preventable conditions and by responding to public health

emergencies. Within the CDC, the following five directorates lead efforts to diagnose, prevent, and treat public
health hazards.


Infectious Diseases Research and Policies
The CDC oversees three infectious disease national centers. The National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic

Infectious Diseases focuses on diseases that have been known for many years, emerging diseases, and zoonotic

diseases (i.e., those that spread from animals to people). The National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD

and TB Prevention eliminates, prevents, and controls disease, disability, and death caused by human

immunodeficiency virus infection/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, non-HIV retroviruses, viral hepatitis,

other sexually transmitted diseases, and tuberculosis. The National Center for Immunization and Respiratory

Diseases mitigates the effects of disease, which include disability and death, through immunization and by

controlling respiratory and related diseases.

https://www.cdc.gov/ddid/centers.html

Occupational Safety and Health
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health conducts research to reduce worker illness and injury

and to advance worker well-being; promotes safe and healthy workers through interventions, recommendations,

and building capacity to address hazards; and enhances worker safety and health through collaborations that

are global in scope.

http://www.cdc.gov/NIOSH

Noncommunicable Diseases Prevention
The CDC's current noninfectious disease priorities include marijuana use outcomes that affect health, mental

health, and the prevention of nonoccupational hearing loss. Its noninfectious disease services are provided by

four national centers: the National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities; the National Center

for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion; the National Center for Environmental Health / Agency

for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry; and the National Center for Injury Prevention and Control.

https://www.cdc.gov/about/leadership/leaders/ondieh.html

Public Health Preparedness and Response
The Center for Preparedness and Response helps the Nation prepare for and respond to urgent public health

threats by providing strategic direction, coordination, and support for CDC's terrorism preparedness and

emergency response activities.

http://www.cdc.gov/phpr

Public Health Science and Surveillance
The Public Health Science and Surveillance services—which include the National Center for Health Statistics and

the Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services (CSELS)—lead the effort in promoting and

facilitating science, surveillance, standards, and policies for reducing the burden of diseases in the United States

and abroad. The CSELS promotes collaboration among health professionals globally; supports educational,

training, and professional opportunities in epidemiology and public health science; maintains datasets and

manages and preserves specimens; facilitates the sharing of health information; and reports on emerging public
health problems. Within the CDC, the Office of Laboratory Science and Safety oversees and coordinates critical

laboratory policies and operations; the Office of Science serves as the CDC’s authority on scientific quality,

integrity, and innovation.

https://www.cdc.gov/ddphss

Public Health Service and Implementation Science
One office and three centers lead the national effort to promote and facilitate science programs and policies for

identifying and responding to domestic and global public health threats. These four components are the Center

for Global Health; Center for Preparedness and Response; Center for State, Tribal, Local and Territorial Support;

and the Office of Minority Health and Health Equity.

https://www.cdc.gov/about/leadership/leaders/ddphsis.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
An alphabetical subject index helps visitors navigate the content of the CDC's website.

https://www.cdc.gov/az/a.html?CDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Faz%2Findex.html

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that CDC records have

been assigned to record group 442.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/442.html?
_ga=2.23023485.794259431.1654643616-1283406641.1650907417

Career Opportunities
The CDC is the leading national public health protection agency in the United States. It relies on professionals

with scientific and nonscientific expertise to protect Earth's human population from the threat of deadly diseases

like Ebola, HIV/AIDS, influenza, malaria, and tuberculosis. Most scientific and technical positions at the CDC are

filled through the Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service, a uniformed service of the U.S.

Government.

http://jobs.cdc.gov
In 2020, the CDC ranked 192d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE39

Climate Change
Together with other natural and anthropogenic health stressors, climate change affects human health and

disease in many ways. It intensifies some existing health threats and causes the emergence of new ones. Not

everyone is equally at risk: Age, economic resources, location, and other factors influence outcomes.

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/default.htm
Extreme heat events pose a serious public health risk. The CDC's "Heat and Health Tracker" provides local heat

and health information to help communities better prepare for and respond to extreme heat events.

https://ephtracking.cdc.gov/Applications/heatTracker

Contact Information
The "Contact CDC–INFO" web page has CDC phone numbers and an electronic form for contacting the agency.

https://wwwn.cdc.gov/dcs/ContactUs/Form

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID–19)
Guidance on prevention and treatment of COVID–19, as well as updates on the virus and information for specific

groups like healthcare professionals and travelers, is available on the CDC website.

https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html

Disease of the Week
The "Disease of the Week" web page presents key facts on, prevention tips for, and a quiz to test one's

knowledge of diseases that are common and serious.

https://www.cdc.gov/dotw?Sort=Date%3A%3Adesc

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the CDC recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/centers-for-disease-control-and-prevention

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires of the CDC to disclose records that any person requests in writing; however, some records (or

parts of them) may be shielded by one or more of the nine disclosure exemptions that the law contains.

https://www.cdc.gov/od/foia/index.htm | Email: FOIARequests@cdc.gov
The CDC has posted an "E–Z Guide to FOIA Exemptions."

https://www.cdc.gov/od/foia/request/ez_guide/index.htm
The CDC posts frequently requested agency records in its electronic reading room.

https://foia.cdc.gov/app/ReadingRoomPopularDocument.aspx

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The CDC posts answers to questions on its website.

https://www.cdc.gov/cdc-info/ask-cdc.html

History
Some of the CDC's most important contributions to public health are described on the "CDC Timeline" web

page.

https://www.cdc.gov/museum/timeline/index.html
The David J. Sencer CDC Museum features award-winning permanent and changing exhibitions that focus on
public health topics, as well as on the history of the CDC. The museum is located at CDC headquarters in

Atlanta, GA, and it is associated with the Smithsonian Institution. Admission is free, and the museum welcomes

visitors Monday–Friday, excluding Federal holidays. Phone, 404-639-0830.

https://www.cdc.gov/museum/index.htm#

Influenza (Flu)
Information on and resources for influenza are available on the CDC website.

https://www.cdc.gov/flu/index.htm

Language Assistance
Information on language assistance services is available online for readers of Arabic, Chinese, Farsi, French,

German, Haitian Creole, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Tagalog, and

Vietnamese speakers.

https://www.cdc.gov/other/language-assistance.html

Library
The Stephen B. Thacker CDC Library helps the advancement of science and public health and safety through

information. It provides a full range of information services and products to support public health research,

policy, and action. The Library, which comprises the headquarters library in Atlanta and six branches, serves CDC

employees nationwide, as well as employees working in international locations.

http://www.cdc.gov/library

Lyme Disease
Lyme disease is the most common vector-borne disease in the United States. The bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi

is the most common cause of the disease. Infected blacklegged ticks transmit the bacterium to people. Typical

Lyme Disease symptoms include fever, headache, fatigue, and a characteristic skin rash called erythema migrans.

https://www.cdc.gov/lyme/index.html

Podcasts
The Public Health Media Library's online holdings include recent and featured CDC podcasts.

https://tools.cdc.gov/medialibrary/index.aspx#/landing/mediatype/Podcast/language/english/page/1/sort/desc/
group/0

Publications
Many publications are accessible on the CDC's website.

https://www.cdc.gov/publications

Reports
The monthly report "CDC Vital Signs" is released on the first Tuesday of every month. Past editions addressed

such topics as colorectal and breast cancer screening; obesity, alcohol and tobacco use; HIV testing; motor

vehicle safety; cardiovascular disease; teen pregnancy and infections associated with health care; and foodborne

diseases. The report is also available in Spanish.
https://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns?Sort=Date%3A%3Adesc
The CDC prepares the "Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report," which it uses for scientific publication of

accurate, authoritative, objective, reliable, timely, and useful public health information and recommendations.

Educators, epidemiologists and other scientists, physicians and nurses, public health practitioners, and

researchers and laboratorians regularly read the report.

https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/index.html | Email: mmwrq@cdc.gov

Social Media
The CDC maintains a robust social media presence online. Digital tools are also accessible on its "Social Media at

CDC" web page.

https://www.cdc.gov/socialmedia

Travel Health Notices
The CDC posts travel health notices on its website.

https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices

Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
VAERS is an early warning system that monitors the safety of vaccines after the U.S. Food and Drug

Administration (FDA) has authorized or licensed them for use. The CDC and FDA comanage VAERS.

https://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/ensuringsafety/monitoring/vaers/index.html
The CDC has posted an instructional video for searching the VAERS by using the search tool WONDER (Wide-

ranging Online Data for Epidemiologic Research).

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cOH7cFWS7o4

  The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
7500 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21244


410-786-3000

http://www.cms.gov


  ADMINISTRATOR                                            Chiquita Brooks-LaSure


  Principal Deputy Administrator                           Jonathan Blum




  Chief of Staff                                           Erin Richardson


  Chief Operating Officer                                  Jonathan Blum


https://www.cms.gov/About-CMS/Leadership
  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) posts an organizational chart in Portable Document

Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.cms.gov/About-CMS/Agency-
Information/CMSLeadership/Downloads/CMS_Organizational_Chart.pdf
The (CMS) administers the Medicare program and works in partnership with State governments to administer

Medicaid, the Children's Health Insurance Program, and health insurance portability standards.

https://www.cms.gov/About-CMS/About-CMS.html
The CMS has additional responsibilities. They include the administrative simplification standards of the Health

Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA); quality standards in long-term care facilities

(nursing homes) through the survey and certification process; and clinical laboratory quality standards as

described in the Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments.

https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-kit



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Blog
The CMS has an official blog on its website.

https://www.cms.gov/blog

Business Opportunities
The CMS posts contracting opportunities.

https://www.cms.gov/about-cms/contracting-with-cms/contractinggeneralinformation

Career Opportunities
For information on career opportunities, visit the "Careers at CMS" web page.

https://www.cms.gov/About-CMS/Career-Information/CareersatCMS
In 2020, the CMS ranked 93d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE70

Contact Information
The "Contact CMS" web page has phone numbers and web links to help visitors find answers to Medicare-

related questions or solutions for program-related issues.

https://www.cms.gov/about-cms/agency-information/contactcms

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the CMS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible
online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/centers-for-medicare-medicaid-services

Forms
Many CMS forms are accessible online.

https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/CMS-Forms/CMS-Forms/CMS-Forms-List

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
To help health care providers understand the Medicare and Medicaid electronic health records (EHR) incentive

programs, CMS has compiled a comprehensive list of FAQs and answers.

https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/FAQ

Glossary
The CMS maintains a glossary that explains terms found on its website.

https://www.cms.gov/glossary
The "Acronyms" web page contains a list of acronyms that are found on the CMS website, as well as other

acronyms that are used frequently. An acronym is a term formed from the initial letter or letters of each of the

major parts of a longer compound term.

https://www.cms.gov/acronyms

History
The CMS website gives a short history of the agency's programs.

https://www.cms.gov/about-cms/agency-information/history

Innovation Center
In 2010, Congress established the CMS Innovation Center (IC) to identify ways to improve healthcare quality and

to reduce costs in the Children’s Health Insurance Program and the Medicare and Medicaid programs. By using

Congressionally-mandated demonstrations and CMS initiatives and models, the IC has accelerated a shift in

priorities, a shift that rewards value over volume, in major programs belonging to the Nation's Government-

managed healthcare systems.

https://innovation.cms.gov/about

Insurance for Children
Millions of children and teens qualify for free or low-cost health and dental coverage through the Children's

Health Insurance Program and the Medicaid program.

https://www.insurekidsnow.gov

Low Income Subsidy
The "Limited Income and Resources" web page answers questions about the Low Income Subsidy (LIS). The LIS

helps Medicare participants pay for prescription drugs, and it lowers the costs of Medicare prescription drug

coverage.
https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prescription-Drug-Coverage/LimitedIncomeandResources

Medicaid
The CMS manages the website Medicaid.gov.

https://www.medicaid.gov

Medicare
The CMS manages the website Medicare.gov.

https://www.medicare.gov
The Medicare Coverage Database contains all national coverage determinations and local coverage

determinations, local articles, and proposed national coverage determination decisions. The database also

includes several other types of national coverage policy-related documents, including national coverage

analyses, coding analyses for labs, Medicare Evidence Development and Coverage Advisory Committee

proceedings, and Medicare coverage guidance documents.

https://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/search.aspx
The Medicare Learning Network has published the booklet "Medicare Fraud and Abuse: Prevent, Detect, Report"

The CMS posted the booklet on its website in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.stopmedicarefraud.gov/index.html

Newsroom
The CMS posts news items on its website.

https://www.cms.gov/newsroom

Regional Offices
Regional Offices are the State and local presence of the CMS. Regional field staff work with beneficiaries,

healthcare providers, State governments, CMS contractors, community groups, and others, to educate and

inform and to answer questions.

https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/ICD10/CMS-Regional-Offices

Social Media
CMS social media accounts are accessible on the "Press Kit" web page. CMS maintains a presence on Facebook,

LinkedIn, Twitter, and YouTube.

https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-kit

Spirit of CMS
To mark the 50th anniversary (1965–2015) of Medicare and Medicaid, the CMS produced the video "Spirit of

CMS." The stars are Amundam, Denita, Jim, Joanne, Jonathan, Lewis, and Rubi, each of whom is a dedicated

CMS civil servant.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jPk6Z5Llm2A

  The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.
Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Avenue, Silver Spring, MD 20993


888-463-6332

http://www.fda.gov


 COMMISSIONER                                             Robert M. Califf


 Principal Deputy Commissioner                            Janet Woodcock




 Chief of Staff                                           Julia C. Tierney


https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/fda-organization-charts/fda-overview-organization-chart-text-version



 The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) posts its organization chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for

viewing and downloading.

https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/fda-organization-charts/fda-overview-organization-chart
The FDA protects the public health by ensuring the safety, security, and efficacy of human and veterinary drugs,

biological products, medical devices, the Nation's food supply, cosmetics, and products that emit radiation. The

FDA also advances the public health by accelerating innovations to make medicines more effective and by

providing the public with accurate and science-based information on medicines and food to improve health. The

agency plays a significant role in the Nation's counterterrorism capability by ensuring the security of the food

supply.

https://www.fda.gov/about-fda



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Animal and Veterinary Recalls
The FDA posts animal and veterinary recall information—brand name, date of recall, company name, product

description, and the reason or problem—on its website.

https://www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/safety-health/recalls-withdrawals

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FDA records have

been assigned to record group 88.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/088.html?
_ga=2.123088395.1422664880.1655843766-1283406641.1650907417

Biologics
Biological products include allergenics, blood and blood components, gene therapy, recombinant therapeutic

proteins, somatic cells, tissues, and vaccines. Biologics can be composed of nucleic acids, proteins, or sugars, or

complex combinations of these substances, or may be living entities such as cells and tissues. They are isolated

from a variety of natural sources—animal, human, and microorganism—and may be produced by using

biotechnology and other recent technologies.

https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/resources-you-biologics

Birth Control
The FDA has posted a birth control chart that contains information about different options for avoiding

pregnancy.

https://www.fda.gov/consumers/free-publications-women/birth-control-chart

Career Opportunities
The FDA relies on attorneys, biologists, chemists, consumer safety officers, engineers, information technology

specialists, medical officers, microbiologists, pharmacists, pharmacologists, statisticians, and other professionals,

to carry out its mission.

https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/jobs-and-training-fda
In 2020, the FDA ranked 80th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Ranking.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE36

Cell Phones
The FDA and Federal Communications Commission share the regulatory responsibilities for regulating cell

phones. The FDA has posted four simple steps to minimize exposure to radio frequency energy when using a

cell phone.

https://www.fda.gov/radiation-emitting-products/home-business-and-entertainment-products/cell-phones

Cigarettes
The FDA describes cigarettes with three words: attractive, addictive, and deadly. Cigarettes are designed to be

attractive and addictive. The FDA's infographic "How a Cigarette is Engineered" explains the role design plays in

attraction and addiction.

https://www.fda.gov/tobacco-products/products-ingredients-components/how-cigarette-engineered

Consumers
The FDA posts science-based health and safety information that consumers may find helpful.

https://www.fda.gov/consumers

Contact Information
Contact information and resources are posted on the "Contact FDA" web page.
https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/contact-fda

Cosmetics
The FDA posts answers to questions that consumers frequently ask about cosmetic safety and regulation on its

"Cosmetics FAQs" web page.

https://www.fda.gov/cosmetics/resources-consumers-cosmetics/cosmetics-faqs

Drugs
The FDA maintains drug databases and has a lot to say about drug safety.

https://www.fda.gov/drugs

En Español
Important sections of the FDA's website are available in Spanish.

https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/fda-en-espanol
FDA press announcements are available in Spanish.

https://www.fda.gov/news-events/fda-newsroom/comunicados-de-prensa

Federal Register
Documents that the FDA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/food-and-drug-administration

Food
The FDA has a lot to say about food safety and healthy foods.

https://www.fda.gov/food

Foodborne Illnesses
The FDA regulates human and animal food. It also posts information on recent outbreaks of foodborne illness.

https://www.fda.gov/food/recalls-outbreaks-emergencies/outbreaks-foodborne-illness

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires of the FDA to disclose records that any person requests in writing; however, some records (or

parts of them) may be shielded by one or more of the nine disclosure exemptions that the law contains.

https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/freedom-information
Before submitting a formal FOIA request in writing, please search for the desired information in the electronic

reading room. Records containing the desired information may be posted already on the FDA website, and,

therefore, they may be accessible immediately and free of charge.

https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/freedom-information/electronic-reading-room

Medical Devices
The FDA gives advice on medical devices and has a lot to say about safety and recalls.

https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices

Press Announcements
The FDA posts press announcements.

https://www.fda.gov/news-events/fda-newsroom/press-announcements

Radiation-Emitting Products
The FDA has posted a table containing examples of radiation-emitting products and a diagram showing the

overlap of FDA enforcement authorities for these products.

https://www.fda.gov/media/77753/download

Recalls / Market Withdrawals / Safety Alerts
Information from press releases and other public notices on certain recalls of FDA-regulated products is

collected and posted online.

https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts

Social Media
The FDA has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/FDA
The FDA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/US_FDA
The FDA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/AHRQHealthTV

 The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Health      Resources                                                 and            Services
Administration
5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857


301-443-3376

http://www.hrsa.gov


 ADMINISTRATOR                                            Carole Johnson


 Deputy Administrator                                     Diana Espinosa




 Chief of Staff                                           Jordan Grossman


https://www.hrsa.gov/about/organization/key-staff.html



 The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.
The Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) posts an organization chart in Portable Document

Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.hrsa.gov/about/organization/org-chart.html
The HRSA improves access to health care by strengthening the health care workforce, building healthy

communities, and achieving health equity. HRSA programs make health care accessible to people who are

geographically isolated or economically or medically vulnerable. It supports the training of health professionals,

the distribution of providers to areas where they are needed most, and improvements in health care delivery.

The agency also oversees organ, bone marrow, and cord blood donations; compensates individuals harmed by

vaccination; and maintains databases that protect against health care abuse, fraud, malpractice, and waste.

https://www.hrsa.gov/about/index.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that HRSA records have

been assigned to record group 512.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/512.html

Data
The HRSA maintains an online data warehouse.

https://data.hrsa.gov

Career Opportunities
The HRSA posts career opportunities on its "Human Resources" web page.

https://www.hrsa.gov/hr
In 2020, the HRSA ranked 51st among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Ranking.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE34

Contact Information
The address for HRSA headquarters, electronic contact forms, email addresses, and phone numbers are

accessible on the "Contact HRSA" web page.

https://www.hrsa.gov/about/contact/index.html

Federal Register
Documents that the HRSA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/health-resources-and-services-administration

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires of the HRSA to disclose agency records that any person properly requests in writing. Certain

records, or parts of them, may be shielded, however, from disclosure by one of the nine exemptions that the

statute contains.

https://www.hrsa.gov/foia

Organ Donation and Transplantation
The HRSA manages the website OrganDonor.gov, which provides the public with U.S. Government information

on organ donation and transplantation.

https://www.organdonor.gov

Social Media
The HRSA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/HRSAgov
The HRSA has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/HRSAgov
The HRSA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/HRSAtube/videos

  The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Indian Health Service
5600 Fishers Lane Rockville, MD 20857


301-443-3593

http://www.ihs.gov


  DIRECTOR                                                  Elizabeth A. Fowler, Acting


  Deputy Director                                           Benjamin Smith


https://www.ihs.gov/aboutihs/keyleaders



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Indian Health Service (IHS) organizational structure is composed of two major office groups: headquarters

offices and regional offices, which are called areas.

https://www.ihs.gov/aboutihs/organizationalstructure
The Indian Health Service, as part of the Public Health Service, provides a comprehensive health services delivery

system for American Indians and Alaska Natives. It helps Native American tribes develop their health programs;

facilitates and assists tribes in coordinating health planning and obtaining and utilizing health resources available
through Federal, State, and local programs, in operating comprehensive health programs and evaluating them;

and provides comprehensive health care services, including hospital and ambulatory medical care, preventive

and rehabilitative services, and development of community sanitation facilities.

https://www.ihs.gov/aboutihs



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The IHS website has an alphabetical index to help visitors search for specific topics or browse content that aligns

with their interests.

https://www.ihs.gov/atoz/a

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that IHS records have

been assigned to record group 513.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/513.html?
_ga=2.129907845.849221083.1656359997-1283406641.1650907417

Blog
The IHS maintains a blog on its "IHS Blog" web page.

https://www.ihs.gov/newsroom/ihs-blog

Career Opportunities
For information on employment, visit the "Career Opportunities" web page.

https://www.ihs.gov/careeropps
In 2020, the IHS ranked 326th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Ranking.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE37

Contact Information
The IHS maintains a "Contact Information" web page that has an electronic "Contact Us" form. For claims-related

questions, call the Health Care Services Corporation. Phone, 800-225-0241.

https://www.ihs.gov/contactus
ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABLITY—An electronic message form is available on the "Environmental

Sustainability" website.

https://www.ihs.gov/sustainability/contactus
MEDIA—Call or email the Public Affairs Office. Phone, 301-443-3593.

Email: newsroom@ihs.gov
RECRUITMENT—The IHS posts information for contacting IHS recruiters of healthcare professionals.

https://www.ihs.gov/careeropps/contactrecruiter | Email: ihsrecruiters@ihs.gov
Events
The IHS maintains an events calendar on its "IHS Calendar" web page.

https://www.ihs.gov/ihscalendar

Environmental Sustainability
The IHS strives to meet all Federal requirements for health and sustainability. Beyond those requirements, the

IHS has adopted a forward-leaning environmental posture with regard to activities and programs. To minimize

adverse effects on the environment, IHS contractors, suppliers, and staff introduce ecological considerations

early when they plan agency operations and implement them. The "Environmental Sustainability" website

informs the general public about IHS efforts and things that concerned citizens can do to heighten their

sustainability awareness.

https://www.ihs.gov/sustainability

Factsheets
IHS factsheets contain general information on the agency and on specific healthcare topics concerning American

Indian and Alaska Native people.

https://www.ihs.gov/newsroom/factsheets

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the IHS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/indian-health-service

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires of the IHS to disclose agency records that a person requests in writing. One of the nine

exemptions that the statute contains may shield, however, some records, or parts of them, from disclosure.

https://www.ihs.gov/FOIA
The FOIA electronic (eFOIA) reading room serves as the central source of FOIA-related documents that are in

digital format.

https://www.ihs.gov/FOIA/readingroom/

Locations
The IHS is divided into twelve physical areas of the United States: Alaska, Albuquerque, Bemidji, Billings,

California, Great Plains, Nashville, Navajo, Oklahoma, Phoenix, Portland, and Tucson. To learn more about each

of these areas, about its facilities and culture, visit the "Locations" web page.

https://www.ihs.gov/locations

Newsroom
Announcements, congressional testimony, factsheets, press releases, and speeches are available online.

https://www.ihs.gov/newsroom | Email: newsroom@ihs.gov
Social Media
The IHS has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/IndianHealthService
The IHS posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/IHSgov/feed

  The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




National Institutes of Health
1 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892


301-496-4000

http://www.nih.gov


  DIRECTOR                                                  Lawrence A. Tabak, Acting


  Principal Deputy Director                                 Tara A. Schwetz, Acting


https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/who-we-are/nih-leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The National Institutes of Health seeks to expand fundamental knowledge about the nature and behavior of living

systems and to apply that knowledge for improved health, longer life, and for reducing disability and illness.


ORGANIZATION
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is made up of 27 different components called Institutes and Centers. Each

component has its own research agenda, typically focusing on particular diseases or body systems. Of these

components, 24 of them receive their funding directly from the U.S. Congress and administrate their own

budgets.

https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/who-we-are/organization
The Office of the Director sets policy for the NIH and plans, manages, and coordinates the programs and

activities of NIH Institutes and Centers.

https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do/nih-almanac/office-director-nih
The organizational chart of the Office of the Director is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing

and downloading.

https://oma.od.nih.gov/IC_Organization_Chart/OD%20Organizational%20Chart.pdf

ACTIVITIES
The NIH supports biomedical and behavioral research domestically and abroad, conducts research in NIH
laboratories and clinics, trains research scientists, and develops and disseminates credible, science-based health

information to the public.

https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do

  C E N T E R S—


https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do/nih-almanac/nih-organization

Clinical Research
The Clinical Center is the clinical research hospital for the NIH. By doing clinical research, investigators translate

laboratory discoveries into better treatments, therapies, and interventions to improve the Nation's health. The

Center conducts clinical and laboratory research and trains future clinical investigators. Nearly 500,000

volunteers from across the Nation have participated in clinical research studies since the Center opened in 1953.

About 1,500 clinical research studies are currently in progress.

http://clinicalcenter.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the Clinical Center. Phone, 301-496-4000.



Complementary and Integrative Health
The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health defines the utility and safety of complementary

and integrative health interventions and their roles in improving health and health care. This science-based

information helps the public, health care professionals, and health policymakers make decisions on the use and

integration of complementary and integrative health approaches.

https://nccih.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health.
  Phone, 888-644-6226.



Global Health
The Fogarty International Center addresses global health challenges through innovative and collaborative

research and training programs. It also supports and advances the NIH mission through international

partnerships.

https://www.fic.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the Fogarty International Center. Phone, 301-496-2075.



Information Technology
The Center for Information Technology provides, coordinates, and manages information technology to advance

computational science.

http://www.cit.nih.gov
  For further information, contact the Center for Information Technology. Phone, 301-496-5703.



Scientific Review
The Center for Scientific Review (CSR) organizes the peer review groups that evaluate the majority of grant

applications submitted to the NIH. These groups include experienced and respected researchers from across the

country and abroad. Since 1946, CSR has ensured that NIH grant applications receive fair, independent, expert,

and timely reviews—free from inappropriate influences—so the NIH can fund the most promising research. CSR

also receives all incoming applications and assigns them to the appropriate Centers and Institutes that fund

grants.

http://public.csr.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the Center for Scientific Review. Phone, 301-435-1111.



Translational Sciences Advancement
The National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences focuses on what is common across diseases and the

translational process. The Center emphasizes innovation and deliverables, relying on data and new technologies

to develop, demonstrate, and disseminate advances in translational science that tangibly improve human health.

https://ncats.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences. Phone,
  301-435-0888.



  I N S T I T U T E S—


https://www.nih.gov/institutes-nih/list-institutes-centers

Aging
The National Institute on Aging (NIA) conducts and supports research on the aging process, age-related

diseases, and other special problems and needs of older people. It is also the lead NIH Institute for research on

age-related cognitive change and Alzheimer's disease. The NIA provides information on aging to the scientific

community, health care providers, and the public.

http://www.nia.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute on Aging. Phone, 301-496-1752.



Alcohol Abuse / Alcoholism
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism leads the national effort to reduce alcohol-related

problems by conducting and supporting biomedical and behavioral research into the causes, consequences,

prevention, and treatment of alcohol-use disorders.
http://www.niaaa.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Phone,
  301-443-3885.



Allergy / Infectious Diseases
The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases conducts and supports research to study the causes of

infectious diseases and immune-mediated diseases and to develop better means of preventing, diagnosing, and

treating these diseases.

http://www.niaid.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. Phone,
  866-284-4107 or 301-496-5717.



Arthritis / Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases
The National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases supports research on the causes,

treatment, and prevention of arthritis and musculoskeletal and skin diseases; the basic and clinical training of

scientists to carry out this research; and the dissemination of information on research progress.

http://www.niams.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin
  Diseases. Phone, 877-226-4267 or 301-496-8190.



Biomedical Imaging / Bioengineering
The National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering supports research, training, and the

dissemination of research advances for accelerating the development and application of biomedical

technologies to improve the detection, treatment, and prevention of disease. It integrates the physical and

engineering sciences with the life sciences to advance basic research and medical care.

http://www.nibib.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering.
  Phone, 301-496-3500.



Biomedical Library Services / Information Resources
The National Library of Medicine, the world's largest biomedical library, serves as the Nation's principal medical

information source, providing medical library services and extensive online information resources to scientists,

practitioners, and the general public. It conducts, fosters, and supports research and training in biomedical

informatics and supports development and dissemination of clinical terminology standards.

http://www.nlm.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Library of Medicine. Phone, 301-496-6308.
Cancer
The National Cancer Institute (NCI) is the Federal Government's principal agency for cancer research and

training. It coordinates the National Cancer Program, which conducts and supports research, training, health

information dissemination, and other activities associated with diagnosing, preventing, treating, and finding the

cause of cancer and with the continuing care of cancer patients and their families.

http://www.cancer.gov

  For further information, contact the Cancer Information Service. Phone, 800-422-6237.



Child Health / Human Development
The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development conducts and supports

basic, clinical, and epidemiological research on the reproductive, rehabilitative, neurobiological, developmental,

and behavioral processes that determine the health of children, adults, families, and communities.

http://www.nichd.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
  Human Development. Phone, 800-370-2943.



Deafness / Other Communication Disorders
The National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders conducts and supports biomedical and

behavioral research and training on normal and disordered processes of hearing, balance, taste, smell, voice,

speech, and language. The Institute also makes science-based health information publicly available, and it

supports efforts to create devices that substitute for lost or impaired sensory and communication function.

http://www.nidcd.nih.gov | Email: NIDCDinfo@nidcd.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication
  Disorders. Phone, 800-241-1044. TTY, 800-241-1055.



Dental and Craniofacial Research
The National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research funds research on dental, oral, and craniofacial health

and disorders. It also conducts research in its own laboratories and clinic, supports research training, and

promotes the timely transfer of research-based knowledge and its implications for health to researchers, to

health professionals, to patients, and to the general public.

http://www.nidcr.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research. Phone,
  301-496-4261.



Diabetes / Digestive and Kidney Diseases
The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases conducts, supports, and coordinates

research and research training. It also offers science-based information on diabetes and other endocrine and

metabolic diseases; on digestive diseases, nutritional disorders, weight control, and obesity; and on kidney,

urologic and blood diseases.

https://www.niddk.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
  Diseases. Phone, 301-496-3583.



Drug Abuse
The National Institute on Drug Abuse supports and conducts basic and clinical research on drug use, its

consequences, and the underlying neurobiological, behavioral, and social mechanisms. The Institute also ensures

effective translation and dissemination of scientific findings to improve the prevention and treatment of

substance-use disorders, and it works at raising the public's awareness that addiction is a type of brain disorder.

http://www.drugabuse.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute on Drug Abuse. Phone, 877-643-2644.



Environmental Health Sciences
The National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences supports research that explores how the environment

affects people's health. Its research centers on environmental exposures and understanding their effects on

human biology and health with an emphasis on disease and disability prevention. The Institute also houses the

national toxicology program, a cross-agency organization that coordinates toxicity testing across the Federal

Government.

http://www.niehs.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. Phone,
  919-541-3345.



Eye and Vision Diseases
The National Eye Institute conducts, fosters, and supports research on the causes, natural history, prevention,

diagnosis, and treatment of disorders of the eye and visual system. It also directs the National Eye Health

Education Program.

http://www.nei.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Eye Institute. Phone, 301-496-5248.



General Medical Sciences
The National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) supports basic research that increases understanding

of biological processes and lays the foundation for advances in disease diagnosis, treatment, and prevention.
NIGMS-funded scientists investigate how living systems work at a range of levels, from molecules and cells to

tissues, to whole organisms and populations. The Institute also supports research in clinical areas, primarily those

that affect multiple organ systems. To assure the vitality and productivity of the research enterprise, the NIGMS

provides leadership in training the next generation of scientists, in diversifying the scientific workforce, and in

developing research capacities throughout the country.

http://www.nigms.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of General Medical Sciences. Phone, 301-496-
  7301.



Heart, Lung, and Blood Diseases
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute provides leadership for a global program in sleep disorders, blood

resources, and diseases of the heart, blood vessels, blood, and lungs. It conducts, fosters, and supports a

comprehensive program of basic research, clinical investigations and trials, observational and implementation

science studies, as well as demonstration and education projects.

http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Phone, 301-592-
  8573.



Human Genome Research
The National Human Genome Research Institute supports research to uncover the role that the genome plays in

human health and disease; studies on the ethical, legal, and social implications of genomics research for

individuals, families, and communities; and the application of genomics research to medical care.

http://www.genome.gov

  For further information, contact the National Human Genome Research Institute. Phone, 301-402-
  0911.



Mental Health
The National Institute of Mental Health works to transform the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.

Through basic and clinical research, it advances the prevention, recovery, and cure of mental conditions that

disable many Americans.

http://www.nimh.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Mental Health. Phone, 866-615-6464.



Minority Health / Health Disparities
The National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities leads scientific research to improve minority

health and eliminate health disparities. The Institute plans, reviews, coordinates, and evaluates all minority health
and health disparities research and activities of the NIH; conducts and supports research on minority health and

health disparities; promotes and supports the training of a diverse research workforce; translates and

disseminates research information; and fosters innovative collaborations and partnerships.

http://www.nimhd.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities.
  Phone, 301-402-1366.



Neurological Disorders / Stroke
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke works to better understand the brain and spinal cord

and to use that knowledge to mitigate the effects of neurological disease. It conducts, promotes, coordinates,

and guides research and training on the causes, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of neurological disorders

and stroke. It also supports basic, translational, and clinical research in related scientific areas.

http://www.ninds.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Phone,
  301-496-5751.



Nursing Research
The National Institute of Nursing Research supports clinical and basic research and research training to build the

scientific foundation for clinical practice, to prevent disease and disability, to manage and eliminate symptoms

caused by illness, to enhance end-of-life and palliative care, and to train the next generation of nurse scientists.

http://www.ninr.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Nursing Research. Phone, 301-496-0207.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Almanac
The NIH Almanac is a reliable source of information on the Federal Government’s principal medical research

agency. Federal employees, journalists, lawmakers, and members of the general public consult the almanac

when seeking NIH-related information.

https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do/nih-almanac/about-nih-almanac

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that NIH records have

been assigned to record group 443.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/443.html?
_ga=2.103502661.453707337.1656617425-1283406641.1650907417
Career Opportunities
For information on employment opportunities, visit the "Jobs at NIH" web page.

https://hr.nih.gov/jobs
In 2020, the NIH ranked 63d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Ranking.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE38

Climate Change
The NIH is concerned about climate change for these reasons: "[Its] effects worsen many existing illnesses,

diseases and conditions, by increasing exposure to increased temperatures, introducing new pests and

pathogens, and impairing air quality and water resources. As the planet warms, oceans expand and sea level

rises, floods and droughts become more frequent and intense, and heat waves and hurricanes become more

severe. Certain populations—including children, the elderly, the poor, and those with underlying health

conditions—are at increased risk for health impacts from climate change. Climate-related events can also stress

health care infrastructure and delivery systems." To learn more, visit the website of the National Institute of

Environmental Health Sciences and see the "Climate Change and Human Health" web page.

https://www.niehs.nih.gov/research/programs/climatechange/index.cfm
The National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences maintains a curated and integrated bibliographic

database of global peer-reviewed research and gray literature on the science of climate effects on human

health.

https://tools.niehs.nih.gov/cchhl/index.cfm

Contact Information
Information for contacting the NIH by mail or phone is available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/contact-us

Environmental Health
The National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences maintains a "Brochures and Factsheets" web page.

https://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/materials/index.cfm

Events
The NIH posts upcoming events on its "Calendar of Events" web page.

https://calendar.nih.gov

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the NIH recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/national-institutes-of-health

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires of the NIH to disclose records that any person requests in writing; however, some records (or
parts of them) may be shielded by one or more of the nine disclosure exemptions that the law contains.

https://www.nih.gov/institutes-nih/nih-office-director/office-communications-public-liaison/freedom-
information-act-office | Email: nihfoia@mail.nih.gov
The NIH maintains a FOIA library that contains both on-site and electronic records.

https://www.nih.gov/institutes-nih/nih-office-director/office-communications-public-liaison/freedom-
information-act-office/nih-foia-library

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The NIH posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/frequently-asked-questions

History
A short history of the NIH is available online.

https://history.nih.gov/display/history/A+Short+History+of+the+National+Institutes+of+Health
The DeWitt Stetten, Jr., Museum of Medical Research, also known as the NIH Stetten Museum, preserves and

interprets the material culture of the NIH's scientific work through physical and virtual exhibits.

https://history.nih.gov/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=1016361

News
The NIH posts news releases on its website.

https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases
The monthly newsletter "NIH News In Health" contains practical consumer health news and information that is

based on NIH research.

https://newsinhealth.nih.gov

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.nih.gov/site-map

Social Media
The NIH tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/NIH
The NIH has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/nih.gov
The NIH posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/nihod

Spanish
The NIH posts important health information in Spanish.

https://salud.nih.gov

Staff Directory
The NIH enterprise directory allows users to search for staff members by email address, name, or phone

number.

https://ned.nih.gov/search

Visitor Information
Maps and information on access and security, parking, tours, the campus shuttle, and more are available on the

NIH website.

https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/visitor-information

Weight Management
The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases' website has weight management

information and resources.

https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/weight-management

 The above Sources of Information were updated 7–2022.




Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration
5600 Fishers Lane Rockville, MD 20857


240-276-2130

http://www.samhsa.gov


 ADMINISTRATOR                                           Miriam E. Delphin-Rittmon


 Deputy Assistant Secretary                              Tom Coderre, Acting


https://www.samhsa.gov/about-us/who-we-are/leadership



 The above list of key personnel was updated 7–2022.



The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration alleviates the pain and mitigates the harm that

substance abuse and mental illness visit upon communities nationwide.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
In 1992, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) was established as an

agency of the Public Health Service (106 Stat. 325) by Public Law 102–321, which also is cited as the "ADAMHA

Reorganization Act."

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-106/pdf/STATUTE-106-Pg323.pdf
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) posts its organizational chart in
Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/samhsa-organization-chart.pdf

ACTIVITIES
The SAMHSA leads public health efforts to advance the Nation's behavioral health. It funds State and local

service agencies through grants and formulas; collects data and makes available surveillance reports on the

effect of behavioral health on Americans; leads efforts to offer public education on mental illness and substance

abuse prevention, treatment, and recovery; regulates and oversees national behavioral health programs; and

promotes practice improvement in community-based, primary, and specialty care settings.

http://www.samhsa.gov/about-us



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration (ADAMHA) was renamed the SAMHSA in 1992. The

"Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that ADAMHA records have

been assigned to record group 511.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/511.html?
_ga=2.205882451.1986076236.1657144025-1283406641.1650907417

Blog
The SAMHSA posts a blog.

https://www.samhsa.gov/blog

Career Opportunities
SAMHSA seeks qualified applicants to advance the Nation's behavioral health, to improve the lives of individuals

suffering from mental disorders and substance abuse, and to assist members of their families. Visit the "Working

at SAMHSA" learn more about starting career at SAMHSA.

http://www.samhsa.gov/about-us/jobs-internships
In 2020, the SAMHSA ranked 410th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's

Best Places To Work Agency Ranking.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE32

Contact Information
Links, phone numbers, and postal and email addresses are available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.samhsa.gov/about-us/contact-us

Data
The Administration maintains five collections of data: Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality reports,

client level data, mental health facilities data, population data, and substance abuse facilities data.
https://www.samhsa.gov/data

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the SAMHSA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/substance-abuse-and-mental-health-services-administration

Find Treatment
The "Find Treatment" web page has locator tools for behavioral health, early serious mental illness, opioid, and

substance use treatment services. It also has a directory for opioid treatment programs. For people who need to

talk, crisis line, helpline, and lifeline phone numbers are available on the same web page.

https://www.samhsa.gov/find-treatment

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires the SAMHSA to disclose records that any person requests in writing; however, some records

(or parts of them) may be shielded by one or more of the nine disclosure exemptions that the law contains.

https://www.samhsa.gov/freedom-information-act-foia

Newsroom
Press announcements, quarterly newsletters, and media highlights of initiatives and other activities are available

in the newsroom.

https://www.samhsa.gov/newsroom | Email: media@samhsa.hhs.gov

Offices / Centers
SAMHSA offices and centers provide leadership and assistance for quality behavioral health services. They

support States, territories, tribes, communities, and local organizations through grants and contract awards.

https://www.samhsa.gov/about-us/who-we-are/offices-centers

Programs / Campaigns
SAMHSA’s programs and campaigns inform, train, and provide technical assistance to improve the quality and

delivery of behavioral health services nationwide.

https://www.samhsa.gov/programs

Publications / Digital Products
Hundreds of publications are available on the SAMHSA website.

https://store.samhsa.gov

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.samhsa.gov/sitemap

Social Media
The SAMHSA uses various forms of social media to connect with the online community and engage people.
     https://www.samhsa.gov/about-us/social-media

     Suicide Prevention
     The Administration funds the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline. Phone, 800-273-8255.

     https://suicidepreventionlifeline.org/?WT_ac=AD20110315NSPL
     Help is available in Spanish, too.

     https://suicidepreventionlifeline.org/help-yourself/en-espanol

        The above Sources of Information were updated 7–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                            Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                   Search                                                    Search
                                                                                             Search




                                             Administration for Children and Families




The United States Government Manual




     ADMINISTRATION FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES
    330 C Street SW., Washington, DC 20201


    202-401-9200

    http://www.acf.hhs.gov


      ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR CHILDREN AND FAMILIES                                            January Contreras


      Deputy Assistant Secretary                                                               S. Jeffrey Hild
https://www.acf.hhs.gov/about/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Administration posts an organizational chart on its "Offices" web page.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/about/offices
The Administration for Children and Families administers programs and provides advice to the Secretary on issues

relevant to children, youth, and families; child support enforcement; community services; developmental disabilities;

family assistance; Native American assistance; and refugee resettlement.

http://www.acf.hhs.gov/about/what-we-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Administration records

have been assigned to record group 292. The guide does not contain, however, a description that is associated with

this record group. In anticipation of the transfer of archival records, record group 292 was created; however, no

transfer had occurred before the guide was last updated.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/201-to-300.html?
_ga=2.136512308.524104603.1653670220-2108958244.1650495806

Career Opportunities
The Administration employs professionals with diverse academic and social backgrounds in a broad range of career

fields and positions.

http://www.acf.hhs.gov/about/jobs-contracts
In 2020, the Administration ranked 230th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's

Best Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE90

Contact Information
The Administration's "Contact Us" web page is loaded with mailing addresses and phone numbers. Hotlines and

helplines, program and regional office contacts, and State and local agency contacts, are included on the web page.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/about/contact-us

Data / Research
The Administration's data and reports highlight its various programs and grants for improving the lives of the Nation's

children, families, communities, and individuals.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/acf-data-research

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the Administration recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/children-and-families-administration

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded from

disclosure by one or more of nine exemptions that are contained within the statute.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/freedom-information-act

History
The Administration for Children and Families was created on April 15, 1991. A short history of the Administration is

available online.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/about/history

Homelessness
The Administration's website has information on its programs and services for the homeless and for those at risk of

becoming homeless.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/family-homelessness

Hotlines
The Administration supports nationwide crisis hotlines for child abuse, domestic violence, human trafficking, and

runaways. The Health Insurance Marketplace Call Center assists callers with choosing coverage that provides the best

protection and benefits for them and family members, as well as for their businesses.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/acf-hotlines

News
The Administration posts press releases.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/media/press

Resource Library
The Administration maintains an online library of resources.

https://www.acf.hhs.gov/resource-library

Social Media
The Administration has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/ChildrenAndFamilies
The Administration tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/acfhhs
The Administration posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/usgovacf
     State Human Services Agencies
     The Administration posts contact information for human services agencies by State and territory, organized according

     to region.

     https://www.acf.hhs.gov/state-human-services-agencies

        The above Sources of Information were updated 5–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                            Administration for Community Living




The United States Government Manual




     ADMINISTRATION FOR COMMUNITY LIVING
    330 C Street SW., Washington, DC 20201


    202-401-4634

    TTY, 800-877-8339

    http://www.acl.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         Alison Barkoff, Acting


      Principal Deputy Administrator                                                        Alison Barkoff
https://acl.gov/about-acl/organization/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Administration posts its organizational chart online, which is accessible on the "Organization" web page.

https://acl.gov/about-acl/organization
The Administration for Community Living administers programs and advises the Secretary on issues relevant to people

with disabilities, their families and caregivers, and the independence, well-being, and health of older adults.

https://acl.gov/about-acl



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Focus Areas, Networks, and Programs
An alphabetical index of areas of focus, networks, and programs is available online.

https://acl.gov/programs/acl-programs-z

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" does not indicate a record group to

which the Administration's records have been assigned.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records#search

Blog
The Administration's Blog presents diverse perspectives on trends and issues related to older adults and people with

disabilities.

https://acl.gov/news-and-events/acl-blog

Career Opportunities
For information on employment opportunities, visit the "Working at ACL" web page.

http://www.acl.gov/About_ACL/CareerOpportunities/Index.aspx
In 2020, the Administration ranked 368th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's

Best Places To Work Agency Ranking.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE01

Contact Information
Phone numbers and an electronic message board are available on the "Contact Us" web page. Addresses for regional

administrators also are accessible on the same web page.

https://acl.gov/contact

Data / Research
Data and statistics on older adults, as well as on persons with intellectual, physical, and developmental disabilities, are

available on the Administration's website.

https://acl.gov/aging-and-disability-in-america/data-and-research

Elder Care Services
The elder care locator is a public service that provides information on services for older adults and their families.

Online chat with an information specialist is also available Monday–Friday, 9 a.m.–8 p.m., eastern time. Phone, 800-

677-1116.

https://eldercare.acl.gov/Public/Index.aspx

Elder Justice
Visit the Elder Justice website to explore its online resources: data, research, response information, technical assistance,

and training.

https://elderjustice.acl.gov/#gsc.tab=0

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the Administration recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/community-living-administration

Finding Help
People often have questions about programs that are available in their States or communities, about which programs

would best suit their needs, and about program eligibility and how to enroll. A variety of resources are available to

help answer these questions and others.

https://acl.gov/help

Long-Term Care
Long-term care is a range of services and supports that help people meet their personal care needs—getting dressed,

driving to appointments, or making meals. Many people are not sure what services and supports are covered by

insurance, and they may be misinformed about Medicare coverage. The website LongTermCare.gov has resources to

bring clarity to insurance benefits, the services and supports that insurance covers, including those services and

supports that Medicare covers.

https://acl.gov/ltc

Older Indians
The "Older Indians" website delivers technical assistance resources to Title VI directors and serves as a Title VI

programs forum for increasing communication.

https://olderindians.acl.gov

Social Media
The Administration has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/aclgov
     The Administration tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/ACLgov
     The Administration posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/AoA25

        The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                         Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality




The United States Government Manual




     AGENCY FOR HEALTHCARE RESEARCH AND QUALITY
    5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857


    301-427-1364

    http://www.ahrq.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Robert O. Valdez


      Deputy Director                                                                       David Meyers
https://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/about/organization/orgchart/organizational-chart.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Agency posts it organization chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/about/organization/orgchart/organizational-chart.html
The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality produces evidence to make healthcare affordable, equitable, more

accessible, of a higher quality, and safer. It also works within the Department of Health and Human Services and with

other partners to ensure that the evidence is understood and used.

http://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/about/profile/index.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Agency for Healthcare

Research and Quality records have been assigned to record group 510.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/510.html

Career Opportunities
For information on employment opportunities, visit the "Careers at the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality"

web page.

https://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/about/careers/index.html
In 2020, the Agency ranked 86th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Ranking.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE33

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has a central mailing address and phone number for contacting the agency.

https://www.ahrq.gov/contact/index.html
The "AHRQ Key Contacts" web page has email addresses and phone numbers for contacting centers and offices.

https://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/about/organization/contacts/key-contacts.html

Core Competencies
The Agency seeks to improve the lives of patients and aims to help healthcare systems and professionals deliver care

that is safe and of high quality and value. The Agency accomplishes its mission by focusing on its three core

competencies: data and analytics, health systems research, and practice improvement.

https://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/corecompetencies/index.html

Data
Statistical portraits of health care delivery in the United States are available on the Agency's website.
    https://www.ahrq.gov/data/index.html

    Federal Register
    Documents that the Agency recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

    https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/agency-for-healthcare-research-and-quality

    Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
    The Agency posts answers to FAQs.

    https://info.ahrq.gov

    Most-Searched Topics
    Information on the Agency's most-searched topics is organized alphabetically on the "Topics" web page.

    https://www.ahrq.gov/topics/index.html

    Other Websites
    With the support of contracting staff, the Agency maintains additional subsites to fulfill its mission. A list of these sites

    and a link to a description of each site's focus are provided on the "Other AHRQ Web Sites" web page.

    https://www.ahrq.gov/cpi/about/otherwebsites/index.html

    Social Media
    The Agency has a Facebook account.

    https://www.facebook.com/ahrq.gov
    The Agency tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/ahrqnews
    The Agency posts videos on its YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/user/AHRQHealthTV

    Tools
    The Agency has practical and research-based tools and other resources to help healthcare organizations, providers,

    and others make care safer.

    https://www.ahrq.gov/tools/index.html

        The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                  Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry




The United States Government Manual




     AGENCY FOR TOXIC SUBSTANCES AND DISEASE REGISTRY
    MS E–61, 4770 Buford Highway NE., Atlanta, GA 30341


    770-488-0604

    http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Patrick Breysse


    https://www.cdc.gov/about/leadership/leaders/ncehatsdr.html
  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) posted an organizational chart in Portable Document

Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/docs/ATSDR_Org_Chart_External-508.pdf
The ATSDR, as part of the Public Health Service, reduces exposure to toxic substances—exposure to substances from

wastesites, unplanned releases, and other pollution sources that are present in the environment—which produce

adverse health effects and diminish the quality of life.

https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/about/index.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The Agency's website has an alphabetical index to help visitors search for specific topics or browse content that aligns

with their interests.

https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/az/a.html

Archived Records
The alphabetical index to the "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" includes a

reference to the ATSDR in record group 090, but no record group has been created for its records. Public Health

Service records have been assigned to record group 090.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-alpha/t.html

ATSDR in 60 Seconds
The ATSDR protects people from the health effects of chemical exposures. The Agency posted the 60-second video

"Dangerous Discovery" to help communicate the importance of its mission.

https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/videos/dangerous_discovery.html

Career Opportunities
Information and other resources for applicants are posted on the "Careers at the CDC" web pages.

https://jobs.cdc.gov/index.html

Climate Change
The ATSDR website has an "Extreme Heat Adaptation" web page, which features an informative map showing changes

in heat wave days from 1979 through 2016.

https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/placeandhealth/share/onemap_heat-crsci/extreme_heat_home.html

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has phone numbers, including an emergency response number. A Spanish language

option is also available on the web page.
     https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/contacts.html
     The "Regional Offices Mailing Addresses" web page has additional contact information.

     https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/dro/dro_contact.html

     Federal Register
     Documents that the Agency recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

     https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/agency-for-toxic-substances-and-disease-registry

     Internships / Training
     Information on internships and educational and training opportunities is available on the ATSDR website.

     https://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/environmentaleducation.html

     News
     The ATSDR posts media announcements on its "News Room" web page.

     Email: ATSDRmediainquiries@cdc.gov

     Toxicological Frequently Asked Questions (ToxFAQs)
     The "ToxFAQs" web page has summaries on hazardous substances that the Agency's Division of Toxicology

     developed. ATSDR toxicological profiles and public health statements are the sources of information on which the

     series relies. Each factsheet serves as a guide that is quick to read and easy to understand. ToxFAQs also answers

     FAQs on exposure to hazardous substances that are encountered near wastesites and their effects on human health.

     https://wwwn.cdc.gov/TSP/ToxFAQs/ToxFAQsLanding.aspx

     Toxic Substances Portal
     The portal provides easy access to the most relevant information on toxic substances and their effects on human

     health. The portal's web pages have an alphabetical ordering of documents on specific substances, toxicological

     information by health effect or chemical class, and toxicological information for specific audiences (community

     members, emergency responders, toxicological and health professionals, and health care providers).

     https://wwwn.cdc.gov/TSP/index.aspx

        The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility
Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                    Search
                                                                                            Search




                                           Centers for Disease Control and Prevention




The United States Government Manual




     CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION
    1600 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 30333


    800-232-4636

    http://www.cdc.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                                Rochelle P.Walensky


      Principal Deputy Director                                                               Debra Houry, Acting
https://www.cdc.gov/about/leadership.htm



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On July 1, 1946, the Communicable Disease Center opened its doors in Atlanta, GA, with the goal of stopping the

spread of malaria nationwide. With a budget of $10 million, its employees numbered fewer than 400. Shovels,

sprayers, and trucks were among the most important tools for slowing the disease's spread.

https://www.cdc.gov/about/history/index.html
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) posts an organizational chart online in Portable Document

Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.cdc.gov/about/pdf/organization/cdc-org-chart.pdf



ACTIVITIES
The CDC, as part of the Public Health Service, protects the public health of Americans by leading the national effort to

prevent and manage diseases and other preventable conditions and by responding to public health emergencies.

Within the CDC, the following five directorates lead efforts to diagnose, prevent, and treat public health hazards.


Infectious Diseases Research and Policies
The CDC oversees three infectious disease national centers. The National Center for Emerging and Zoonotic Infectious

Diseases focuses on diseases that have been known for many years, emerging diseases, and zoonotic diseases (i.e.,

those that spread from animals to people). The National Center for HIV/AIDS, Viral Hepatitis, STD and TB Prevention

eliminates, prevents, and controls disease, disability, and death caused by human immunodeficiency virus

infection/acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, non-HIV retroviruses, viral hepatitis, other sexually transmitted

diseases, and tuberculosis. The National Center for Immunization and Respiratory Diseases mitigates the effects of

disease, which include disability and death, through immunization and by controlling respiratory and related diseases.

https://www.cdc.gov/ddid/centers.html

Occupational Safety and Health
The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health conducts research to reduce worker illness and injury and to

advance worker well-being; promotes safe and healthy workers through interventions, recommendations, and building

capacity to address hazards; and enhances worker safety and health through collaborations that are global in scope.

http://www.cdc.gov/NIOSH

Noncommunicable Diseases Prevention
The CDC's current noninfectious disease priorities include marijuana use outcomes that affect health, mental health,

and the prevention of nonoccupational hearing loss. Its noninfectious disease services are provided by four national
centers: the National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities; the National Center for Chronic Disease

Prevention and Health Promotion; the National Center for Environmental Health / Agency for Toxic Substances and

Disease Registry; and the National Center for Injury Prevention and Control.

https://www.cdc.gov/about/leadership/leaders/ondieh.html

Public Health Preparedness and Response
The Center for Preparedness and Response helps the Nation prepare for and respond to urgent public health threats

by providing strategic direction, coordination, and support for CDC's terrorism preparedness and emergency response

activities.

http://www.cdc.gov/phpr

Public Health Science and Surveillance
The Public Health Science and Surveillance services—which include the National Center for Health Statistics and the

Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services (CSELS)—lead the effort in promoting and facilitating

science, surveillance, standards, and policies for reducing the burden of diseases in the United States and abroad. The

CSELS promotes collaboration among health professionals globally; supports educational, training, and professional

opportunities in epidemiology and public health science; maintains datasets and manages and preserves specimens;

facilitates the sharing of health information; and reports on emerging public health problems. Within the CDC, the

Office of Laboratory Science and Safety oversees and coordinates critical laboratory policies and operations; the Office

of Science serves as the CDC’s authority on scientific quality, integrity, and innovation.

https://www.cdc.gov/ddphss

Public Health Service and Implementation Science
One office and three centers lead the national effort to promote and facilitate science programs and policies for

identifying and responding to domestic and global public health threats. These four components are the Center for

Global Health; Center for Preparedness and Response; Center for State, Tribal, Local and Territorial Support; and the

Office of Minority Health and Health Equity.

https://www.cdc.gov/about/leadership/leaders/ddphsis.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
An alphabetical subject index helps visitors navigate the content of the CDC's website.

https://www.cdc.gov/az/a.html?CDC_AA_refVal=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.cdc.gov%2Faz%2Findex.html

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that CDC records have been

assigned to record group 442.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/442.html?_ga=2.23023485.794259431.1654643616-
1283406641.1650907417
Career Opportunities
The CDC is the leading national public health protection agency in the United States. It relies on professionals with

scientific and nonscientific expertise to protect Earth's human population from the threat of deadly diseases like Ebola,

HIV/AIDS, influenza, malaria, and tuberculosis. Most scientific and technical positions at the CDC are filled through the

Commissioned Corps of the Public Health Service, a uniformed service of the U.S. Government.

http://jobs.cdc.gov
In 2020, the CDC ranked 192d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE39

Climate Change
Together with other natural and anthropogenic health stressors, climate change affects human health and disease in

many ways. It intensifies some existing health threats and causes the emergence of new ones. Not everyone is equally

at risk: Age, economic resources, location, and other factors influence outcomes.

https://www.cdc.gov/climateandhealth/effects/default.htm
Extreme heat events pose a serious public health risk. The CDC's "Heat and Health Tracker" provides local heat and

health information to help communities better prepare for and respond to extreme heat events.

https://ephtracking.cdc.gov/Applications/heatTracker

Contact Information
The "Contact CDC–INFO" web page has CDC phone numbers and an electronic form for contacting the agency.

https://wwwn.cdc.gov/dcs/ContactUs/Form

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID–19)
Guidance on prevention and treatment of COVID–19, as well as updates on the virus and information for specific

groups like healthcare professionals and travelers, is available on the CDC website.

https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/index.html

Disease of the Week
The "Disease of the Week" web page presents key facts on, prevention tips for, and a quiz to test one's knowledge of

diseases that are common and serious.

https://www.cdc.gov/dotw?Sort=Date%3A%3Adesc

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the CDC recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/centers-for-disease-control-and-prevention

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires of the CDC to disclose records that any person requests in writing; however, some records (or parts

of them) may be shielded by one or more of the nine disclosure exemptions that the law contains.

https://www.cdc.gov/od/foia/index.htm | Email: FOIARequests@cdc.gov
The CDC has posted an "E–Z Guide to FOIA Exemptions."

https://www.cdc.gov/od/foia/request/ez_guide/index.htm
The CDC posts frequently requested agency records in its electronic reading room.

https://foia.cdc.gov/app/ReadingRoomPopularDocument.aspx

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The CDC posts answers to questions on its website.

https://www.cdc.gov/cdc-info/ask-cdc.html

History
Some of the CDC's most important contributions to public health are described on the "CDC Timeline" web page.

https://www.cdc.gov/museum/timeline/index.html
The David J. Sencer CDC Museum features award-winning permanent and changing exhibitions that focus on public

health topics, as well as on the history of the CDC. The museum is located at CDC headquarters in Atlanta, GA, and it

is associated with the Smithsonian Institution. Admission is free, and the museum welcomes visitors Monday–Friday,

excluding Federal holidays. Phone, 404-639-0830.

https://www.cdc.gov/museum/index.htm#

Influenza (Flu)
Information on and resources for influenza are available on the CDC website.

https://www.cdc.gov/flu/index.htm

Language Assistance
Information on language assistance services is available online for readers of Arabic, Chinese, Farsi, French, German,

Haitian Creole, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Tagalog, and Vietnamese speakers.

https://www.cdc.gov/other/language-assistance.html

Library
The Stephen B. Thacker CDC Library helps the advancement of science and public health and safety through

information. It provides a full range of information services and products to support public health research, policy, and

action. The Library, which comprises the headquarters library in Atlanta and six branches, serves CDC employees

nationwide, as well as employees working in international locations.

http://www.cdc.gov/library

Lyme Disease
Lyme disease is the most common vector-borne disease in the United States. The bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi is the

most common cause of the disease. Infected blacklegged ticks transmit the bacterium to people. Typical Lyme Disease

symptoms include fever, headache, fatigue, and a characteristic skin rash called erythema migrans.

https://www.cdc.gov/lyme/index.html

Podcasts
The Public Health Media Library's online holdings include recent and featured CDC podcasts.
    https://tools.cdc.gov/medialibrary/index.aspx#/landing/mediatype/Podcast/language/english/page/1/sort/desc/group/
    0

    Publications
    Many publications are accessible on the CDC's website.

    https://www.cdc.gov/publications

    Reports
    The monthly report "CDC Vital Signs" is released on the first Tuesday of every month. Past editions addressed such

    topics as colorectal and breast cancer screening; obesity, alcohol and tobacco use; HIV testing; motor vehicle safety;

    cardiovascular disease; teen pregnancy and infections associated with health care; and foodborne diseases. The report

    is also available in Spanish.

    https://www.cdc.gov/vitalsigns?Sort=Date%3A%3Adesc
    The CDC prepares the "Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report," which it uses for scientific publication of accurate,

    authoritative, objective, reliable, timely, and useful public health information and recommendations. Educators,

    epidemiologists and other scientists, physicians and nurses, public health practitioners, and researchers and

    laboratorians regularly read the report.

    https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/index.html | Email: mmwrq@cdc.gov

    Social Media
    The CDC maintains a robust social media presence online. Digital tools are also accessible on its "Social Media at CDC"

    web page.

    https://www.cdc.gov/socialmedia

    Travel Health Notices
    The CDC posts travel health notices on its website.

    https://wwwnc.cdc.gov/travel/notices

    Vaccine Adverse Event Reporting System (VAERS)
    VAERS is an early warning system that monitors the safety of vaccines after the U.S. Food and Drug Administration

    (FDA) has authorized or licensed them for use. The CDC and FDA comanage VAERS.

    https://www.cdc.gov/vaccinesafety/ensuringsafety/monitoring/vaers/index.html
    The CDC has posted an instructional video for searching the VAERS by using the search tool WONDER (Wide-ranging

    Online Data for Epidemiologic Research).

    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cOH7cFWS7o4

       The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States
About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                         Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services




The United States Government Manual




     CENTERS FOR MEDICARE AND MEDICAID SERVICES
    7500 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21244


    410-786-3000

    http://www.cms.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         Chiquita Brooks-LaSure


      Principal Deputy Administrator                                                        Jonathan Blum
  Chief of Staff                                                                        Erin Richardson


  Chief Operating Officer                                                               Jonathan Blum


https://www.cms.gov/About-CMS/Leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) posts an organizational chart in Portable Document Format

(PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.cms.gov/About-CMS/Agency-Information/CMSLeadership/Downloads/CMS_Organizational_Chart.pdf
The (CMS) administers the Medicare program and works in partnership with State governments to administer

Medicaid, the Children's Health Insurance Program, and health insurance portability standards.

https://www.cms.gov/About-CMS/About-CMS.html
The CMS has additional responsibilities. They include the administrative simplification standards of the Health

Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA); quality standards in long-term care facilities (nursing

homes) through the survey and certification process; and clinical laboratory quality standards as described in the

Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments.

https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-kit



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Blog
The CMS has an official blog on its website.

https://www.cms.gov/blog

Business Opportunities
The CMS posts contracting opportunities.

https://www.cms.gov/about-cms/contracting-with-cms/contractinggeneralinformation

Career Opportunities
For information on career opportunities, visit the "Careers at CMS" web page.

https://www.cms.gov/About-CMS/Career-Information/CareersatCMS
In 2020, the CMS ranked 93d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE70

Contact Information
The "Contact CMS" web page has phone numbers and web links to help visitors find answers to Medicare-related
questions or solutions for program-related issues.

https://www.cms.gov/about-cms/agency-information/contactcms

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the CMS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/centers-for-medicare-medicaid-services

Forms
Many CMS forms are accessible online.

https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/CMS-Forms/CMS-Forms/CMS-Forms-List

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
To help health care providers understand the Medicare and Medicaid electronic health records (EHR) incentive

programs, CMS has compiled a comprehensive list of FAQs and answers.

https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/FAQ

Glossary
The CMS maintains a glossary that explains terms found on its website.

https://www.cms.gov/glossary
The "Acronyms" web page contains a list of acronyms that are found on the CMS website, as well as other acronyms

that are used frequently. An acronym is a term formed from the initial letter or letters of each of the major parts of a

longer compound term.

https://www.cms.gov/acronyms

History
The CMS website gives a short history of the agency's programs.

https://www.cms.gov/about-cms/agency-information/history

Innovation Center
In 2010, Congress established the CMS Innovation Center (IC) to identify ways to improve healthcare quality and to

reduce costs in the Children’s Health Insurance Program and the Medicare and Medicaid programs. By using

Congressionally-mandated demonstrations and CMS initiatives and models, the IC has accelerated a shift in priorities,

a shift that rewards value over volume, in major programs belonging to the Nation's Government-managed

healthcare systems.

https://innovation.cms.gov/about

Insurance for Children
Millions of children and teens qualify for free or low-cost health and dental coverage through the Children's Health

Insurance Program and the Medicaid program.

https://www.insurekidsnow.gov

Low Income Subsidy
The "Limited Income and Resources" web page answers questions about the Low Income Subsidy (LIS). The LIS helps

Medicare participants pay for prescription drugs, and it lowers the costs of Medicare prescription drug coverage.

https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Prescription-Drug-Coverage/LimitedIncomeandResources

Medicaid
The CMS manages the website Medicaid.gov.

https://www.medicaid.gov

Medicare
The CMS manages the website Medicare.gov.

https://www.medicare.gov
The Medicare Coverage Database contains all national coverage determinations and local coverage determinations,

local articles, and proposed national coverage determination decisions. The database also includes several other types

of national coverage policy-related documents, including national coverage analyses, coding analyses for labs,

Medicare Evidence Development and Coverage Advisory Committee proceedings, and Medicare coverage guidance

documents.

https://www.cms.gov/medicare-coverage-database/search.aspx
The Medicare Learning Network has published the booklet "Medicare Fraud and Abuse: Prevent, Detect, Report" The

CMS posted the booklet on its website in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.stopmedicarefraud.gov/index.html

Newsroom
The CMS posts news items on its website.

https://www.cms.gov/newsroom

Regional Offices
Regional Offices are the State and local presence of the CMS. Regional field staff work with beneficiaries, healthcare

providers, State governments, CMS contractors, community groups, and others, to educate and inform and to answer

questions.

https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/ICD10/CMS-Regional-Offices

Social Media
CMS social media accounts are accessible on the "Press Kit" web page. CMS maintains a presence on Facebook,

LinkedIn, Twitter, and YouTube.

https://www.cms.gov/newsroom/press-kit

Spirit of CMS
To mark the 50th anniversary (1965–2015) of Medicare and Medicaid, the CMS produced the video "Spirit of CMS."

The stars are Amundam, Denita, Jim, Joanne, Jonathan, Lewis, and Rubi, each of whom is a dedicated CMS civil

servant.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jPk6Z5Llm2A
        The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Food and Drug Administration




The United States Government Manual




     FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION
    10903 New Hampshire Avenue, Silver Spring, MD 20993


    888-463-6332

    http://www.fda.gov


      COMMISSIONER                                                                          Robert M. Califf


      Principal Deputy Commissioner                                                         Janet Woodcock
  Chief of Staff                                                                            Julia C. Tierney


https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/fda-organization-charts/fda-overview-organization-chart-text-version



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) posts its organization chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing

and downloading.

https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/fda-organization-charts/fda-overview-organization-chart
The FDA protects the public health by ensuring the safety, security, and efficacy of human and veterinary drugs,

biological products, medical devices, the Nation's food supply, cosmetics, and products that emit radiation. The FDA

also advances the public health by accelerating innovations to make medicines more effective and by providing the

public with accurate and science-based information on medicines and food to improve health. The agency plays a

significant role in the Nation's counterterrorism capability by ensuring the security of the food supply.

https://www.fda.gov/about-fda



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Animal and Veterinary Recalls
The FDA posts animal and veterinary recall information—brand name, date of recall, company name, product

description, and the reason or problem—on its website.

https://www.fda.gov/animal-veterinary/safety-health/recalls-withdrawals

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FDA records have been

assigned to record group 88.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/088.html?_ga=2.123088395.1422664880.1655843766-
1283406641.1650907417

Biologics
Biological products include allergenics, blood and blood components, gene therapy, recombinant therapeutic

proteins, somatic cells, tissues, and vaccines. Biologics can be composed of nucleic acids, proteins, or sugars, or

complex combinations of these substances, or may be living entities such as cells and tissues. They are isolated from a

variety of natural sources—animal, human, and microorganism—and may be produced by using biotechnology and

other recent technologies.

https://www.fda.gov/vaccines-blood-biologics/resources-you-biologics

Birth Control
The FDA has posted a birth control chart that contains information about different options for avoiding pregnancy.
https://www.fda.gov/consumers/free-publications-women/birth-control-chart

Career Opportunities
The FDA relies on attorneys, biologists, chemists, consumer safety officers, engineers, information technology

specialists, medical officers, microbiologists, pharmacists, pharmacologists, statisticians, and other professionals, to

carry out its mission.

https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/jobs-and-training-fda
In 2020, the FDA ranked 80th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Ranking.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE36

Cell Phones
The FDA and Federal Communications Commission share the regulatory responsibilities for regulating cell phones. The

FDA has posted four simple steps to minimize exposure to radio frequency energy when using a cell phone.

https://www.fda.gov/radiation-emitting-products/home-business-and-entertainment-products/cell-phones

Cigarettes
The FDA describes cigarettes with three words: attractive, addictive, and deadly. Cigarettes are designed to be

attractive and addictive. The FDA's infographic "How a Cigarette is Engineered" explains the role design plays in

attraction and addiction.

https://www.fda.gov/tobacco-products/products-ingredients-components/how-cigarette-engineered

Consumers
The FDA posts science-based health and safety information that consumers may find helpful.

https://www.fda.gov/consumers

Contact Information
Contact information and resources are posted on the "Contact FDA" web page.

https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/contact-fda

Cosmetics
The FDA posts answers to questions that consumers frequently ask about cosmetic safety and regulation on its

"Cosmetics FAQs" web page.

https://www.fda.gov/cosmetics/resources-consumers-cosmetics/cosmetics-faqs

Drugs
The FDA maintains drug databases and has a lot to say about drug safety.

https://www.fda.gov/drugs

En Español
Important sections of the FDA's website are available in Spanish.

https://www.fda.gov/about-fda/fda-en-espanol
FDA press announcements are available in Spanish.

https://www.fda.gov/news-events/fda-newsroom/comunicados-de-prensa

Federal Register
Documents that the FDA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/food-and-drug-administration

Food
The FDA has a lot to say about food safety and healthy foods.

https://www.fda.gov/food

Foodborne Illnesses
The FDA regulates human and animal food. It also posts information on recent outbreaks of foodborne illness.

https://www.fda.gov/food/recalls-outbreaks-emergencies/outbreaks-foodborne-illness

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires of the FDA to disclose records that any person requests in writing; however, some records (or parts

of them) may be shielded by one or more of the nine disclosure exemptions that the law contains.

https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/freedom-information
Before submitting a formal FOIA request in writing, please search for the desired information in the electronic reading

room. Records containing the desired information may be posted already on the FDA website, and, therefore, they

may be accessible immediately and free of charge.

https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/freedom-information/electronic-reading-room

Medical Devices
The FDA gives advice on medical devices and has a lot to say about safety and recalls.

https://www.fda.gov/medical-devices

Press Announcements
The FDA posts press announcements.

https://www.fda.gov/news-events/fda-newsroom/press-announcements

Radiation-Emitting Products
The FDA has posted a table containing examples of radiation-emitting products and a diagram showing the overlap of

FDA enforcement authorities for these products.

https://www.fda.gov/media/77753/download

Recalls / Market Withdrawals / Safety Alerts
Information from press releases and other public notices on certain recalls of FDA-regulated products is collected and

posted online.

https://www.fda.gov/safety/recalls-market-withdrawals-safety-alerts

Social Media
     The FDA has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/FDA
     The FDA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/US_FDA
     The FDA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/AHRQHealthTV

        The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                     Health Resources and Services Administration




The United States Government Manual




     HEALTH RESOURCES AND SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
    5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville, MD 20857


    301-443-3376

    http://www.hrsa.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         Carole Johnson


      Deputy Administrator                                                                  Diana Espinosa
  Chief of Staff                                                                         Jordan Grossman


https://www.hrsa.gov/about/organization/key-staff.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) posts an organization chart in Portable Document Format

(PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.hrsa.gov/about/organization/org-chart.html
The HRSA improves access to health care by strengthening the health care workforce, building healthy communities,

and achieving health equity. HRSA programs make health care accessible to people who are geographically isolated or

economically or medically vulnerable. It supports the training of health professionals, the distribution of providers to

areas where they are needed most, and improvements in health care delivery. The agency also oversees organ, bone

marrow, and cord blood donations; compensates individuals harmed by vaccination; and maintains databases that

protect against health care abuse, fraud, malpractice, and waste.

https://www.hrsa.gov/about/index.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that HRSA records have been

assigned to record group 512.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/512.html

Data
The HRSA maintains an online data warehouse.

https://data.hrsa.gov

Career Opportunities
The HRSA posts career opportunities on its "Human Resources" web page.

https://www.hrsa.gov/hr
In 2020, the HRSA ranked 51st among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Ranking.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE34

Contact Information
The address for HRSA headquarters, electronic contact forms, email addresses, and phone numbers are accessible on

the "Contact HRSA" web page.
     https://www.hrsa.gov/about/contact/index.html

     Federal Register
     Documents that the HRSA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

     https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/health-resources-and-services-administration

     Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
     The FOIA requires of the HRSA to disclose agency records that any person properly requests in writing. Certain

     records, or parts of them, may be shielded, however, from disclosure by one of the nine exemptions that the statute

     contains.

     https://www.hrsa.gov/foia

     Organ Donation and Transplantation
     The HRSA manages the website OrganDonor.gov, which provides the public with U.S. Government information on

     organ donation and transplantation.

     https://www.organdonor.gov

     Social Media
     The HRSA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/HRSAgov
     The HRSA has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/HRSAgov
     The HRSA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/HRSAtube/videos

        The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                    Indian Health Service




The United States Government Manual




     INDIAN HEALTH SERVICE
    5600 Fishers Lane Rockville, MD 20857


    301-443-3593

    http://www.ihs.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Elizabeth A. Fowler, Acting


      Deputy Director                                                                       Benjamin Smith
https://www.ihs.gov/aboutihs/keyleaders



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The Indian Health Service (IHS) organizational structure is composed of two major office groups: headquarters offices

and regional offices, which are called areas.

https://www.ihs.gov/aboutihs/organizationalstructure
The Indian Health Service, as part of the Public Health Service, provides a comprehensive health services delivery

system for American Indians and Alaska Natives. It helps Native American tribes develop their health programs;

facilitates and assists tribes in coordinating health planning and obtaining and utilizing health resources available

through Federal, State, and local programs, in operating comprehensive health programs and evaluating them; and

provides comprehensive health care services, including hospital and ambulatory medical care, preventive and

rehabilitative services, and development of community sanitation facilities.

https://www.ihs.gov/aboutihs



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The IHS website has an alphabetical index to help visitors search for specific topics or browse content that aligns with

their interests.

https://www.ihs.gov/atoz/a

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that IHS records have been

assigned to record group 513.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/513.html?_ga=2.129907845.849221083.1656359997-
1283406641.1650907417

Blog
The IHS maintains a blog on its "IHS Blog" web page.

https://www.ihs.gov/newsroom/ihs-blog

Career Opportunities
For information on employment, visit the "Career Opportunities" web page.

https://www.ihs.gov/careeropps
In 2020, the IHS ranked 326th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Ranking.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE37

Contact Information
The IHS maintains a "Contact Information" web page that has an electronic "Contact Us" form. For claims-related

questions, call the Health Care Services Corporation. Phone, 800-225-0241.

https://www.ihs.gov/contactus
ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABLITY—An electronic message form is available on the "Environmental Sustainability"

website.

https://www.ihs.gov/sustainability/contactus
MEDIA—Call or email the Public Affairs Office. Phone, 301-443-3593.

Email: newsroom@ihs.gov
RECRUITMENT—The IHS posts information for contacting IHS recruiters of healthcare professionals.

https://www.ihs.gov/careeropps/contactrecruiter | Email: ihsrecruiters@ihs.gov

Events
The IHS maintains an events calendar on its "IHS Calendar" web page.

https://www.ihs.gov/ihscalendar

Environmental Sustainability
The IHS strives to meet all Federal requirements for health and sustainability. Beyond those requirements, the IHS has

adopted a forward-leaning environmental posture with regard to activities and programs. To minimize adverse effects

on the environment, IHS contractors, suppliers, and staff introduce ecological considerations early when they plan

agency operations and implement them. The "Environmental Sustainability" website informs the general public about

IHS efforts and things that concerned citizens can do to heighten their sustainability awareness.

https://www.ihs.gov/sustainability

Factsheets
IHS factsheets contain general information on the agency and on specific healthcare topics concerning American

Indian and Alaska Native people.

https://www.ihs.gov/newsroom/factsheets

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the IHS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/indian-health-service

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires of the IHS to disclose agency records that a person requests in writing. One of the nine exemptions

that the statute contains may shield, however, some records, or parts of them, from disclosure.

https://www.ihs.gov/FOIA
The FOIA electronic (eFOIA) reading room serves as the central source of FOIA-related documents that are in digital

format.

https://www.ihs.gov/FOIA/readingroom/

Locations
     The IHS is divided into twelve physical areas of the United States: Alaska, Albuquerque, Bemidji, Billings, California,

     Great Plains, Nashville, Navajo, Oklahoma, Phoenix, Portland, and Tucson. To learn more about each of these areas,

     about its facilities and culture, visit the "Locations" web page.

     https://www.ihs.gov/locations

     Newsroom
     Announcements, congressional testimony, factsheets, press releases, and speeches are available online.

     https://www.ihs.gov/newsroom | Email: newsroom@ihs.gov

     Social Media
     The IHS has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/IndianHealthService
     The IHS posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/IHSgov/feed

        The above Sources of Information were updated 6–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                    Search
                                                                                            Search




                                                  National Institutes of Health




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH
    1 Center Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892


    301-496-4000

    http://www.nih.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                                Lawrence A. Tabak, Acting


      Principal Deputy Director                                                               Tara A. Schwetz, Acting
https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/who-we-are/nih-leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2022.



The National Institutes of Health seeks to expand fundamental knowledge about the nature and behavior of living

systems and to apply that knowledge for improved health, longer life, and for reducing disability and illness.


ORGANIZATION
The National Institutes of Health (NIH) is made up of 27 different components called Institutes and Centers. Each

component has its own research agenda, typically focusing on particular diseases or body systems. Of these

components, 24 of them receive their funding directly from the U.S. Congress and administrate their own budgets.

https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/who-we-are/organization
The Office of the Director sets policy for the NIH and plans, manages, and coordinates the programs and activities of

NIH Institutes and Centers.

https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do/nih-almanac/office-director-nih
The organizational chart of the Office of the Director is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and

downloading.

https://oma.od.nih.gov/IC_Organization_Chart/OD%20Organizational%20Chart.pdf

ACTIVITIES
The NIH supports biomedical and behavioral research domestically and abroad, conducts research in NIH laboratories

and clinics, trains research scientists, and develops and disseminates credible, science-based health information to the

public.

https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do

  C E N T E R S—


https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do/nih-almanac/nih-organization

Clinical Research
The Clinical Center is the clinical research hospital for the NIH. By doing clinical research, investigators translate

laboratory discoveries into better treatments, therapies, and interventions to improve the Nation's health. The Center

conducts clinical and laboratory research and trains future clinical investigators. Nearly 500,000 volunteers from across

the Nation have participated in clinical research studies since the Center opened in 1953. About 1,500 clinical research

studies are currently in progress.

http://clinicalcenter.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the Clinical Center. Phone, 301-496-4000.



Complementary and Integrative Health
The National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health defines the utility and safety of complementary and

integrative health interventions and their roles in improving health and health care. This science-based information

helps the public, health care professionals, and health policymakers make decisions on the use and integration of

complementary and integrative health approaches.

https://nccih.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Center for Complementary and Integrative Health. Phone,
  888-644-6226.



Global Health
The Fogarty International Center addresses global health challenges through innovative and collaborative research

and training programs. It also supports and advances the NIH mission through international partnerships.

https://www.fic.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the Fogarty International Center. Phone, 301-496-2075.



Information Technology
The Center for Information Technology provides, coordinates, and manages information technology to advance

computational science.

http://www.cit.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the Center for Information Technology. Phone, 301-496-5703.



Scientific Review
The Center for Scientific Review (CSR) organizes the peer review groups that evaluate the majority of grant

applications submitted to the NIH. These groups include experienced and respected researchers from across the

country and abroad. Since 1946, CSR has ensured that NIH grant applications receive fair, independent, expert, and

timely reviews—free from inappropriate influences—so the NIH can fund the most promising research. CSR also

receives all incoming applications and assigns them to the appropriate Centers and Institutes that fund grants.

http://public.csr.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the Center for Scientific Review. Phone, 301-435-1111.



Translational Sciences Advancement
The National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences focuses on what is common across diseases and the

translational process. The Center emphasizes innovation and deliverables, relying on data and new technologies to

develop, demonstrate, and disseminate advances in translational science that tangibly improve human health.

https://ncats.nih.gov
  For further information, contact the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences. Phone, 301-
  435-0888.



  I N S T I T U T E S—


https://www.nih.gov/institutes-nih/list-institutes-centers

Aging
The National Institute on Aging (NIA) conducts and supports research on the aging process, age-related diseases, and

other special problems and needs of older people. It is also the lead NIH Institute for research on age-related

cognitive change and Alzheimer's disease. The NIA provides information on aging to the scientific community, health

care providers, and the public.

http://www.nia.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute on Aging. Phone, 301-496-1752.



Alcohol Abuse / Alcoholism
The National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism leads the national effort to reduce alcohol-related problems

by conducting and supporting biomedical and behavioral research into the causes, consequences, prevention, and

treatment of alcohol-use disorders.

http://www.niaaa.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. Phone, 301-443-
  3885.



Allergy / Infectious Diseases
The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases conducts and supports research to study the causes of

infectious diseases and immune-mediated diseases and to develop better means of preventing, diagnosing, and

treating these diseases.

http://www.niaid.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. Phone, 866-
  284-4107 or 301-496-5717.



Arthritis / Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases
The National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases supports research on the causes, treatment,

and prevention of arthritis and musculoskeletal and skin diseases; the basic and clinical training of scientists to carry

out this research; and the dissemination of information on research progress.

http://www.niams.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases.
  Phone, 877-226-4267 or 301-496-8190.
Biomedical Imaging / Bioengineering
The National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering supports research, training, and the dissemination of

research advances for accelerating the development and application of biomedical technologies to improve the

detection, treatment, and prevention of disease. It integrates the physical and engineering sciences with the life

sciences to advance basic research and medical care.

http://www.nibib.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering. Phone,
  301-496-3500.



Biomedical Library Services / Information Resources
The National Library of Medicine, the world's largest biomedical library, serves as the Nation's principal medical

information source, providing medical library services and extensive online information resources to scientists,

practitioners, and the general public. It conducts, fosters, and supports research and training in biomedical informatics

and supports development and dissemination of clinical terminology standards.

http://www.nlm.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Library of Medicine. Phone, 301-496-6308.



Cancer
The National Cancer Institute (NCI) is the Federal Government's principal agency for cancer research and training. It

coordinates the National Cancer Program, which conducts and supports research, training, health information

dissemination, and other activities associated with diagnosing, preventing, treating, and finding the cause of cancer

and with the continuing care of cancer patients and their families.

http://www.cancer.gov

  For further information, contact the Cancer Information Service. Phone, 800-422-6237.



Child Health / Human Development
The Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development conducts and supports basic,

clinical, and epidemiological research on the reproductive, rehabilitative, neurobiological, developmental, and

behavioral processes that determine the health of children, adults, families, and communities.

http://www.nichd.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and
  Human Development. Phone, 800-370-2943.



Deafness / Other Communication Disorders
The National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders conducts and supports biomedical and

behavioral research and training on normal and disordered processes of hearing, balance, taste, smell, voice, speech,

and language. The Institute also makes science-based health information publicly available, and it supports efforts to

create devices that substitute for lost or impaired sensory and communication function.

http://www.nidcd.nih.gov | Email: NIDCDinfo@nidcd.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders.
  Phone, 800-241-1044. TTY, 800-241-1055.



Dental and Craniofacial Research
The National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research funds research on dental, oral, and craniofacial health and

disorders. It also conducts research in its own laboratories and clinic, supports research training, and promotes the

timely transfer of research-based knowledge and its implications for health to researchers, to health professionals, to

patients, and to the general public.

http://www.nidcr.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research. Phone, 301-
  496-4261.



Diabetes / Digestive and Kidney Diseases
The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases conducts, supports, and coordinates research

and research training. It also offers science-based information on diabetes and other endocrine and metabolic

diseases; on digestive diseases, nutritional disorders, weight control, and obesity; and on kidney, urologic and blood

diseases.

https://www.niddk.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
  Phone, 301-496-3583.



Drug Abuse
The National Institute on Drug Abuse supports and conducts basic and clinical research on drug use, its consequences,

and the underlying neurobiological, behavioral, and social mechanisms. The Institute also ensures effective translation

and dissemination of scientific findings to improve the prevention and treatment of substance-use disorders, and it

works at raising the public's awareness that addiction is a type of brain disorder.

http://www.drugabuse.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute on Drug Abuse. Phone, 877-643-2644.



Environmental Health Sciences
The National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences supports research that explores how the environment affects
people's health. Its research centers on environmental exposures and understanding their effects on human biology

and health with an emphasis on disease and disability prevention. The Institute also houses the national toxicology

program, a cross-agency organization that coordinates toxicity testing across the Federal Government.

http://www.niehs.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences. Phone, 919-541-
  3345.



Eye and Vision Diseases
The National Eye Institute conducts, fosters, and supports research on the causes, natural history, prevention,

diagnosis, and treatment of disorders of the eye and visual system. It also directs the National Eye Health Education

Program.

http://www.nei.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Eye Institute. Phone, 301-496-5248.



General Medical Sciences
The National Institute of General Medical Sciences (NIGMS) supports basic research that increases understanding of

biological processes and lays the foundation for advances in disease diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. NIGMS-

funded scientists investigate how living systems work at a range of levels, from molecules and cells to tissues, to whole

organisms and populations. The Institute also supports research in clinical areas, primarily those that affect multiple

organ systems. To assure the vitality and productivity of the research enterprise, the NIGMS provides leadership in

training the next generation of scientists, in diversifying the scientific workforce, and in developing research capacities

throughout the country.

http://www.nigms.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of General Medical Sciences. Phone, 301-496-7301.



Heart, Lung, and Blood Diseases
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute provides leadership for a global program in sleep disorders, blood

resources, and diseases of the heart, blood vessels, blood, and lungs. It conducts, fosters, and supports a

comprehensive program of basic research, clinical investigations and trials, observational and implementation science

studies, as well as demonstration and education projects.

http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Phone, 301-592-8573.



Human Genome Research
The National Human Genome Research Institute supports research to uncover the role that the genome plays in
human health and disease; studies on the ethical, legal, and social implications of genomics research for individuals,

families, and communities; and the application of genomics research to medical care.

http://www.genome.gov

  For further information, contact the National Human Genome Research Institute. Phone, 301-402-0911.



Mental Health
The National Institute of Mental Health works to transform the understanding and treatment of mental illnesses.

Through basic and clinical research, it advances the prevention, recovery, and cure of mental conditions that disable

many Americans.

http://www.nimh.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Mental Health. Phone, 866-615-6464.



Minority Health / Health Disparities
The National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities leads scientific research to improve minority health

and eliminate health disparities. The Institute plans, reviews, coordinates, and evaluates all minority health and health

disparities research and activities of the NIH; conducts and supports research on minority health and health disparities;

promotes and supports the training of a diverse research workforce; translates and disseminates research information;

and fosters innovative collaborations and partnerships.

http://www.nimhd.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute on Minority Health and Health Disparities. Phone,
  301-402-1366.



Neurological Disorders / Stroke
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke works to better understand the brain and spinal cord and

to use that knowledge to mitigate the effects of neurological disease. It conducts, promotes, coordinates, and guides

research and training on the causes, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of neurological disorders and stroke. It also

supports basic, translational, and clinical research in related scientific areas.

http://www.ninds.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Phone, 301-
  496-5751.



Nursing Research
The National Institute of Nursing Research supports clinical and basic research and research training to build the

scientific foundation for clinical practice, to prevent disease and disability, to manage and eliminate symptoms caused

by illness, to enhance end-of-life and palliative care, and to train the next generation of nurse scientists.
http://www.ninr.nih.gov

  For further information, contact the National Institute of Nursing Research. Phone, 301-496-0207.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Almanac
The NIH Almanac is a reliable source of information on the Federal Government’s principal medical research agency.

Federal employees, journalists, lawmakers, and members of the general public consult the almanac when seeking NIH-

related information.

https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/what-we-do/nih-almanac/about-nih-almanac

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that NIH records have been

assigned to record group 443.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/443.html?_ga=2.103502661.453707337.1656617425-
1283406641.1650907417

Career Opportunities
For information on employment opportunities, visit the "Jobs at NIH" web page.

https://hr.nih.gov/jobs
In 2020, the NIH ranked 63d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Ranking.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE38

Climate Change
The NIH is concerned about climate change for these reasons: "[Its] effects worsen many existing illnesses, diseases

and conditions, by increasing exposure to increased temperatures, introducing new pests and pathogens, and

impairing air quality and water resources. As the planet warms, oceans expand and sea level rises, floods and droughts

become more frequent and intense, and heat waves and hurricanes become more severe. Certain populations—

including children, the elderly, the poor, and those with underlying health conditions—are at increased risk for health

impacts from climate change. Climate-related events can also stress health care infrastructure and delivery systems."

To learn more, visit the website of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences and see the "Climate

Change and Human Health" web page.

https://www.niehs.nih.gov/research/programs/climatechange/index.cfm
The National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences maintains a curated and integrated bibliographic database of

global peer-reviewed research and gray literature on the science of climate effects on human health.

https://tools.niehs.nih.gov/cchhl/index.cfm

Contact Information
Information for contacting the NIH by mail or phone is available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/contact-us

Environmental Health
The National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences maintains a "Brochures and Factsheets" web page.

https://www.niehs.nih.gov/health/materials/index.cfm

Events
The NIH posts upcoming events on its "Calendar of Events" web page.

https://calendar.nih.gov

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the NIH recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/national-institutes-of-health

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires of the NIH to disclose records that any person requests in writing; however, some records (or parts

of them) may be shielded by one or more of the nine disclosure exemptions that the law contains.

https://www.nih.gov/institutes-nih/nih-office-director/office-communications-public-liaison/freedom-information-act-
office | Email: nihfoia@mail.nih.gov
The NIH maintains a FOIA library that contains both on-site and electronic records.

https://www.nih.gov/institutes-nih/nih-office-director/office-communications-public-liaison/freedom-information-act-
office/nih-foia-library

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The NIH posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/frequently-asked-questions

History
A short history of the NIH is available online.

https://history.nih.gov/display/history/A+Short+History+of+the+National+Institutes+of+Health
The DeWitt Stetten, Jr., Museum of Medical Research, also known as the NIH Stetten Museum, preserves and

interprets the material culture of the NIH's scientific work through physical and virtual exhibits.

https://history.nih.gov/pages/viewpage.action?pageId=1016361

News
The NIH posts news releases on its website.

https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases
The monthly newsletter "NIH News In Health" contains practical consumer health news and information that is based

on NIH research.

https://newsinhealth.nih.gov
    Site Map
    The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

    https://www.nih.gov/site-map

    Social Media
    The NIH tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/NIH
    The NIH has a Facebook account.

    https://www.facebook.com/nih.gov
    The NIH posts videos on its YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/user/nihod

    Spanish
    The NIH posts important health information in Spanish.

    https://salud.nih.gov

    Staff Directory
    The NIH enterprise directory allows users to search for staff members by email address, name, or phone number.

    https://ned.nih.gov/search

    Visitor Information
    Maps and information on access and security, parking, tours, the campus shuttle, and more are available on the NIH

    website.

    https://www.nih.gov/about-nih/visitor-information

    Weight Management
    The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases' website has weight management information

    and resources.

    https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/weight-management

        The above Sources of Information were updated 7–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy
Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                            Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                   Search                                                    Search
                                                                                             Search




                                Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration




The United States Government Manual




     SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
    5600 Fishers Lane Rockville, MD 20857


    240-276-2130

    http://www.samhsa.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                            Miriam E. Delphin-Rittmon


      Deputy Assistant Secretary                                                               Tom Coderre, Acting
https://www.samhsa.gov/about-us/who-we-are/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 7–2022.



The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration alleviates the pain and mitigates the harm that

substance abuse and mental illness visit upon communities nationwide.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
In 1992, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) was established as an agency of

the Public Health Service (106 Stat. 325) by Public Law 102–321, which also is cited as the "ADAMHA Reorganization

Act."

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-106/pdf/STATUTE-106-Pg323.pdf
The Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) posts its organizational chart in Portable

Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.samhsa.gov/sites/default/files/samhsa-organization-chart.pdf

ACTIVITIES
The SAMHSA leads public health efforts to advance the Nation's behavioral health. It funds State and local service

agencies through grants and formulas; collects data and makes available surveillance reports on the effect of

behavioral health on Americans; leads efforts to offer public education on mental illness and substance abuse

prevention, treatment, and recovery; regulates and oversees national behavioral health programs; and promotes

practice improvement in community-based, primary, and specialty care settings.

http://www.samhsa.gov/about-us



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The Alcohol, Drug Abuse, and Mental Health Administration (ADAMHA) was renamed the SAMHSA in 1992. The

"Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that ADAMHA records have been

assigned to record group 511.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/511.html?_ga=2.205882451.1986076236.1657144025-
1283406641.1650907417

Blog
The SAMHSA posts a blog.

https://www.samhsa.gov/blog

Career Opportunities
SAMHSA seeks qualified applicants to advance the Nation's behavioral health, to improve the lives of individuals

suffering from mental disorders and substance abuse, and to assist members of their families. Visit the "Working at
SAMHSA" learn more about starting career at SAMHSA.

http://www.samhsa.gov/about-us/jobs-internships
In 2020, the SAMHSA ranked 410th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Ranking.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HE32

Contact Information
Links, phone numbers, and postal and email addresses are available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.samhsa.gov/about-us/contact-us

Data
The Administration maintains five collections of data: Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality reports, client

level data, mental health facilities data, population data, and substance abuse facilities data.

https://www.samhsa.gov/data

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the SAMHSA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/substance-abuse-and-mental-health-services-administration

Find Treatment
The "Find Treatment" web page has locator tools for behavioral health, early serious mental illness, opioid, and

substance use treatment services. It also has a directory for opioid treatment programs. For people who need to talk,

crisis line, helpline, and lifeline phone numbers are available on the same web page.

https://www.samhsa.gov/find-treatment

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires the SAMHSA to disclose records that any person requests in writing; however, some records (or

parts of them) may be shielded by one or more of the nine disclosure exemptions that the law contains.

https://www.samhsa.gov/freedom-information-act-foia

Newsroom
Press announcements, quarterly newsletters, and media highlights of initiatives and other activities are available in the

newsroom.

https://www.samhsa.gov/newsroom | Email: media@samhsa.hhs.gov

Offices / Centers
SAMHSA offices and centers provide leadership and assistance for quality behavioral health services. They support

States, territories, tribes, communities, and local organizations through grants and contract awards.

https://www.samhsa.gov/about-us/who-we-are/offices-centers

Programs / Campaigns
     SAMHSA’s programs and campaigns inform, train, and provide technical assistance to improve the quality and delivery

     of behavioral health services nationwide.

     https://www.samhsa.gov/programs

     Publications / Digital Products
     Hundreds of publications are available on the SAMHSA website.

     https://store.samhsa.gov

     Site Map
     The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

     https://www.samhsa.gov/sitemap

     Social Media
     The SAMHSA uses various forms of social media to connect with the online community and engage people.

     https://www.samhsa.gov/about-us/social-media

     Suicide Prevention
     The Administration funds the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline. Phone, 800-273-8255.

     https://suicidepreventionlifeline.org/?WT_ac=AD20110315NSPL
     Help is available in Spanish, too.

     https://suicidepreventionlifeline.org/help-yourself/en-espanol

        The above Sources of Information were updated 7–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                             Department of Homeland Security




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY
    Washington, DC 20528


    202-282-8000

    http://www.dhs.gov


      SECRETARY OF HOMELAND SECURITY                                                        Markwayne Mullin, Acting


      Deputy Secretary                                                                      (vacancy)
 Chief of Staff                                                  (vacancy)


 Executive Secretary                                             Juliana Blackwell, Acting


 General Counsel                                                 Joseph N. Mazzara, Acting


 Military Advisor                                                Rear Adm. Jeffrey W. Novak


https://www.dhs.gov/leadership



Office of the Secretary


 UNDERSECRETARY


 Strategy, Policy, and Plans                                     Chad F. Wolf




 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Legislative Affairs                                             Beth Spivey


 Partnership and Engagement                                      John H. Hill


 Public Affairs                                                  Alexei Woltornist, Acting




 Chief Privacy Officer                                           Dena Kozanas


 Citizenship and Immigration Services Ombudsman                  Michael T. Dougherty


 Civil Rights and Civil Liberties Officer                        Patricia Nation


 General Counsel                                                 Joseph N. Mazzara, Acting


                                                                 Randolph D. "Tex" Alles,
 Under Secretary, Management (acting), Randolph D. "Tex" Alles
                                                                 Acting

https://www.dhs.gov/office-secretary



Operational and Support Components


 UNDER SECRETARIES
Intelligence and Analysis                          (vacancy)


Management                                         (vacancy)


Science and Technology                             (vacancy)




ADMINISTRATORS


Federal Emergency Management Agency                Pete T. Gaynor


Transportation Security Administration             David P. Pekoske




ASSISTANT SECRETARY


Countering Weapons of Mass Destruction             David Richardson




CHIEF OFFICERS


Chief Financial Officer                            Troy D. Edgar


Chief Information Officer                          Karen S. Evans




DIRECTORS


Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency   Christopher C. Krebs


Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers           Thomas J. Walters


Operations Coordination                            Christopher J. Tomney


U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services          (vacancy)


U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement           (vacancy)


U.S. Secret Service                                James M. Murray




U.S. Coast Guard Commandant                        Adm. Kevin E. Lunday, Acting


U.S. Customs and Border Protection Commissioner    (vacancy)
https://www.dhs.gov/operational-and-support-components



Office of Inspector General


  Inspector General                                                                       Joseph V. Cuffari

https://www.oig.dhs.gov/about/meetActingIG



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2020.



The Department of Homeland Security prevents terrorism and enhances security, manages the Nation’s borders,

administers immigration laws, safeguards cyberspace, and ensures resilience in the wake of disaster.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On November 25, 2002, President George W. Bush approved Public Law 107–296, which is also cited as the

"Homeland Security Act of 2002" to establish the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). Sixty days after its

enactment, on January 24, 2003, the law became effective (116 STAT. 2142).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-116/pdf/STATUTE-116-Pg2135.pdf
By the advice and with the consent of the Senate, the President appoints the Secretary of Homeland Security, who

heads the Department and has direction, authority, and control over it (116 STAT. 2142). The Secretary develops and

coordinates a comprehensive strategy to protect the Nation from terrorist attacks. These efforts are undertaken in

coordination with Federal, State, local, international, and private sector partners. The Secretary also advises the

President on border management and protection, cyberspace security, administration and enforcement of

immigration laws, intelligence analysis and infrastructure protection, science and technology for countering weapons

of mass destruction, and resilience after a disastrous event.


Title 6 of the U.S. Code contains codified subject matter that affects domestic security. Its six chapters are named: 1)

"Homeland Security Organization"; 2) "National Emergency Management"; 3) "Security and Accountability for Every

Port"; 4) "Transportation Security"; 5) "Border Infrastructure and Technology Modernization"; and 6) "Cybersecurity."

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title6&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that affect domestic security are codified in title 6 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).

Chapter I, parts 1–199, deals with the "Department of Homeland Security, Office of the Secretary."

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=c4691da41d68a6d8d63e570daa7abec6&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title06/6chapterI.tpl
Title 5, chapter XCVII, part 9701, of the CFR is dedicated to the "Department of Homeland Security Human Resources

Management System."

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=79801535510dc623dfd64869e36a7d0e&mc=true&node=pt5.3.9701&rgn=div5
The DHS posts an organizational chart on its "Organizational Chart" web page. A Portable Document Format (PDF) file

of the chart is available for viewing and downloading.

https://www.dhs.gov/organizational-chart



ADMINISTRATION

Citizenship / Immigration
The Office of the Citizenship and Immigration Services Ombudsman improves the quality of citizenship and

immigration services that are delivered to the public by providing individual case assistance. The Offices also makes

recommendations for improving the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services' administration of immigration benefits.

http://www.dhs.gov/topic/cis-ombudsman | Email: cisombudsman@hq.dhs.gov

Civil Rights / Liberties
The Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties ensures that while the DHS secures the Nation, it also preserves individual

liberty, fairness, and equality under the law. The Office promotes respect for civil rights and civil liberties in

policymaking and implementation; advises DHS leadership and personnel, and State and local partners; communicates

with communities and individuals whose civil rights and civil liberties may be affected by DHS activities, informing them

about policies and avenues of redress and bringing appropriate attention to their experiences and concerns within the

Department; investigates civil rights and liberties complaints filed by the public regarding DHS policies or activities, or

actions taken by DHS personnel; and leads DHS equal employment opportunity programs and promotes workforce

diversity and merit system principles.

http://www.dhs.gov/office-civil-rights-and-civil-liberties

Department of Defense Coordination
The Military Advisor counsels and supports the Secretary and Deputy Secretary on matters relating to policy,

procedures, preparedness activities, and operations involving the DHS and the Department of Defense.

http://www.dhs.gov/about-office-military-advisor

Executive Support
The Office of the Executive Secretary directly supports the Secretary and Deputy Secretary and provides related

support to leadership and management agencywide. The Office's activities are diverse, including accurate and timely

dissemination of information and written communications to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary from throughout the

DHS and its homeland security partners .

http://www.dhs.gov/office-executive-secretary

Internal Audits / Investigations
The Office of Inspector General conducts and supervises audits, investigations, and inspections relating to DHS

programs and operations. The Office examines, evaluates, and, where necessary, critiques DHS operations and

activities. It recommends ways for the agency to carry out its responsibilities in more economical, efficient, and

effective ways. The Office also reviews recommendations regarding existing and proposed legislation and regulations

affecting DHS programs and operations.
https://www.oig.dhs.gov

Legal Compliance
The Office of General Counsel ensures that departmental activities comply with applicable legal requirements. The

Office provides legal advice on matters affecting national security, immigration, litigation, international law, maritime

safety and security, transportation security, border security law, cybersecurity, fiscal and appropriations law,

environmental law, and on matters affecting many more subjects. It also ensures that DHS efforts to secure the Nation

are consistent with the civil rights and civil liberties of its citizens and follow the rule of law. The Office also provides

legal services in several areas where the law intersects with the achievement of mission goals, such as the coordination

of rulemaking activities, managing interdepartmental clearance of proposed legislation, and providing legal training for

law enforcement officers.

http://www.dhs.gov/office-general-counsel

Legislative Affairs
The Office of Legislative Affairs serves as primary liaison to Members of Congress and their congressional staff. The

Office responds to inquiries from Congress; notifies it about DHS initiatives, policies, and programs; and keeps the

agency’s senior leaders informed about the activities of Congress. The Office also participates in the Senate

confirmation process of each DHS nominee whom the President nominates.

http://www.dhs.gov/about-office-legislative-affairs

Partnership / Engagement
The Office of Partnership and Engagement includes the following offices and programs: the Office for State and Local

Law Enforcement, Private Sector Office, Office of Academic Engagement, Committee Management Office, Homeland

Security Advisory Council, Homeland Security Academic Advisory Council, Blue Campaign, and the "If You See

Something, Say Something" public awareness campaign. The Office comprises stakeholder engagement offices that

communicate with State, local, tribal, and territorial governments, and with law enforcement, the private sector,

academia, and Federal advisory committees. These offices coordinate DHS programs and policies with these same

stakeholders. The Office also serves as the liaison between these stakeholders and the Office of the Secretary. It

promotes an integrated national approach to homeland security by coordinating and advancing Federal interaction

with external stakeholders, and it continues the homeland security dialogue with those partners and with the national

associations representing them.

http://www.dhs.gov/partnership-engagement

Privacy
The Privacy Office safeguards the collection, disclosure, and use of personally identifiable information and

departmental information. It ensures that appropriate access to information is consistent with the core values, mission,

and vision of DHS. The Office also implements the agency's policies to defend and protect the individual rights,

liberties, and information interests of U.S. citizens. The Office has oversight of privacy and disclosure policy matters,

including compliance with the Privacy Act of 1974, the Freedom of Information Act, and the completion of statements

addressing the effect of new programs and systems on privacy, as required by the E-Government Act of 2002 and the

Homeland Security Act of 2002.
http://www.dhs.gov/privacy-office | Email: privacy@dhs.gov

Public Affairs
The Office of Public Affairs coordinates the public affairs activities of DHS components and offices. It also serves as the

Federal Government’s lead public information office during a national emergency or disaster. The Office is the point of

contact for members of the news media, representatives of organizations, and the general public who seek

information on DHS policies, procedures, programs, services, and statistics. The Office assists the Secretary with

strategic and internal communications and with all matters of public affairs.

http://www.dhs.gov/office-public-affairs

Strategy / Policy / Plans
The Office of Strategy, Policy, and Plans advises the Secretary and Deputy Secretary, develops policy and represents

the DHS in interagency fora, coordinates and unifies policy positions, leads and coordinates international engagement

and negotiations, operates the REAL ID and Visa Waiver programs, leads the development of operational and

resource allocation guidance, develops strategies and operational plans, and collects and maintains and reports

immigration data.

https://www.dhs.gov/office-policy



OPERATIONS AND SUPPORT

Citizenship / Immigration
The Unites States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) administers the Nation's legal immigration system.

Operating primarily by fee funding, it ensures that information and decisions on citizenship and immigration benefits

are provided to applications and petitioners in an accurate, consistent, courteous, professional, and timely manner that

is consistent with national security. USCIS also strengthens the integrity of the Nation’s legal immigration system by

combating the unauthorized practice of immigration law, by helping to combat unauthorized employment in the

workplace, and by deterring, detecting, and pursuing immigration-related fraud.

http://www.uscis.gov

Customs / Border Protection
The U.S. Customs and Border Protection secures America's borders to protect the public from dangerous people and

materials, while enabling legitimate trade and travel to enhance the Nation’s global economic competitiveness.

http://www.cbp.gov

Cybersecurity / Infrastructure Security
The Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) builds the Nation's capacity to defend against cyber

attacks and works with the Federal Government to provide cybersecurity tools, incident response services, and

assessment capabilities to safeguard the networks that support the essential operations of partner departments and

agencies. The Agency coordinates security and resilience efforts, using trusted partnerships across the private and

public sectors, and delivers technical assistance and assessments to Federal stakeholders and to infrastructure owners

and operators nationwide. Working with stakeholders nationwide, CISA conducts extensive outreach to support and
strengthen the ability of emergency responders and relevant government officials to communicate in the event of a

natural disaster, act of terrorism, or other man-made disaster.

https://www.dhs.gov/cisa/about-cisa

Emergency Management
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) administers a nationwide, risk-based, and comprehensive

emergency management system of preparedness, protection, response, recovery, and mitigation. The goal is to

reduce the loss of life and property and to protect the Nation from all hazards, including natural disasters, acts of

terrorism, and other man-made disasters. FEMA coordinates programs to improve the effectiveness of emergency

response providers at all levels of the government, initiates proactive mitigation activities, and manages the National

Flood Insurance Program and U.S. Fire Administration. It also leads Government continuity planning, guidance, and

operations for the Federal executive branch to minimize the disruption of essential operations and to guarantee

enduring constitutional governance.

http://www.fema.gov

Immigration / Customs Enforcement
U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) is the principal investigative arm of DHS. It promotes homeland

security and public safety through the criminal and civil enforcement of Federal laws governing border control,

customs, immigration, and trade.

https://www.ice.gov

Intelligence / Analysis
The Office of Intelligence and Analysis, as a member of the U.S. Intelligence Community, is the nexus between the

Nation’s intelligence apparatus and DHS components and other State, local, and private sector partners. The Office

ensures that information is gathered from all relevant DHS field operations and other State, local, and private sector

partners and that this information is shared with appropriate stakeholders to produce accurate, timely, and actionable

analytical intelligence products and services.

https://www.dhs.gov/office-intelligence-and-analysis

Law Enforcement Training
The Federal Law Enforcement Training Centers (FLETC) is the Nation’s largest provider of law enforcement training. It

offers career-long training to law enforcement professionals to help them fulfill their responsibilities safely and

proficiently. Under a collaborative training model, FLETC’s Federal partner organizations provide training unique to

their missions, while FLETC provides training in areas common to all law enforcement officers: driving, firearms,

investigations, legal training, and tactics.

https://www.fletc.gov

Management
The Directorate for Management is responsible for accounting and finance, appropriations, budget, expenditure of

funds, and procurement; equipment, facilities, property, and other material resources; human resources, personnel,

and their security; identification and tracking of performance measurements relating to the responsibilities of the

agency, and information technology and communication systems. The Directorate ensures that DHS employees have
well-defined responsibilities and that managers and their employees have effective means of communicating with one

another, with other governmental and nongovernmental bodies, and with the public they serve.

http://www.dhs.gov/directorate-management

Maritime Safety / Security
The U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) is the principal Federal agency responsible for maritime safety, security, and

environmental stewardship in U.S. ports and waterways. The USCG protects and defends more than 100,000 miles of

coastline and inland waterways and safeguards an exclusive economic zone that stretches from north of the Arctic

Circle to south of the equator, from Puerto Rico to Guam. The USCG is a member of the Intelligence Community and

one of the five Armed Services. It is also a first response and humanitarian service provider that aids people in distress

or impacted by natural and man-made disasters both at sea and ashore. It is a law enforcement and regulatory

agency with broad legal authorities associated with bridge administration, hazardous materials shipping, maritime

transportation, oil spill response, pilotage, and vessel construction and operation.

https://www.work.uscg.mil

Nuclear Terrorism
The Domestic Nuclear Detection Office focuses solely on preventing nuclear terrorism, in coordination with domestic

and international partners, by improving deterrence, detection, response, and attribution. The Office coordinates

development of the global nuclear detection architecture with partners from the private sector and local, State,

Federal, and international governments. The Office develops, acquires, and supports the deployment of mechanisms

to detect and report attempts to import, possess, store, transport, develop, or use unauthorized nuclear and other

radioactive material in the United States. The Office also serves as steward of an enduring national technical nuclear

forensics capability and leads efforts to improve national nuclear forensics expertise. Working with the international

community, it promotes the development of nuclear detection architectures and nuclear forensics guidance.

http://www.dhs.gov/domestic-nuclear-detection-office

Operations Coordination
The Office of Operations Coordination provides decision support and enables the Secretary's execution of

responsibilities across the homeland security enterprise by promoting situational awareness and information sharing,

integrating and synchronizing strategic operations, and administering the DHS continuity program. At the strategic

level, the Office provides a joint operations coordination capability to support DHS operational decision making,

departmental leadership, and participation in interagency operations throughout the homeland security enterprise and

across all mission areas.

http://www.dhs.gov/office-operations-coordination

Presidential Protection / Safeguarding Financial and Payment Systems
The U.S. Secret Service carries out a dual mission of protection and investigation. It protects the President, Vice

President, and their families; major Presidential and Vice Presidential candidates; visiting heads of state and

government; and National Special Security Events, as well as the White House and other designated buildings within

the Washington, DC, area. The Secret Service also safeguards the Nation's financial infrastructure and payment

systems to preserve the integrity of the economy.
http://www.secretservice.gov

Science / Technology
The Science and Technology Directorate is the primary research and development arm of the agency. The Directorate

provides Federal, State, and local officials with protective technology and capabilities. Its strategic objectives are

developing and deploying systems to prevent, detect, and mitigate the consequences of biological, chemical,

explosive, nuclear, and radiological attacks; develop equipment, protocols, and training procedures for response and

recovery; enhance the agency's and other Federal, State, local, and tribal government's technical capabilities to fulfill

their homeland security-related functions; and develop technical standards and establish certified laboratories to

evaluate homeland security and emergency responder technologies for SAFETY Act certification.

http://www.dhs.gov/science-and-technology/our-work

Transportation Security
The Transportation Security Administration protects the Nation's transportation systems to ensure freedom of

movement for people and commerce.

https://www.tsa.gov



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The DHS website has an alphabetical index of topics to help visitors navigate its content.

https://www.dhs.gov/dhsgov-z-index

Archived Records
The general records of the Department of Homeland Security and the records of the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration

Services, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, and U.S. Customs and Border Protection are referenced in the

"Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States." The Guide is accessible online, and these

records have been assigned respectively to Record Groups 563 and 566–568. None of these record groups has a

description associated with it.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/501-to-600.html#page-header

Audits / Inspections / Evaluations
The Office of the Inspector General (OIG) posts reports on its website. Starting with the year 2003, the OIG's archives

of audits, inspections, and evaluations cover the following areas of oversight: border security, counterterrorism,

cybersecurity, disaster recovery, immigration, management, and transportation security.

https://www.oig.dhs.gov/reports/audits-inspections-and-evaluations

Blog
The DHS maintains a blog on its website.

https://www.dhs.gov/news-releases/blog?field_news_type_tid=588

Career Opportunities
The DHS is one of the largest agencies in the Federal Government. It offers career opportunities in the areas of

immigration and travel security, law enforcement, mission support, and prevention and response. To carry out its

mission, the agency relies on attorneys, contract specialists, engineers, intelligence analysts, K–9 officers, pilots,

scientists, and many other types of experts and professionals.

https://www.dhs.gov/homeland-security-careers
In 2019, the DHS ranked 17th among 17 large Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/HS00
In "Best Practices & Key Considerations for Enhancing Federal Facility Security and Resilience to Climate-Related

Hazards" (2015), the Interagency Security Committee identified threats posed by climate change to the assets,

missions, operations, and workforce of the Federal Government. It also provided guidance and security planning

considerations for agencies housed in nonmilitary Federal facilities. This document's main purpose is to identify short-

and long-term strategies for enhancing physical security and resilience in the face climate-related threats.

https://www.dhs.gov/publication/isc-climate-related-hazards-best-practices

Contact Information
Contact information for DHS headquarters, DHS components, and specific programs of interest is available on the

"Direct Contact Information" web page.

https://www.dhs.gov/direct-contact-information
The "Department White Pages" is a listing of key contacts that are organized by component. The listing includes email

addresses and phone numbers.

https://www.dhs.gov/department-white-pages

Current Issues
The "In Focus" web page brings together in one place key current issues that fall within the scope of the Department's

mission.

https://www.dhs.gov/focus

Data
The DHS and its components provide Internet access to statistical reports and datasets: Coast Guard maritime

information, Customs and Border Protection intellectual property rights recordations, Federal Emergency Management

Agency disaster declarations, immigration data, and more.

https://www.dhs.gov/topic/data

Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs)
Flooding can occur anywhere in the United States; however, certain areas are prone to serious flooding. To help

communities understand their risk, flood maps or FIRMs have been created to show the locations of high-risk,

moderate-to-low risk, and undetermined-risk areas. Banks, citizens, insurance agents, and all levels of government rely

on FIRMs to determine whether flood insurance is required.

https://msc.fema.gov/portal
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded from

disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute. Instructions for submitting a FOIA request or filing a

Privacy Act request and information on other FOIA-related matters are available on the DHS website.

https://www.dhs.gov/how-submit-foia-request
The DHS maintains a FOIA library on its website. Information seekers should avail themselves of this online resource to

determine if the desired record is immediately available and readily accessible without the additional effort of filing a

FOIA request.

https://www.dhs.gov/foia-library

Frequently Requested Pages
Links to the most requested pages on the DHS website are collected in place for convenience.

https://www.dhs.gov/frequently-requested-pages

Green Card
A person may obtain authorization to live and work in the United States on a permanent basis in several ways: A family

member or employer in the United States may sponsor the Green Card applicant; refugee or asylee status and other

humanitarian programs offer additional pathways; and, in some cases, a person may be eligible to file on his or her

own initiative for permanent residency.

https://www.dhs.gov/how-do-i/get-green-card

How Do I?
The DHS website features a comprehensive section that arranges answers to "how do I" questions according to

audience: DHS employees, businessmen and women, travelers, and the general public. Entrepreneurs can learn how

to apply for grants, find forms for exporting and importing, and verify employment eligibility; travelers can learn how

to check wait times at airports and border crossings; and members of the public can learn how to adopt a child

internationally, become a citizen, check the status of an immigration case, prepare for a disaster, and report cyber

incidents and suspicious activity.

https://www.dhs.gov/how-do-i

Keywords
The DHS website features a long list of keywords that are linked to pages containing information on the DHS, its

components, and its mission.

https://www.dhs.gov/keywords

National Terrorism Advisories
Terrorism advisories that remain in effect and archived copies of ones that have expired are posted on the National

Terrorism Advisory System web page.

https://www.dhs.gov/national-terrorism-advisory-system
Naturalization
Congress has established the requirements that a foreign citizen or national must fulfill to receive U.S. citizenship. The

process of being granted citizenship is known as naturalization. The U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services' website

offers resources for those seeking citizenship through naturalization.

https://www.uscis.gov/us-citizenship/citizenship-through-naturalization

News
The DHS posts audio items, congressional testimony, factsheets, photos and videos, press releases, and speeches on

its website. It also posts news items on national security in Spanish.

https://www.dhs.gov/news

Open Government
The DHS supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

https://www.dhs.gov/open-government

Operational Components
The DHS comprises 10 operational components: the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Cybersecurity and

Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), Federal Emergency Management

Agency (FEMA), Federal Law Enforcement Training Center (FLETC), U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE),

U.S. Secret Service (USSS), Transportation Security Administration (TSA), U.S. Coast Guard (USCG), and U.S. Citizenship

and Immigration Services (USCIS). The DHS website offers easy access to each of their home pages.

https://www.dhs.gov/dhs-component-websites

Policy Facts
The information on the regularly updated "Myth vs. Fact" web page responds to misleading characterizations of DHS

policies in the public domain.

https://www.dhs.gov/myth-vs-fact?utm_source=hp_carousel&utm_medium=web&utm_campaign=dhsgov

Publications
The DHS publications library contains brochures, guidance and policy papers, guidelines, program regulations, reports,

strategies, and more.

https://www.dhs.gov/publications

Report Cyber Incidents
To protect the Nation’s cybersecurity, the DHS has organizations dedicated to collecting information and reporting on

cyber incidents, phishing, malware, and other vulnerabilities.

https://www.dhs.gov/how-do-i/report-cyber-incidents

Site Links
The "Site Links" web page offers easy access to some of the most helpful resources on the DHS web site.

https://www.dhs.gov/site-links
     Site Map
     The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

     https://www.dhs.gov/sitemap

     Social Media
     The DHS maintains accounts on Facebook, Flickr, Instagram, and Twitter. An online subscription form also is available

     to sign up for email updates.

     https://www.dhs.gov/social-media-directory

     Topics
     The "Topics" web page offers convenient access to content that has been arranged topically.

     https://www.dhs.gov/topics

     Transportation Security
     The "Transportation Security" web page provides information on transportation and travel: aviation security, cargo

     screening, domestic travel, electronic passports, visas, and more.

     https://www.dhs.gov/topic/transportation-security

     Travel Alerts
     The DHS website offers convenient access to alerts and wait times: airport security checkpoint wait times from the

     Transportation Security Administration, airport wait times from the U.S. Customs and Border Protection, international

     travel warnings from the Department of State, and health alerts from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

     https://www.dhs.gov/travel-alerts

     White House Fence
     The White House complex fence is in the process of being redesigned. The proposal for the new fence is accessible on

     the website of the U.S. Secret Service. See the Fine Arts Commission's 35-page presentation (JUN 2016) of the "White

     House Complex Fence—Phase 1."

     https://www.secretservice.gov/data/about/faqs/WH-Fence-updated-CFA-061616.pdf
     https://www.dhs.gov/



Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility
Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                   Department of Housing and Urban Development




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
    451 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20410


    202-708-1422

    http://www.hud.gov


      SECRETARY                                                                             (Eric) Scott Turner


    https://www.hud.gov/about/leadership/Scott_Turner

      Deputy Secretary                                                                      (vacancy)
https://www.hud.gov/about/leadership/Adrianne_Todman



OFFICES REPORTING TO THE SECRETARY


 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Financial                                                                           (vacancy)


 Information                                                                         Elizabeth Niblock




 DIRECTOR


 Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization                                        Jean Lin Pao




 General Counsel                                                                     (vacancy)

https://www.hud.gov/about/leadership

 Inspector General                                                                   Rae Oliver Davis


https://www.hudoig.gov/about-hud-oig/organization-staff/inspector-general-immediate-office/rae-oliver-davis



OFFICES REPORTING TO THE CHIEF OF STAFF


 CHIEF OF STAFF                                                                      Jennifer C. Jones




 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Congressional and Intergovernmental Relations                                       (vacancy)


 Public Affairs                                                                      Addie Whisenant




 DIRECTOR


 Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships                                           Derrick Harkins

https://www.hud.gov/contact/principal_directory
OFFICES REPORTING TO THE DEPUTY SECRETARY


 ASSISTANT SECRETATIES


 Administration                                       (vacancy)


 Community Planning and Development                   (vacancy)


 Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity                   Jeanine Worden, Acting


 Field Policy and Management                          (vacancy)


 Housing                                              Janet Golrick, Acting


 Policy Development and Research                      (vacancy)


 Public and Indian Housing                            (vacancy)




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Administrative                                       (vacancy)


 Human Capital                                        Monica Matthews


 Procurement                                          Ronald C. Flom




 COMMISSIONER                                         Janet Golrick, Acting


 Federal Housing                                      (vacancy)




 DIRECTORS


 Equal Employment Opportunity                         Tami Wright, Acting


 Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes                Michelle Miller, Acting

https://www.hud.gov/program_offices



Government National Mortgage Association—Ginnie Mae
  President                                                                              (vacancy)

https://www.ginniemae.gov/about_us/who_we_are/pages/executive_leadership.aspx



The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.

The Department of Housing and Urban Development oversees housing needs nationwide, ensures fair housing

opportunities, and creates strong, sustainable, and inclusive communities.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On September 9, 1965, President Lyndon B. Johnson approved Public Law 89–174, which is also cited as the

Department of Housing and Urban Development Act. As part of the statute's declaration of purpose, Congress

declared that "the general welfare and security of the Nation and the health and living standards of our people require

. . . sound development of the Nation's communities and metropolitan areas in which the vast majority of its people

live and work." To support this requirement of sound development, Congress established "an executive department to

be known as the Department of Housing and Urban Development [HUD]" (79 Stat. 667).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-79/pdf/STATUTE-79-Pg667.pdf
Statutory material that governed HUD's establishment and that continues to affect the appointment and supervision of

the Secretary of HUD and his or her general duties is codified and assigned to section 3532 of 42 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title42-section3532&num=0&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that affect the Office of the Secretary have been codified and assigned to Subtitle A (parts 0–99)

of 24 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=5bb98a110aae0aa5ef135b4529083902&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title24/24subtitleA.tpl
By the advice and with the consent of the Senate, the President appoints the Secretary of HUD. The Secretary

supervises and directs the administration of the Department (79 Stat. 667).

https://www.hud.gov/about/hud_secretary/powersec
HUD's department structure is presented like an organizational chart in its "Fiscal Year 2020 Annual Performance

Report" on page 9. The Report was published in January of 2021.

https://www.hud.gov/sites/dfiles/CFO/documents/HUD_FY20_Annual_Performance_Report_1-15-21.pdf
HUD's program offices are listed alphabetically and hyperlinked on the "Program Offices" web page.

https://www.hud.gov/program_offices



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
"The Public Health and Welfare" is the general topic of statutory material that has been codified and assigned to 42

U.S.C. Chapter 44 (sections 3531–3550) is dedicated to the "Department of Housing and Urban Development."
https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title42/chapter44&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that affect housing and urban development have been codified and assigned to 24 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=5bb98a110aae0aa5ef135b4529083902&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title24/24tab_02.tpl



PROGRAM AREAS
HUD administers various programs to facilitate its six core functions: insuring mortgages for single-family and

multifamily dwellings and extending loans for home improvement and for the purchasing of mobile homes;

channeling funds from investors to the mortgage industry through the Government National Mortgage Association–

Ginnie Mae; making direct loans for construction or rehabilitation of housing projects that benefit the elderly and

handicapped; providing Federal housing subsidies for low- and moderate-income families; giving community

development grants to States and communities; and promoting and enforcing fair housing and equal housing

opportunity.

https://www.hud.gov/topics

Community Planning and Development
The Office of Community and Planning Development administers grant programs to help communities plan and

finance growth and development, to increase their governing capacity, and to shelter and provide services for the

homeless. The Office is responsible for implementing Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) programs for

entitlement communities; the State- and HUD-administered Small Cities Program; community development loan

guarantees; special purpose grants for insular areas and historically black colleges and universities; Appalachian

Regional Commission grants; the Home Investment in Affordable Housing Program, which provides Federal assistance

for housing rehabilitation, tenant-based assistance, first-time homebuyers, and new construction when a jurisdiction is

determined to need new rental housing; the Department's programs to address homelessness; the John Heinz

Neighborhood Development Program; community outreach partnerships; the joint community development plan that

assists institutions of higher education working in concert with State and local governments to undertake activities

under the CDBG program; community adjustment and economic diversification planning grants; empowerment zones

and enterprise communities; efforts to improve the environment; and community planning and development efforts of

other departments and agencies, public and private organizations, private industry, financial markets, and international

organizations.

http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/comm_planning

  For further information, contact the Office of Community Planning and Development. Phone, 202-708-
  2690.



Fair Housing / Equal Opportunity
The Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity administers fair housing laws and regulations prohibiting

discrimination in public and private housing; equal opportunity laws and regulations prohibiting discrimination in HUD-

assisted housing and community development programs; the fair housing assistance grants program to provide

financial and technical assistance to State and local government agencies to implement local fair housing laws and
ordinances; and the Community Housing Resources Boards program to provide grants for fair housing activities,

including outreach and education, identification of institutional barriers to fair housing, and telephone hotlines for

complaints.

http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/fair_housing_equal_opp

  For further information, contact the Office of Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity. Phone, 202-708-4252.



Government National Mortgage Association–Ginnie Mae
Ginnie Mae is a Government corporation that makes housing affordable for millions of low- and moderate-income

earners by channeling capital into the Nation's housing markets. The Ginnie Mae guaranty allows mortgage lenders to

obtain a higher price when selling their mortgage loans in the secondary mortgage market. Lenders can then use the

proceeds of these sales to fund new mortgage loans. Without that liquidity, lenders would have to keep all loans in

their own portfolios and would not have adequate capital for making new loans. Ginnie Mae guarantees investors the

timely payment of principal and interest on mortgage-backed securities that are backed by federally insured or

federally guaranteed loans—loans insured by the Federal Housing Administration or guaranteed by the Department of

Veterans Affairs. Other guarantors, or issuers, of loans that are eligible as collateral for Ginnie Mae mortgage-backed

securities include HUD's Office of Public and Indian Housing and the Department of Agriculture's Rural Development.

Ginnie Mae securities are the only mortgage-backed securities to carry the full faith and credit guaranty of the U.S.

Government.

http://www.ginniemae.gov/pages/default.aspx

  For further information, contact the Government National Mortgage Association. Phone, 202-708-0926.



Housing
The Office of Housing oversees aid for construction and financing of new and rehabilitated housing and for

preservation of existing housing. The Office underwrites single-family, multifamily, property improvement, and

manufactured home loans; administers special purpose programs designed for the elderly, handicapped, and

chronically mentally ill; administers housing assistance programs for low-income families having difficulties affording

standard housing; administers grants to fund resident ownership of multifamily house properties; and protects

consumers against fraudulent land development and promotional practices.

http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/housing

  For further information, contact the Office of Housing. Phone, 202-708-3600.



Lead Hazard Control / Healthy Homes
The Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes is responsible for lead hazard control policy development,

abatement, training, regulations, and research. Activities of the Office include increasing public and building-industry

awareness of the dangers of lead-based paint poisoning and the options for detection, risk reduction, and abatement;

encouraging the development of safer, more effective, and less costly methods for detection, risk reduction, and
abatement; and encouraging State and local governments to develop lead-based paint programs covering contractor

certification, hazard reduction, financing, enforcement, and primary prevention, including public education.

http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/healthy_homes

  For further information, contact the Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes. Phone, 202-755-
  1785.



Public and Indian Housing
The Office of Public and Indian Housing administers public and Indian housing programs; assists technically and

financially with planning, developing, and managing low-income projects; subsidizes the operations of public housing

agencies (PHAs) and Indian housing authorities (IHAs) and provides procedures for reviewing the management of

public housing agencies; administers the comprehensive improvement assistance and comprehensive grant programs

for modernizing low-income housing projects; administers programs for resident participation, resident management,

home ownership, economic development and supportive services, and drug-free neighborhood programs; protects

low-income tenants from lead-based paint poisoning by requiring PHAs and IHAs to comply with HUD regulations for

the testing and removal of lead-based paint; implements and monitors program requirements related to program

eligibility and admission of families to public and assisted housing, as well as tenant income and rent requirements for

continued occupancy; administers the HOPE VI and vacancy reduction programs; administers voucher and certificate

programs and the Moderate Rehabilitation Program; coordinates all departmental housing and community

development programs for Indian and Alaskan Natives; and awards grants to PHAs and IHAs for the construction,

acquisition, and operation of public and Indian housing projects.

http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/public_indian_housing/ih

  For further information, contact the Office of Public and Indian Housing. Phone, 202-708-0950.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
An alphabetical index is available on the HUD website to help visitors search for specific topics or browse content that

aligns with their interests.

https://www.hud.gov/siteindex/quicklinks

Archived Records
HUD records are referenced in the "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States." The Guide

is accessible online, and HUD records have been assigned to Record Group 207.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/207.html

Bibliographic Database
The HUD USER bibliographic database contains more than 10,000 full-abstract citations to research reports, articles,

books, monographs, and data sources in housing policy, building technology, economic development, urban
planning, and a host of other relevant fields.

https://www.huduser.gov/portal/bibliodb/pdrbibdb.html

Business Opportunities
To learn about contracting opportunities, programs, and resources, use the link below. The Office of the Chief

Procurement Officer can provide additional information. Phone, 202-708-1290. TDD, 202-708-1455.

https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/cpo

Career Opportunities
Information on career opportunities—including opportunities for veterans, students, and people with disabilities—is

available online. Information is also available from the Personnel Division at the nearest regional office and from the

Office of Human Resources in Washington, DC. Phone, 202-708-0408.

https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/administration/careers
In 2020, HUD ranked 14th among 25 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=HU00

Climate Change Resilience
The Office of Economic Development oversees HUD's preparations to mitigate the effects of climate change on it's

mission, operations, and programs. This includes promoting greater capacity in and more utilization of resilient

approaches to community development at the local, regional, and State levels.

https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/economic_development/resilience/about                       |                Email:
EconomicDevelopment@hud.gov

Contact Information
Contact information is available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.hud.gov/contact

Data / Research
The Office of Policy Development and Research posts datasets, publications, research, and information on initiatives

on its "HUD User" website.

https://www.huduser.gov/portal/home.html

Employee Locater
To locate a HUD employee or to send a HUD employee an email, visit the "Search for HUD Employees" web page. An

automated phone locator service is also available. Phone, 202-708-1112. TDD, 202-708-1455.

http://peoplesearch.hud.gov/po/i/netlocator

En Español
HUD posts information in Spanish on its website.

https://www.hud.gov/espanol
Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that HUD recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/housing-and-urban-development-department
Several phone numbers are available on the "Información en Español" web page.

https://www.hud.gov/directory/800/parainformacion

Field Offices
Visit HUD's online local office directory to find contact information for its field offices.

https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/field_policy_mgt/localoffices

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded from

disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute.

https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/administration/foia
Many HUD documents are available online. Before submitting a written request, click on the "Frequently Requested

Materials" and "E–FOIA Reading Room" links on HUD's FOIA web page to see if the desired information is immediately

accessible, free of charge. Phone, 202-708-3054.

https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/administration/foia/frequentrequestedmaterials

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
Answers to FAQs are posted online.

https://www.hud.gov/faqs

Glossary
The Government National Mortgage Association (Ginnie Mae) maintains a glossary on its website.

https://www.ginniemae.gov/Pages/Glossary.aspx
HUD maintains a list of frequently used terms and acronyms on its website.

https://www.hud.gov/about/acronyms

History
In the aftermath of assassination that outraged communities of color and sparked protest and violence in American

cities, President Lyndon B. Johnson approved Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, commonly referred to as the Fair

Housing Act. Signing "into law the promises of a century" was his description of that moment. The promises of this

legislation included outlawing most housing discrimination and giving enforcement responsibility to HUD. To learn

more about HUD's history of overseeing and coordinating Federal housing programs and enforcing fair housing

practices, visit the "HUD History" web page.

https://www.hud.gov/about/hud_history

Hotline
The Office of the Inspector General maintains the Hotline to report fraud, mismanagement, and waste. Phone, 202-
708-4200 or 800-347-3735. TDD, 202-708-2451.

http://www.hudoig.gov/hotline | Email: hotline@hudoig.gov

Housing Choice Voucher (HCV)
The HCV program is the Federal Government's main program to help low-income families, the elderly, and the

disabled find and afford decent, safe, and sanitary housing in the private market.

https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/public_indian_housing/programs/hcv/about/fact_sheet

Human Stories
"The Humans of HUD" web page allows visitors to meet the men and women whom HUD serves. The page contains

brief narratives and short videos.

https://www.hud.gov/humansofhud

Library
The library is located at HUD headquarters in Washington, DC. Visitors must schedule an appointment to use the

library. It is open weekdays, except Federal holidays, from 9:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. Phone, 202-402-2680.


Organizational Directory
An organization directory of HUD's headquarters is available online.

https://www.hud.gov/directory/director

Press Room
HUD posts press releases, remarks, speeches, statements, and testimonies on its website.

https://www.hud.gov/press

Program Offices
The "Program Offices" web page provides links for easy access to program information.

https://www.hud.gov/program_offices

Property Disposition
For single-family properties, contact the Chief Property Officer at the nearest HUD regional office or the Property

Disposition Division. Phone, 202-708-0614. For multifamily properties, contact the Regional Housing Director at the

nearest HUD regional office or the Property Disposition Division. Phone, 202-708-0614.

https://www.hud.gov/topics/homes_for_sale

Regional Organization Map
HUD is organized in 10 regions, each of which a regional administrator manages. A field office director manages each

field office within a region. Field office directors report to the appropriate regional administrator.

https://www.hud.gov/localoffices/regions

Publications
Information on bibliographies, forms, grant applications, handbooks, technical guidance for programs, and other
     publications, is posted online. These publications are described on the "HUD Handbooks, Forms, and Publications"

     web page.

     https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/administration/handbks_forms

     Resources
     The "Resources" web page has a list of helpful links in alphabetical order.

     https://www.hud.gov/resources

     Site Map
     The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

     https://www.hud.gov/siteindex

     Social Media
     HUD's social media directory provides links to all of its official blogs and social media platforms on Facebook, Flickr,

     Instagram, Twitter, and YouTube.

     https://www.hud.gov/program_offices/public_affairs/socialmedia

     State Information
     The "State Information" web page allows visitors to access online informational resources that States provide. People

     who are searching for resources that address homelessness and other related topics should explore how State-level

     organizations and government agencies may be able to help.

     https://www.hud.gov/states

     Veteran Homelessness
     The "Veteran Homelessness" page lists HUD homeless programs and initiatives that are available to veterans and

     veteran service providers. The web page also has policy guidance, publications, resources, and relevant links to other

     agencies and organizations.

     https://www.hudexchange.info/homelessness-assistance/resources-for-homeless-veterans

        The above Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility
Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                 Department of Justice
                                                         Bureaus
                                Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
                                                    Bureau of Prisons
                                          Drug Enforcement Administration
                                            Federal Bureau of Investigation
                         International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL)–Washington
                                               Office of Justice Programs
                                            United States Marshals Service
                                                     Offices / Boards
                                       Executive Office for Immigration Review
                             Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States
                                   Office of Community Oriented Policing Services
                                          Office on Violence Against Women
                                           United States Parole Commission




The United States Government Manual
 DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
950 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20530


202-514-2000

http://www.justice.gov


 ATTORNEY GENERAL                                                Pam Bondi


 Deputy Attorney General                                         Lisa O. Monaco


https://www.justice.gov/ag/staff-profile/meet-attorney-general

 Associate Attorney General                                      Vanita Gupta


 Solicitor General                                               Brian H. Fletcher, Acting




Assistant Attorneys General for Divisions


 Antitrust                                                       Richard A. Powers, Acting


 Civil                                                           Brian Boynton, Acting


 Civil Rights                                                    Kristen Clarke


 Criminal                                                        Kenneth A. Polite, Jr.


 Environment and Natural Resources                               Todd S. Kim


 Justice Management—Administration                               Lee J. Lofthus


 National Security                                               (vacancy)


 Tax                                                             David A. Hubbert, Acting

https://www.justice.gov/agencies/chart



Assistant Attorneys General for Offices


 Legal Counsel                                                   Dawn E. Johnsen, Acting


 Legal Policy                                                    Kevin Jones, Acting
 Legislative Affairs                                                                    (vacancy)




Directors of Components


 Community Relations Service                                                            Gerri L. Ratliff, Acting


 Organized Crime Drug Enforcement Task Forces                                           Adam W. Cohen




Directors of Executive Offices


 U.S. Attorneys                                                                         Monty Wilkinson


 U.S. Trustee Program                                                                   Clifford J. White III




Directors of Offices


 Information Policy                                                                     Bobak Talebian


                                                                                        Rosalind Sargent-Burns,
 Pardon Attorney
                                                                                        Acting


 Professional Responsibility                                                            Jeffrey R. Ragsdale


 Professional Responsibility Advisory                                                   Stacy Ludwig


 Public Affairs                                                                         Anthony Coley


 Tribal Justice                                                                         Tracy Toulou

https://www.justice.gov/agencies/alphabetical-listing-components-programs-initiatives

 Inspector General                                                                      Michael E. Horowitz


https://oig.justice.gov/about/meet-ig.htm



 The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Department of Justice enforces the law and defends national interests according to the law; ensures public safety

against domestic and foreign threats; provides Federal leadership in preventing and controlling crime; seeks just

punishment for those who have behaved unlawfully; and ensures fair and impartial administration of justice for all
American citizens.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On September 23, 1789, when the U.S. Congress was assembled in the City of New York, President George

Washington approved "an Act for allowing certain Compensation . . . to the Attorney General of the United States."

This statute, which is often called the Judiciary Act of 1789, established the Office of the Attorney General.

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/1st-congress/session-1/c1s1ch18.pdf
The increased amount of litigation involving the United States after the Civil War necessitated the retention of private

attorneys, until the U.S. Congress established the Department of Justice to handle the legal business of the Nation.

https://www.justice.gov/history/timeline/150-years-department-justice#event-1195101
On June 22, 1870, President Ulysses S. Grant approved "an Act to establish the Department of Justice" (16 Stat. 162).

The statute established the Department of Justice (DOJ) as "an executive department of the government of the United

States . . . of which the Attorney-General shall be the head." The statute also established, within the DOJ, the office of

Solicitor General: "an officer learned in the law, to assist the Attorney-General in the performance of his duties." The

Solicitor General represents the interests of the United States before the Nation's Supreme Court. The statute became

effective on July 1, 1870, and gave the DOJ control over all Federal law enforcement and all criminal prosecutions and

civil suits in which the United States has an interest.

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/41st-congress/session-2/c41s2ch150.pdf
Under the leadership of the Attorney General, the DOJ comprises approximately 40 separate component

organizations with approximately 116,000 employees. The DOJ's headquarters are in Washington, DC, and the

Department conducts most of its work through field locations nationwide and others that are overseas.


The DOJ posts its organizational chart online.

https://www.justice.gov/agencies/chart
The DOJ posts its "Organization, Mission, and Functions Manual" online.

https://www.justice.gov/jmd/organization-mission-and-functions-manual



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material whose subject matter affects the DOJ is codified in "Part II—Department of Justice" (parts 501–599B)

in 28 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title28/part2&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations dealing with judicial administration are codified in 28 CFR. Chapter I (parts 0.1–200.1)) of that

same CFR title contains subject matter associated with the DOJ.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
gp=&SID=4bc7cb17c5a411037d7efbd9fe3a2c32&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title28/28chapterI.tpl



ACTIVITIES
Administration of Bankruptcy Cases
The DOJ oversees the administration of bankruptcy cases and private trustees through its U.S. Trustee Program. This

national program has broad administrative, regulatory, and litigation and enforcement authorities to promote the

integrity and efficiency of the bankruptcy system for the benefit of creditors, debtors, and the public.

https://www.justice.gov/ust

Coordination of Enforcement With Intelligence
The DOJ participates in the fight against terrorism and against other national security threats. The National Security

Division (NSD) ensures that prosecutors and law enforcement agencies coordinate with intelligence attorneys and the

intelligence community and that they share a unity of purpose to strengthen the effectiveness of the Federal

Government's threat response. The NSD's major areas of responsibility include counterespionage, counterterrorism,

foreign investment, intelligence operations and intelligence-related litigation, policy and other legal issues, oversight

and reporting, and victims of terrorism.

https://www.justice.gov/jmd/organization-mission-and-functions-manual-national-security-division

Criminal Investigation
The DOJ participates in the fight against crime. Its major investigative agencies—the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,

Firearms and Explosives; the Drug Enforcement Administration; and the Federal Bureau of Investigation—prevent and

deter crime and arrest people who are suspect of criminal activity.

https://www.justice.gov/agencies/alphabetical-listing-components-programs-initiatives

Incarceration / Rehabilitation
The Federal Bureau of Prisons supports public safety by confining Federal lawbreakers in the controlled environments

of prisons and community-based facilities. Prisons and community-based facilities are appropriately secure, cost-

efficient, humane, and safe. Work and other self-improvement opportunities are available to help offenders become

law-abiding citizens.

https://www.bop.gov

Litigation
The DOJ litigating divisions enforce Federal criminal and civil laws, including antitrust, civil justice, civil rights,

environmental, and tax statutes.

https://www.justice.gov/agencies/alphabetical-listing-components-programs-initiatives

Prosecution / Representation
U.S. Attorneys serve as the Nation's principal litigators, prosecuting offenders and representing the Federal

Government in court. They conduct most of the trial work for cases in which the United States is a party. U.S. Attorneys

have three statutory responsibilities: prosecution of criminal cases brought by the Federal Government; prosecution

and defense of civil cases in which the United States is a party; and the collection of debts that are owed the Federal

Government and that are administratively uncollectible.

https://www.justice.gov/usao/mission
Protecting the Federal Judiciary
The U.S. Marshals Service occupies a central position in the Federal justice system. It serves as the enforcement arm of

the Federal courts and is involved in virtually every Federal law enforcement initiative. Deputy U.S. marshals and

criminal investigators form the backbone of the agency. They protect the Federal judiciary, apprehend Federal

fugitives, seize property acquired by criminals through illegal activities, house and transport Federal prisoners, and

operate the witness security program.

https://www.justice.gov/jmd/organization-mission-and-functions-manual-united-states-marshals-service

Recommendations for Executive Clemency
The Office of the Pardon Attorney receives and reviews all petitions requesting executive clemency for Federal

offenses, conducts the necessary investigations, and prepares recommendations to the President for the review and

signature of the Deputy Attorney General. It provides policy guidance for the conduct of clemency proceedings and

the standards for decision. It respond to inquiries from clemency applicants, their representatives, public groups,

Members of Congress, various Federal, State, and local officials, and others concerning clemency petitions and the

clemency process. It also maintains contacts with DOJ officials, the Counsel to the President, and other Government

officials to advise them on clemency matters as requested.

https://www.justice.gov/jmd/organization-mission-and-functions-manual-office-pardon-attorney

State, Tribal, and Local Assistance
The DOJ gives assistance to State, tribal, and local governments. The Office of Justice Programs (OJP) provides Federal

leadership in developing the Nation's capacity to prevent and control crime, administer justice, and assist crime

victims. The OJP partners with Federal, State, local, and tribal agencies, as well as with national, community-based, and

nonprofit organizations, to develop, implement, and evaluate criminal and juvenile justice programs. The Office of

Community Oriented Policing Services develops programs that respond to the emerging needs of State, local, and

tribal law enforcement and helps shift its focus onto preventing, rather than reacting to, crime and disorder; develops

training and technical assistance to enhance law enforcement officers' problem-solving and community interaction

skills; promotes collaboration between law enforcement and community members for developing crime prevention

initiatives; and provides responsive and cost-effective service delivery to grant recipients. The Community Relations

Service provides services for conflicts and tensions arising from differences of race, color, or national origin. It is the

only Federal service mandated to help State and local government agencies, public and private organizations, and

community groups resolve and prevent community racial conflicts through mediation, conciliation, and other methods

of conflict resolution.

https://www.justice.gov/jmd/organization-mission-and-functions-manual



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Americans with Disabilities
The Civil Rights Division operates an Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) information line. Phone, 800-514-0301. TDD,

800-514-0383. The ADA.gov website has a "Topics of Interest" web page.

https://www.ada.gov/topics_of_interest.htm
Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that DOJ records have been

assigned to record group 060.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/060.html

Asset Sales
As part of the asset forfeiture program, the U.S. Marshals Service maintains a web page that is dedicated to assets that

are currently available for purchase.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/assets/sales.htm

Blogs
DOJ staff members post their blogs online.

https://www.justice.gov/blogs

Budget / Performance / Strategy
Budget factsheets, budget submissions, budget summaries, financial reports, performance plans, performance reports,

performance summaries, and strategic plans are posted on the "Budget and Performance" web page.

https://www.justice.gov/doj/budget-and-performance

Business Opportunities
For information on business opportunities, grants, and small and disadvantaged business utilization, visit the "Business"

web page.

https://www.justice.gov/business

Career Opportunities
The DOJ relies on people with various educational and professional backgrounds and who have diverse skills and

talents to carry out its mission. Career opportunities that the DOJ offers include accountant, attorney, auditor, budget

analyst, contract specialist, correctional officer, criminal investigator, financial manager, forensic scientist, human

resource specialist, information technology technician, intelligence researcher, legal assistant, paralegal specialist,

safety and occupational health specialist, and more.

http://www.justice.gov/careers
The "Legal Careers" web page contains information for law students and entry-level and experienced attorneys.

http://www.justice.gov/legal-careers
In 2020, the DOJ ranked 13th among 17 large Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJ00

Components / Programs / Initiatives
The DOJ has a list of components, programs, and initiatives on its "Alphabetical Listing of Components, Programs, and

Initiatives" web page. Each entry is hyperlinked and provides convenient access to the website of the respective

component, program, or initiative.
https://www.justice.gov/agencies/alphabetical-listing-components-programs-initiatives

Contact Information
An electronic "Contact Us Form" is available on the DOJ's "Contact Us" web page. General contact information also is

available on the same page.

https://www.justice.gov/contact-us
Office of Public Affairs contact information is posted for media inquiries.

https://www.justice.gov/opa/contact-office

Crime Data
The Bureau of Justice Statistics collects, analyzes, publishes, and disseminates information on crime, criminal offenders,

victims of crime, and the operation of justice systems at all levels of government. These data are critical to the efforts

of Federal, State, and local policymakers to prevent crime and to ensure that justice is administered efficiently and

evenhandedly.

https://bjs.ojp.gov

En Español
The DOJ posts information in Spanish on its "Justice.gov En Español" web pages.

https://www.justice.gov/espanol

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the DOJ recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/justice-department

Forms
The DOJ posts an electronic forms list that can be sorted by form title or by agency. This list does not include forms for

the Federal Bureau of Prisons or for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. Those forms are

available on the Bureaus' websites.

https://www.justice.gov/forms

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives the right to request access to records from a Federal agency. Any person may submit a request for

access to Government records (i.e., a FOIA request). Federal agencies are required to disclose information requested

under the FOIA, unless that information is shielded from disclosure because it falls under one of nine exemptions

protecting interests such as personal privacy, national security, or law enforcement. The DOJ manages the website

FOIA.gov, which serves as the Federal Government's central website for FOIA-related matters.

https://www.foia.gov
The DOJ maintains an electronic FOIA Library. The library contains DOJ documents, including documents that belong

to components of the DOJ. The DOJ proactively discloses documents, and these documents are accessible without

submitting a FOIA request. Before making a formal FOIA request, an information seeker should search the FOIA library

to rule out the possibility that the DOJ or one of its components already has disclosed the desired information
proactively.

https://www.justice.gov/oip/foia-library

Glossary
The Offices of the U.S. Attorneys web page has a legal terms glossary that defines over 100 of the most common legal

terms in simple language.

https://www.justice.gov/usao/justice-101/glossary

History
Historical information on the Attorneys General of the United States, the Department's motto and seal, and the art and

architecture of the Robert F. Kennedy Department of Justice Building is available online.

https://www.justice.gov/about/history

Housing Discrimination
To report an incident of housing discrimination, contact the Civil Rights Division's housing and civil enforcement

section. Phone, 800-896-7743.

http://www.justice.gov/crt/housing-and-civil-enforcement-section | Email: fairhousing@usdoj.gov

Immigrant and Employee Rights
The Civil Rights Division operates a worker hotline. Phone, 800-255-7688. TDD, 800-237-2515. It also has a hotline for

employers. Phone, 800-255-8155. TTY, 800-237-2515. The hotlines allow workers and employers to work directly with

Immigrant and Employee Rights staff to resolve potential immigration-related employment disputes, informally and

quickly, without contested litigation. Language interpretation services are available upon request.

http://www.justice.gov/crt/hotline-technical-assistance-referral-agencies

Initiatives / Programs / Subject Matter Areas
Initiatives and programs in which the DOJ participates and subject matter areas that it handles are listed on the

"Topics" web page.

https://www.justice.gov/topics

Judicial Encroachment
Former Attorney General Jefferson B. Sessions delivered remarks to the Heritage Foundation in October of 2018 on

judicial encroachment. In those remarks, he said: "Federal district court judges are not empowered to fashion

immigration policy, combat climate change, solve the opioid crisis, or run police departments. The Legislative and

Executive branches . . . are the constitutionally authorized branches to do these things, and if these branches haven’t

done so to the satisfaction of an unaccountable judge, it’s not because they need judicial expertise or advice."

https://www.justice.gov/opa/speech/attorney-general-jeff-sessions-delivers-remarks-heritage-foundation-judicial-
encroachment

Justice Manual
The current and official version of the "Justice Manual" is available online. The manual was previously known as the

"United States Attorneys' Manual." In 2018, it was comprehensively revised and renamed. The "Justice Manual" serves
as an internal guide within the DOJ.

https://www.justice.gov/jm/justice-manual

News
The DOJ posts press releases on its website.

https://www.justice.gov/news

Open Government
The Department supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation,

and transparency.

https://www.justice.gov/open

Pardons / Commutations
The Office of the Pardon Attorney maintains a list of Presidential pardons and commutations on its "Clemency

Recipients" web page. The list starts with pardons and commutations that President Richard M. Nixon granted and

ends with those that were granted by the former or current President.

https://www.justice.gov/pardon/clemencyrecipients

Publications
DOJ reports and publications are accessible and arranged alphabetically online.

https://www.justice.gov/publications/usdoj-resources-publications-alphabetical-list
The Office of the Attorney General maintains a web page of "Selected Publications."

https://www.justice.gov/ag/selected-publications

Reading Rooms
Reading rooms are located in Washington, DC, at the Department of Justice, Tenth Street and Constitution Avenue

NW., and at the National Institute of Justice, 633 Indiana Avenue NW., and in Falls Church, VA, at the Board of

Immigration Appeals, 5107 Leesburg Pike. Phone, 202-514-3775.


Social Media
The DOJ and its component agencies rely on social media for providing information in additional places and in more

ways. The DOJ uses various social media accounts to share news, to make information and services more widely

available, and to increase Government transparency.

https://www.justice.gov/social

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Bureaus
Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
Explosives
99 New York Avenue NE., Washington, DC 20226


202-648-8500

http://www.atf.gov


  DIRECTOR                                               Marvin G. Richardson, Acting


  Deputy Director                                        Marvin G. Richardson


https://www.atf.gov/about-atf/executive-staff



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives protects the public from crimes involving arson,

explosives, firearms, and the diversion of alcohol and tobacco products; regulates lawful commerce in

explosives and firearms; and supports law enforcement, public safety, and industry partners worldwide.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 6, 1972, Acting Secretary of the Treasury Charles E. Walker signed an order affecting the

Department's organization and procedure. Order No. 221 transferred "the functions, powers and duties of

the Internal Revenue Service arising under laws relating to alcohol, tobacco, firearms, and explosives

(including the Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms Division of the Internal Revenue Service), to the Bureau of

Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms . . . which is hereby established." On June 10, 1972, Treasury Department

Order 221 was published as a notice in the Federal Register (37 FR 11696).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1972-06-10/pdf/FR-1972-06-10.pdf
On November 25, 2002, President George W. Bush approved Public Law 107–296, which also may be cited

as the Homeland Security Act of 2002, "to establish the Department of Homeland Security, and for other

purposes" (116 Stat. 2135). One of the other purposes was to separate the functions of the Bureau of

Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF). The alcohol and tobacco excise tax functions and regulations

remained within the Department of the Treasury, and a new bureau became responsible for them. The Act

also transferred ATF firearms and explosives functions to the Department of Justice and made the newly

established Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATFE) responsible for them (116 Stat.

2274).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-116/pdf/STATUTE-116-Pg2135.pdf
The ATFE posts an organizational chart on its website.

https://www.atf.gov/about/organization-structure

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
"Subchapter XI—Department of Justice Divisions" is part of "Chapter 1—Homeland Security Organization"

in 6 U.S.C. Parts 531–533 contain codified statutory material associated with the transfer of the ATFE to the
Department of Justice.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title6/chapter1/subchapter11&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that affect firearms and ammunition, explosives, alcohol and tobacco, and explosive

license and permit proceedings are codified in chapter II, parts 400–799, of 27 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=c5bb1cb9dbe3c7d2134a728d6b30c7ea&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title27/27chapterII.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The ATFE enforces Federal criminal laws and regulates the firearms and explosives industries. Directly and

through partnerships, the ATFE investigates and deters violent crime involving arson, firearms and

explosives, and trafficking of alcohol and tobacco products. The Bureau provides training and support to

its Federal, State, local, and international law enforcement partners and works primarily in 25 field divisions

nationwide, including Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and Guam. It also has foreign offices in Canada,

El Salvador, Mexico, and Europe.

https://www.atf.gov/about/what-we-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that ATFE records

have been assigned to record group 436.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/436.html

Career Opportunities
ATFE employees conduct criminal investigations and regulate the firearms and explosives industries. They

also assist other law enforcement agencies, help to prevent terrorism, reduce violent crime, and protect

the public in a manner that is consistent with the Constitution and the laws of the United States.

https://www.atf.gov/careers
In 2020, the ATFE ranked 23d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's

Best Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TR40

Contact Information
Contact information for media inquiries is available on the "Media and Congressional Contacts" web page.

https://www.atf.gov/news/media-and-congressional-contacts

Data / Statistics
The ATFE maintains a comprehensive collection of agency-related data from national surveys, State-based

surveys, other collected license statistics, and other data sources. The data reflect trends in commerce,

firearms, and use of Federal services in the United States.
https://www.atf.gov/resource-center/data-statistics

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the ATFE recently published in the Federal Register are

accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/alcohol-tobacco-firearms-and-explosives-bureau

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA provides that a person may request access to Federal agency records or information. The ATFE

must disclose records that any person properly requests in writing. Pursuant to one or more of nine

exemptions and three exclusions that the Act contains, a Federal agency may withhold certain records or

parts of them. The FOIA applies only to Federal agencies and does not create a right of access to records

held by the U.S. Congress, the courts, State or local government agencies, and private entities.

https://www.atf.gov/resource-center/freedom-information-act-foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The ATFE posts answers to FAQs on its "Questions and Answers" web page.

https://www.atf.gov/questions-and-answers

History
A history timeline is available on the ATFE website.

https://www.atf.gov/our-history/atf-history-timeline

Social Media
The ATFE maintains accounts on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, and YouTube.

https://www.atf.gov/news/social-media

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Bureau of Prisons
320 First Street NW., Washington, DC 20534


202-307-3198

http://www.bop.gov


  DIRECTOR                                              Michael Carvajal


  Deputy Director                                       Gene Beasley


https://www.bop.gov/about/agency/leadership.jsp



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.
The BOP was established in 1930 to provide more progressive and humane care for Federal inmates, to

professionalize the prison service, and to ensure consistent and centralized administration of the 11 Federal

prisons in operation at that time. Today, the Bureau comprises more than 100 institutions and 6 regional

offices. The Bureau has its headquarters, also known as Central Office, in Washington, DC. The Central

Office is divided into 10 divisions, including the National Institute of Corrections.


The Correctional Programs Division (CPD) is responsible for inmate classification and programming,

including psychology and religious services, substance abuse treatment, case management, and programs

for special needs offenders. CPD provides policy direction and daily operational oversight of institution

security,   emergency    preparedness,     intelligence   gathering,   inmate    discipline,   inmate   sentence

computations, receiving and discharge, and inmate transportation, as well as coordinating international

treaty transfers and overseeing the special security needs of inmates placed in the Federal Witness

Protection Program. CPD administers contracts and intergovernmental agreements for the confinement of

offenders in community-based programs, community corrections centers, and other facilities, including

privately managed facilities. CPD staff is also involved in the Bureau's privatization efforts.


The Industries, Education, and Vocational Training Division oversees Federal Prison Industries, or UNICOR,

which is a wholly owned Government corporation that provides employment and training opportunities

for inmates confined in Federal correctional facilities. Additionally, it is responsible for oversight of

educational, occupational, and vocational training and leisure-time programs, as well as those related to

inmate release preparation.


The National Institute of Corrections (NIC) provides technical assistance, training, and information to State

and local corrections agencies throughout the country, as well as the Bureau. It also provides research

assistance and documents through the NIC Information Center.

https://www.bop.gov/about/agency



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
An alphabetical subject index helps visitors navigate the website's content.

https://www.bop.gov/website/a_to_z_topics.jsp

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that BOP records

have been assigned to record group 129.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/129.html

Business Opportunities
Information is available on the "Let's Do Business" web page.

http://www.bop.gov/business
Career Opportunities
Job openings are posted online. For additional career-related information, contact any regional or field

office or the Central Office, 320 First Street NW., Washington, DC 20534. Phone, 202-307-3082.

http://www.bop.gov/jobs
In 2020, the BOP ranked 387th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's

Best Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJ03

Contact Information
The BOP has a "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.bop.gov/contact

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the BOP recently published in the Federal Register are

accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/prisons-bureau

Find an Inmate
The Department's website features a search tool for locating Federal inmates who were incarcerated after

1981.

https://www.bop.gov/inmateloc

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Enacted in 1966, the FOIA took effect on July 4, 1967. The law gives a right to obtain access to Federal

agency records to any person, except a fugitive from the law. Some records, or portions of them, are

shielded, however, from disclosure by one or more of nine statutory exemptions or by specific harm that

disclosure may cause.

https://www.bop.gov/foia/index.jsp#tabs-0 | Email: ogc_efoia@bop.gov
The BOP posts records online. Before filing a formal FOIA request, an information seeker should visit the

BOP's "Freedom of Information" web page and view the records section to ensure that the desired

information is not already freely accessible.

https://www.bop.gov/foia/index.jsp#tabs-1

Locations
The "Our Locations" web page features a list of locations, a search tool that requires the facility's name,

and location maps (national, regional, type of facility).

https://www.bop.gov/locations

Population Statistics
Federal inmate population statistics are online.
https://www.bop.gov/about/statistics/population_statistics.jsp

Reading Room
The reading room is located at the Bureau of Prisons, 320 First Street NW., Washington, DC 20534. Phone,

202-307-3029.


Resources by Audience
Resources to help Bureau of Prisons staff and their families access frequently used services are online.

https://www.bop.gov/resources/employee_resources.jsp
Resources to help former inmates make the transition from incarceration to normal life within a community

are online.

https://www.bop.gov/resources/former_inmate_resources.jsp
The Attorney General and the Secretary of Health and Human Services provide health management

guidelines for infectious disease prevention, detection, and treatment of inmates and correctional

employees who are exposed to infectious diseases in correctional facilities.

https://www.bop.gov/resources/health_care_mngmt.jsp
Resources to help qualified media representatives visit institutions and gather information on programs

and activities or conduct interviews are online.

https://www.bop.gov/resources/media_resources.jsp
Resources to help victims or witnesses of Federal crimes find information on complaint procedures,

notifications, and payments are online.

https://www.bop.gov/resources/victim_resources.jsp

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse for content that aligns with their

interests.

https://www.bop.gov/website/site_map.jsp

Social Media
The BOP has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/BOPCareers
The BOP tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/officialfbop

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Drug Enforcement Administration
8701 Morrissette Drive, Springfield, VA 22152


202-307-1000
http://www.dea.gov/index.shtml


  ADMINISTRATOR                                           Anne Milgram


  Principal Deputy Administrator                          Preston L. Grubbs


https://www.dea.gov/about/dea-leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is the lead Federal agency in enforcing narcotics and

controlled substances laws and regulations. The DEA also enforces the Federal money laundering and bulk

currency smuggling statutes when the funds involved in the transactions or smuggling are derived from

the sale of narcotics. It was created in July 1973 by Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1973 (5 U.S.C. app.).

https://www.dea.gov/history
The DEA enforces the provisions of the controlled substances and chemical diversion and trafficking laws

and regulations of the United States, operating on a worldwide basis. It presents cases to the criminal and

civil justice systems of the United States—or any other competent jurisdiction—on those significant

organizations and their members involved in cultivation, production, smuggling, distribution, laundering of

proceeds, or diversion of controlled substances appearing in or destined for illegal traffic in the United

States. The DEA disrupts and dismantles these organizations by arresting their members, confiscating their

drugs, and seizing their assets; and it creates, manages, and supports enforcement-related programs—

domestically and internationally—to reduce the availability of and demand for illicit controlled substances.


The DEA's responsibilities include: investigation of major narcotic, chemical, drug-money laundering, and

bulk currency smuggling violators who operate at interstate and international levels; seizure and forfeiture

of assets derived from, traceable to, or intended to be used for illicit drug trafficking; seizure and forfeiture

of assets derived from or traceable to drug-money laundering or the smuggling of bulk currency derived

from illegal drugs; enforcement of regulations governing the legal manufacture, distribution, and

dispensing of controlled substances; management of an intelligence program that supports drug

investigations, initiatives, and operations worldwide; coordination with Federal, State, and local law

enforcement authorities and cooperation with counterpart agencies abroad; assistance to State and local

law enforcement agencies in addressing their most significant drug and drug-related violence problems;

leadership and influence over international counterdrug and chemical policy and support for institution

building in host nations; training, scientific research, and information exchange in support of drug traffic

prevention and control; and education and assistance to the public community on the prevention,

treatment, and dangers of drugs.

https://www.dea.gov/mission
The DEA maintains liaison with the United Nations, INTERPOL, and other organizations on matters relating

to international narcotics control programs. It has 239 domestic offices in 23 Divisions nationwide, and 91
foreign offices in 68 countries.
https://www.dea.gov/domestic-divisions



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that DEA records

have been assigned to record group 170.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/170.html

Asset Forfeiture
The DEA posts public notices of forfeiture in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and

downloading on the Department of Justice's forfeiture.gov website.

https://www.forfeiture.gov

Business Opportunities
The DEA obtains supplies and services through its Office of Acquisition and Relocation Management. The

Office acquires supplies and services for local needs and all DEA agency-level procurements. DEA field

activities also have procurement authority, but it is limited.

https://www.dea.gov/resources/doing-business-dea | Email: deasmallbusinessprogram@usdoj.gov

Career Opportunities
For career information, contact the nearest DEA field division recruitment office. The DEA also posts

information on its "Careers" web page.

https://www.dea.gov/careers
In 2020, the DEA ranked 96th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's

Best Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJAA

Contact Information
The DEA posts contact information on its "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.dea.gov/who-we-are/contact-us | Email: info@dea.gov
Contact information for each of the DEA's 23 domestic divisions is available online.

https://www.dea.gov/divisions

Controlled Substances Act Registration
For information on registration under the Controlled Substances Act, contact the Office of Diversion

Control, 8701 Morrissette Drive, Springfield, VA 22152. Phone: 800-882-9539.

http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/drugreg/index.html | Email: DEA.Registration.Help@usdoj.gov

Data / Statistics
The DEA posts data and statistics online.

https://www.dea.gov/resources/data-and-statistics

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the DEA recently published in the Federal Register are

accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/drug-enforcement-administration

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives a right for public access to Government records. A FOIA request must be submitted in

writing. The DEA generally follows the FOIA guidelines that the Department of Justice has adopted.

https://www.dea.gov/foia

Museum
The DEA Museum and visitors' center are located in Arlington, VA. The museum posts virtual exhibits on

its deamuseum.org website. Phone, 202–307–3463.

https://deamuseum.org/exhibits

Press Releases
The DEA posts press releases online.

https://www.dea.gov/what-we-do/news/press-releases

Publications
The DEA posts various types of documents and publications online.

https://www.dea.gov/resources/documents?field_document_document_type_value=Publication

Resources
The "Resources" web page provides convenient access to data and statistics, drug information, Freedom of

Information Act guidance, media galleries, and publications.

https://www.dea.gov/resources

Social Media
The DEA maintains Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, and Twitter accounts. A social media directory is part of

the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.dea.gov/who-we-are/contact-us | Email: DEA.Public.Affairs@usdoj.gov

Victim Witness Assistance
Victims' rights laws resulted in the implementation of the victim witness assistance program. These laws

provide for fair and just treatment of crime victims, immediate emergency treatment, and referrals to

appropriate adult and child service agencies. The Department of Justice also gives guidance to Federal law

enforcement agencies through the Attorney General's guidelines for victim witness assistance.

https://www.dea.gov/resources/vwap | Email: VWAP.DEA@usdoj.gov
  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Federal Bureau of Investigation
935 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20535


202-324-3000

http://www.fbi.gov


  DIRECTOR                                                Kashyap Patel


  Deputy Director                                         Dan Bongino


https://www.fbi.gov/about/leadership-and-structure



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is the Department of Justice's principal investigative arm. It is

primarily charged with gathering and reporting facts, locating witnesses, and compiling evidence in cases

involving Federal jurisdiction. It also provides law enforcement leadership and assistance to State and

international law enforcement agencies.


The FBI was established in 1908 by the Attorney General, who directed that Department of Justice

investigations be handled by its own staff. The Bureau is charged with investigating all violations of Federal

law except those that have been assigned by legislative enactment or otherwise to another Federal

agency. Its jurisdiction includes a wide range of responsibilities in the national security, criminal, and civil

fields. Priority has been assigned to areas such as counterterrorism, counterintelligence, cybercrimes,

internationally and nationally organized crime and drug-related activities, and financial crimes.


The FBI also offers cooperative services to local, State, and international law enforcement agencies. These

services include fingerprint identification, laboratory examination, police training, the Law Enforcement

Online communication and information service for use by the law enforcement community, the National

Crime Information Center, and the National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FBI records

have been assigned to record group 065.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/065.html
Career Opportunities
The FBI relies on professionals with diverse expertise and skills to analyze data for the intelligence

community, safeguard national security, and support the structure of the Bureau. Information on career

opportunities, including student internships, is available online.

https://www.fbijobs.gov
In 2020, the FBI ranked 223d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's

Best Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJ02

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page provides convenient access to information for contacting FBI headquarters,

field offices, and overseas offices.

https://www.fbi.gov/contact-us
Members of the public may report a violation of U.S. Federal law or suspected terrorism or criminal activity

to the FBI.

https://www.fbi.gov/tips

Crime Statistics
The Uniform Crime Reporting program generates reliable statistics for use in law enforcement. It also

releases information that is relevant for students of criminal justice, researchers, the media, and the public.

The program has been generating crime statistics since 1930. The crime reporting program includes data

from more than 18,000 city, university and college, county, State, Tribal, and Federal law enforcement

agencies. Agencies participate voluntarily and submit their crime data either through a State UCR program

or directly to the FBI's UCR Program.

https://www.fbi.gov/services/cjis/ucr

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the FBI recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-bureau-of-investigation

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA provides that a person may request access to Federal agency records or information. The FBI

must disclose records that any person properly requests in writing. Pursuant to one or more of nine

exemptions and three exclusions that the Act contains, a Federal agency can withhold certain records or

parts of them. The FOIA applies only to Federal agencies and does not create a right of access to records

held by the U.S. Congress, the courts, State or local government agencies, and private entities.

https://www.fbi.gov/services/information-management/foipa
The FBI's electronic FOIA library, which contains nearly 7,000 documents and other media that have been

scanned from paper and made into more accessible digital copies, is named the "Vault." The library
includes new files that have been released to the public, but never added to the FBI website; dozens of

records previously posted on the FBI website, but removed when requests diminished; files from the

previous FBI FOIA Library; and new and previously unreleased files.

https://vault.fbi.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The FBI posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.fbi.gov/about/faqs

History
The FBI posted a brief agency history on its website.

https://www.fbi.gov/history

Most Wanted
The FBI maintains the official "Ten Most Wanted Fugitives" list on its website.

https://www.fbi.gov/wanted/topten

News
The FBI posts top news stories, press releases, podcasts, radio broadcasts, speeches, and Tweets on its

"News" web page.

https://www.fbi.gov/news

Publications
The FBI's training division maintains the "Law Enforcement Bulletin" website.

https://leb.fbi.gov
The FBI maintains an extensive "Reports and Publications" database.

https://www.fbi.gov/stats-services/publications

Resources
The "Resources" web page provides convenient access to information on business opportunities and victim

services. It also has links to featured publications and frequently requested forms and services.

https://www.fbi.gov/resources

Safe Online Surfing
The FBI maintains a "Safe Online Surfing" website for children.

https://www.fbi.gov/fbi-kids

Services
Services that the FBI provides are presented on a single "Services" web page.

https://www.fbi.gov/services

Social Media
The FBI started its presence on social media in 2008. Today, the Bureau has dozens of pages and sites.

https://www.fbi.gov/news/fbi-social-media-sites

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL)–Washington
Department of Justice, Washington, DC 20530


202-616-9000

202-616-8400

http://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington


  DIRECTOR                                              Michael A. Hughes


https://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/meet-leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



INTERPOL–Washington is a separate component under the supervision of the Deputy Attorney General

and comanaged with the Department of Homeland Security. It provides an essential communications link

between the U.S. police community and their counterparts in the foreign member countries.


INTERPOL is an association of 190 countries that promotes mutual assistance among law enforcement

authorities to prevent and suppress international crime. With no police force of its own, INTERPOL has no

powers of arrest or search and seizure and, therefore, relies on the law enforcement authorities of its

member countries. Each member country is required to have a national central bureau, such as

INTERPOL–Washington, to act as the primary point of contact for police affairs. INTERPOL serves as a

channel of communication for its member countries to cooperate in the investigation and prosecution of

crime; provides a forum for discussions, working group meetings, and symposia to help police focus on

specific areas of criminal activity affecting their countries; and issues information and maintains databases

—supplied and used by member countries—on crime, fugitives, humanitarian concerns, missing persons,

and stolen passports and vehicles.


INTERPOL–Washington has permanent staff and detailed special agents from numerous Federal law

enforcement agencies. It is organized into seven divisions: the Alien and Fugitive, Counterterrorism, Drug,

Economic Crimes, Human Trafficking and Child Protection, State and Local Police Liaison, and Violent

Crimes Divisions.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Career Opportunities
Information on career opportunities is available online.

http://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/employment

Contact Information
The "Contact the Agency" web page contains a postal address for INTERPOL–Washington.

https://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/contact-agency

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives any person a right to access Government records. A request for information must be

submitted in writing. INTERPOL–Washington, U.S. National Central Bureau, generally follows the guidelines

that the Department of Justice has set forth in its FOIA reference guide.

https://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/interpol-washington-foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
INTERPOL posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/frequently-asked-questions

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Office of Justice Programs
810 Seventh Street NW., Washington, DC 20531


202-307-0703

http://www.ojp.gov | Email: askojp@ojp.usdoj.gov


  Assistant Attorney General                               Amy L. Solomon, Acting


  Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General              Amy L. Solomon


https://www.ojp.gov/about/offices/office-assistant-attorney-general-oaag



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Office of Justice Programs (OJP) was established by the Justice Assistance Act of 1984 (42 U.S.C. 3711)

and reauthorized in 1994 and 2005 to provide Federal leadership, coordination, and assistance needed to

make the Nation's justice system more efficient and effective in preventing and controlling crime. OJP is

responsible for collecting statistical data and conducting analyses; identifying emerging criminal justice

issues; developing and testing promising approaches to address these issues; evaluating program results;

and disseminating these findings and other information to State and local governments.
https://www.ojp.gov/about
The OJP is comprised of the following bureaus and offices: the Bureau of Justice Assistance provides

funding, training, and technical assistance to State and local governments to combat violent and drug-

related crime and help improve the criminal justice system; the Bureau of Justice Statistics is responsible for

collecting and analyzing data on crime, criminal offenders, crime victims, and the operations of justice

systems at all levels of government; the National Institute of Justice sponsors research and development

programs, conducts demonstrations of innovative approaches to improve criminal justice, and develops

new criminal justice technologies; the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention provides

grants and contracts to States to help them improve their juvenile justice systems and sponsors innovative

research, demonstration, evaluation, statistics, replication, technical assistance, and training programs to

increase the Nation's understanding of and improve its response to juvenile violence and delinquency; the

Office for Victims of Crime administers victim compensation and assistance grant programs and provides

funding, training, and technical assistance to victim service organizations, criminal justice agencies, and

other professionals to improve the Nation's response to crime victims; and the Office of Sex Offender

Sentencing, Monitoring, Apprehending, Registering, and Tracking (SMART) maintains the standards of the

Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act as defined by the Adam Walsh Act. The SMART Office also

provides technical assistance and supports innovative and best practices in the field of sex offender

management.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Law

Enforcement Assistance Administration (LEAA) records have been assigned to record group 423. The OJP

is one of the LEAA's successor agencies.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/423.html

Blog
OJP Blog posts highlight OJP programs, as well as Department of Justice initiatives that support OJP's

mission.

https://www.ojp.gov/news/ojp-blogs/2020-ojp-blogs

Career Opportunities
The OJP relies on accountants, attorneys, grant and project managers, information technology specialists,

policy advisors, public affairs specialists, researchers, scientists, statisticians, writers and editors, and many

other professionals to carry out its mission.

https://www.ojp.gov/about/jobs
In 2020, the OJP ranked 337th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's

Best Places To Work Agency Rankings.
https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJ07

Congressional Resources
Resources for Members of Congress and their staff are posted on the "For Congress" web page.

https://www.ojp.gov/congress | Email: OJPCongressionalAffairs@usdoj.gov

Contact
The "Contact Us" web page has a mailing address, as well as email addresses and phone numbers.

https://www.ojp.gov/contact | Email: askojp@ncjrs.gov
The OJP has a "For Media" web page that also contains contact information.

https://www.ojp.gov/news/for-media

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the OJP recently published in the Federal Register are

accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/justice-programs-office

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Enacted in 1966, the FOIA took effect on July 4, 1967. The law gives a right to obtain access to Federal

agency records to any person, except a fugitive from the law. Some records, or portions of them, are

shielded, however, from disclosure by one or more of nine statutory exemptions or by specific harm that

disclosure may cause.

https://www.ojp.gov/program/freedom-information-act/overview

Juvenile Justice / Delinquency Prevention
The Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention publishes the bimonthly electronic newsletter

"OJJDP News @ a Glance." This award winning newsletter highlights office activities, funding opportunities,

publications, Tribal connections, and upcoming events.

https://ojjdp.ojp.gov/news/newsletter

News Releases
News releases are posted on the OJP website.

https://www.ojp.gov/news/news-releases

Publications
The OJP posts publications on its website.

https://www.ojp.gov/news/publications

Social Media
The OJP has social media accounts. The "Social Media" web page provides convenient access to all of

them: Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, and YouTube.

https://www.ojp.gov/news/social-media
State Administering Agencies
The OJP awards formula grants directly to State governments, which then set priorities and allocate funds

within their respective States.

https://www.ojp.gov/funding/state-administering-agencies/overview

Topics
The "All Topics" web page provides convenient access to information on American Indian and Alaska

Native Affairs, civil rights, corrections, courts, juvenile justice, law enforcement, research and statistics and

evaluation, substance abuse and crime, technology to fight crime, and victims of crime.

https://www.ojp.gov/topics/all-topics

Training / Technical Assistance
The OJP offers training on and technical assistance with financial management, grant writing, and other

subjects that are relevant to criminal and juvenile justice professionals and victim service providers.

https://www.ojp.gov/training-and-technical-assistance

Virtual Library
the National Criminal Justice Reference Service (NCJRS) is an informational resource that supports policy,

program development, and research. The NCJRS Virtual Library contains bibliographic information on and

abstracts of more than 230,000 collection resources and over 80,000 online materials.

https://www.ojp.gov/ncjrs/virtual-library

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




United States Marshals Service
Department of Justice, Washington, DC 20530


703-740-1699

http://www.usmarshals.gov


  DIRECTOR                                                Donald W. Washington


https://www.usmarshals.gov/contacts/leadership.html

  Deputy Director                                         Jeffrey R. Tyler


https://www.usmarshals.gov/contacts/index.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The United States Marshals Service (USMS) is the Nation's oldest Federal law enforcement agency, having
served as a vital link between the executive and judicial branches of the Government since 1789. The USMS

performs tasks that are essential to the operation of virtually every aspect of the Federal justice system.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/duties/factsheets/overview.pdf
The USMS has these responsibilities: providing support and protection for the Federal courts, including

security for 800 judicial facilities and nearly 2,000 judges and magistrates, as well as countless other trial

participants such as jurors and attorneys; apprehending the majority of Federal fugitives; operating the

Federal Witness Security Program and ensuring the safety of endangered Government witnesses;

maintaining custody of and transporting thousands of Federal prisoners annually; executing court orders

and arrest warrants; managing and selling seized property forfeited to the Government by drug traffickers

and other criminals and assisting the Justice Department's asset forfeiture program; responding to

emergency circumstances, including civil disturbances, terrorist incidents, and other crisis situations

through its Special Operations Group; restoring order in riot and mob-violence situations; providing

housing, transportation, and medical care of federal detainees; and operating the USMS Training

Academy.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that USMS records

have been assigned to record group 527.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/527.html
Notable references to USMS activities also are found in the following National Archives record groups: 021

(records of Federal courts); 060 (letters received by the Department of Justice); 118 (records of U.S.

Attorneys, and formerly U.S. Marshals); and 206 (records of the Solicitor of the Treasury).

https://www.usmarshals.gov/history/records_assistance.htm

Business Opportunities
The USMS posts products and services that it purchases.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/business/index.html

Career Opportunities
The USMS relies on administrative personnel, aviation enforcement officers, deputy U.S. Marshals,

detention enforcement officers, and other professionals to carry out its mission.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/careers/index.html
In 2020, the USMS ranked 92d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's

Best Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJ08

Contact
The "U.S. Marshals Service Contacts" web page contains a lot of names, phone numbers, and titles.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/contacts/index.html
The USMS posts contact information for its district offices.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/contacts/districts.html

Factsheets
The USMS posts factsheets on its website.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/duties/factsheets/index.html

Federal Register
Documents that the USMS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/united-states-marshals-service

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the

records of executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested

information is shielded from disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute. Phone,

703-740-3943.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/foia/index.html | Email: usms.foia@usdoj.gov
The USMS maintains an electronic reading room. Before submitting a FOIA request, seekers of information

should search the reading room's holdings to verify that the desired information is not already accessible,

free of charge and without delay.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/readingroom/files.html

History
A historical timeline of the USMS is available online.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/history/timeline.html

Most Wanted
The USMS posts information on its 15 most-wanted fugitives. The USMS considers these individuals armed

and dangerous. Phone, 800-336-0102.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/investigations/most_wanted/index.html

News
The USMS posts news releases.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/news/index.html

Site Map
The USMS website index allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their

interests.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/site_map/index.html
  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Offices / Boards
Executive Office for Immigration Review
Falls Church, VA 22041


703-305-0289

http://www.justice.gov/eoir


  DIRECTOR                                                Jean King, Acting


https://www.justice.gov/eoir/staff-profile/meet-the-director



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR), under a delegation of authority from the Attorney

General, is charged with adjudicating matters brought under various immigration statutes before its three

administrative tribunals: the Office of the Chief Immigration Judge, the Board of Immigration Appeals, and

the Office of the Chief Administrative Hearing Officer.


The Office of the Chief Immigration Judge provides overall direction for more than 300 immigration

judges located in 58 immigration courts throughout the Nation. Immigration judges are responsible for

conducting formal administrative proceedings and act independently in their decision-making capacity.

Their decisions are administratively final, unless appealed or certified to the BIA.


In removal proceedings, an immigration judge determines whether an alien should be removed or allowed

to remain in the United States. Judges are located throughout the United States, and each judge has

jurisdiction to consider various forms of relief available under the law.


The Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) has nationwide jurisdiction to hear appeals from certain decisions

made by immigration judges and by district directors of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). In

addition, the BIA is responsible for hearing appeals involving disciplinary actions against attorneys and

representatives before DHS and EOIR.


Decisions of the BIA are binding on all DHS officers and immigration judges unless modified or overruled

by the Attorney General or a Federal court. All BIA decisions are subject to judicial review in Federal court.

The majority of appeals reaching the BIA involve orders of removal and applications for relief from

removal. Other cases before the BIA include petitions to classify the status of alien relatives for the

issuance of preference immigrant visas, fines imposed upon carriers for the violation of the immigration

laws, and motions for reopening or reconsideration of decisions previously rendered.

The Office of the Chief Administrative Hearing Officer (OCAHO) is headed by a Chief Administrative
Hearing Officer (CAHO), who is responsible for the general supervision and management of administrative

law judges (ALJs). OCAHO ALJs preside at hearings that are mandated by provisions of immigration law

concerning allegations of unlawful employment of aliens, employment eligibility verification violations

(“employer sanctions), unfair immigration-related employment practices, and immigration document

fraud. ALJ decisions in employer sanctions and document fraud cases may be reviewed by the CAHO and

the Attorney General, and all OCAHO cases may be appealed to the appropriate U.S. Circuit Court of

Appeals.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that EOIR records

have been assigned to record group 582. The guide does not contain, however, a description that is

currently associated with this record group.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/501-to-600.html

Contact
Phone numbers and email and postal addresses are available on the "Contact EOIR" web page.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/contact-eoir | Email: PAO.EOIR@usdoj.gov

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the EOIR recently published in the Federal Register are

accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/executive-office-for-immigration-review

Forms
The "EOIR Forms" web page has most of the forms that one needs for filing with the Board of Immigration

Appeals, the Immigration Courts, and the Office of the Chief Administrative Hearing Officer.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/forms

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the

records of executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested

information is shielded from disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute. The EOIR

maintains four electronic libraries: archived resources, frequently requested agency records, proactive

disclosures, and reference materials. Before submitting a FOIA request, an information seeker should

browse these library collections to verify that the desired information is not available, immediately and free

of charge.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/freedom-information-act-foia

Immigration Courts
An alphabetical list of immigration courts, which are arranged by State and by cities within a State, is

available online.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/eoir-immigration-court-listing

Legal Representation
The "Find Legal Representation" web page has resources for those seeking representation.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/find-legal-representation

Library
A virtual law library that serves as a complement to the Law Library and Immigration Research Center is

available online.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/virtual-law-library

Social Media
The EOIR has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/doj.eoir
The EOIR tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/DOJ_EOIR

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of
the United States
Suite 6002, 600 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20579


202-616-6975

202-616-6993

http://www.justice.gov/fcsc


  COMMISSIONER                                           Sylvia M. Becker


  COMMISSIONER                                           Patrick Hovakimian


https://www.justice.gov/fcsc



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States is a quasi-judicial, independent agency

within the Department of Justice, which adjudicates claims of U.S. nationals against foreign governments,

either under specific jurisdiction conferred by Congress or the Department of State or pursuant to
international claims settlement agreements. The decisions of the Commission are final and are not

reviewable under any standard by any court or other authority. Funds for payment of the Commission's

awards are derived from congressional appropriations, international claims settlements, or the liquidation

of foreign assets in the United States by the Departments of Justice and the Treasury.


The Commission also has authority to receive, determine the validity and amount, and provide for the

payment of claims by members of the U.S. Armed Services and civilians held as prisoners of war or

interned by a hostile force in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam conflict or by the survivors of such

servicemembers and civilians.


The Commission is also responsible for maintaining records and responding to inquiries related to the

various claims programs it has conducted against the Governments of Albania, Bulgaria, China, Cuba,

Czechoslovakia, Egypt, Ethiopia, the Federal Republic of Germany, the German Democratic Republic,

Hungary, Iran, Italy, Panama, Poland, Romania, the Soviet Union, Vietnam, and Yugoslavia, as well as those

authorized under the War Claims Act of 1948 and other statutes.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
General information on career opportunities is available on the Department of Justice's "Careers" web

page. For additional information on attorney positions, contact the Office of the Chief Counsel, 600 E

Street NW., Suite 6002, Washington, DC 20579. Phone, 202-616-6975.

http://www.justice.gov/careers

Contact Information
The Commission may be contacted by sending electronic or postal mail. Addresses are posted on the

"Contact the Commission" web page.

https://www.justice.gov/fcsc/contact-commission | Email: info.FCSC@usdoj.gov

Publications
Annual reports, starting with the year 2008, are available on the "Publications" web page.

http://www.justice.gov/fcsc/publications

Reading Room
The reading room is located at 600 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20579. Phone, 202-616-6975.


  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Office of Community Oriented Policing
Services
935 N. Street NE., Washington, DC 20530


202-514-2058

http://www.cops.usdoj.gov


  DIRECTOR                                               Robert Chapman, Acting


https://m.facebook.com/DOJCOPS/photos/a.180221468674616/4732389816791069/?
_se_imp=0vbs31vCvpgh7MTD3



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Office of Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) was established to assist law enforcement

agencies in enhancing public safety through the implementation of community policing strategies. The

Office gives assistance by providing training to enhance law enforcement officers' problem-solving and

community interaction skills and helping law enforcement and community members develop initiatives to

prevent crime; increasing the number of law enforcement officers directly interacting with communities;

and supporting the development of new technologies to shift law enforcement's focus to preventing crime

and disorder within communities.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Resources
The "Dispatch" is a monthly electronic newsletter. The article "Ten Recruiting Tips for Finding Good

Officers" ran in the SEP 2019 issue.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/html/dispatch/09-2019/recruitment.html
The "Dispatch" article "Surviving the Job" ran in the DEC 2019 issue.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/html/dispatch/12-2019/surviving.html

Contact Information
https://cops.usdoj.gov/contactcops | Email: askcopsRC@usdoj.gov

Grants and Funding
COPS grants and funding opportunities support State, local, and tribal law enforcement efforts to advance

community policing. Current applicant and grantee information—announcements, fiscal year grant

programs, current funding opportunities, and resources for grantees—is available online.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/grants

News
The "News" web page provides easy access to photo galleries, press releases, " the podcast series "The

Beat," the video series "What's New in Blue, and the Office's news feed.
https://cops.usdoj.gov/news

Resources
COPS is a valuable resource for smart approaches to preventing and reducing crime. COPS works with

researchers, practitioners, and trailblazers to implement effective strategies in the field.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/resources

Training / Technical Assistance
Resources for training and technical assistance are available on the COPS website.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/training-technical-assistance

Social Media
COPS has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/DOJCOPS
COPS tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/COPSOffice

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Office on Violence Against Women
145 N Street NE., Suite 10W–121, Washington, DC 20530


Phone: 202-307-6026

http://www.justice.gov/ovw


  DIRECTOR                                                 Allison Randall, Acting


https://www.justice.gov/ovw/about-office



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Office on Violence Against Women (OVW) was established in 1995 to reduce violence against women

through the implementation of the Violence Against Women Act. The Office administers financial and

technical assistance to communities that are developing programs, policies, and practices to end domestic

and dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
Information on employment and internship opportunities is available online.
http://www.justice.gov/ovw/careers

Publications
Portable Document Format (PDF) files of selected publications are available online.

http://www.justice.gov/ovw/selected-publications
http://www.justice.gov/ovw/contact-office | Email: ovw.info@usdoj.gov
For further information, contact the Office on Violence Against Women, 145 N Street NE., Suite 10W–121,

Washington, DC, 20530. Phone, 202-307-6026.



United States Parole Commission
90 K Street NE., Washington, DC 20530. Phone, 202-346-7000.


http://www.usdoj.gov/uspc


  CHAIR                                                Patricia K. Cushwa, Acting


https://www.justice.gov/uspc/about-commission



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The U.S. Parole Commission (USPC) makes parole release decisions for eligible Federal and District of

Columbia prisoners; authorizes methods of release and conditions under which release occurs; prescribes,

modifies, and monitors compliance with the terms and conditions governing offenders' behavior while on

parole or mandatory or supervised release; issues warrants for violation of supervision; determines

probable cause for the revocation process; revokes parole, mandatory, or supervised release; releases

from supervision those offenders who are no longer a risk to public safety; and promulgates the rules,

regulations, and guidelines for the exercise of USPC's authority and the implementation of a national

parole policy.


USPC has sole jurisdiction over the following: Federal offenders who committed offenses before

November 1, 1987; DC Code offenders who committed offenses before August 5, 2000; DC Code

offenders sentenced to a term of supervised release; Uniform Code of Military Justice offenders who are in

Bureau of Prison's custody; transfer treaty cases; and State probationers and parolees in the Federal

Witness Protection Program.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The Commission maintains an online FOIA library. Information on Freedom of Information Act requests is

available online.
     http://www.justice.gov/uspc/freedom-information-act-foia/foia-library
     http://www.justice.gov/uspc/freedom-information-act-foia | Email: USPC.FOIA@usdoj.gov

     Reading Room
     The reading room is located at 90 K Street NE., Washington, DC 20530. Phone, 202-346-7000.

     http://www.justice.gov/uspc/contact-commission
     For further information, contact the U.S. Parole Commission, Department of Justice, 90 K Street NE.,

     Washington, DC 20530. Phone, 202-346-7000.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                        Bureaus
                                Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives
                                                   Bureau of Prisons
                                          Drug Enforcement Administration
                                           Federal Bureau of Investigation
                         International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL)–Washington
                                              Office of Justice Programs
                                            United States Marshals Service




The United States Government Manual




     BUREAUS

    Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and
    Explosives
99 New York Avenue NE., Washington, DC 20226


202-648-8500

http://www.atf.gov


  DIRECTOR                                                 Marvin G. Richardson, Acting


  Deputy Director                                          Marvin G. Richardson


https://www.atf.gov/about-atf/executive-staff



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives protects the public from crimes involving arson,

explosives, firearms, and the diversion of alcohol and tobacco products; regulates lawful commerce in explosives

and firearms; and supports law enforcement, public safety, and industry partners worldwide.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 6, 1972, Acting Secretary of the Treasury Charles E. Walker signed an order affecting the Department's

organization and procedure. Order No. 221 transferred "the functions, powers and duties of the Internal

Revenue Service arising under laws relating to alcohol, tobacco, firearms, and explosives (including the Alcohol,

Tobacco and Firearms Division of the Internal Revenue Service), to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms

. . . which is hereby established." On June 10, 1972, Treasury Department Order 221 was published as a notice in

the Federal Register (37 FR 11696).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1972-06-10/pdf/FR-1972-06-10.pdf
On November 25, 2002, President George W. Bush approved Public Law 107–296, which also may be cited as

the Homeland Security Act of 2002, "to establish the Department of Homeland Security, and for other purposes"

(116 Stat. 2135). One of the other purposes was to separate the functions of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and

Firearms (ATF). The alcohol and tobacco excise tax functions and regulations remained within the Department of

the Treasury, and a new bureau became responsible for them. The Act also transferred ATF firearms and

explosives functions to the Department of Justice and made the newly established Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,

Firearms, and Explosives (ATFE) responsible for them (116 Stat. 2274).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-116/pdf/STATUTE-116-Pg2135.pdf
The ATFE posts an organizational chart on its website.

https://www.atf.gov/about/organization-structure

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
"Subchapter XI—Department of Justice Divisions" is part of "Chapter 1—Homeland Security Organization" in 6

U.S.C. Parts 531–533 contain codified statutory material associated with the transfer of the ATFE to the

Department of Justice.
https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title6/chapter1/subchapter11&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that affect firearms and ammunition, explosives, alcohol and tobacco, and explosive

license and permit proceedings are codified in chapter II, parts 400–799, of 27 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=c5bb1cb9dbe3c7d2134a728d6b30c7ea&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title27/27chapterII.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The ATFE enforces Federal criminal laws and regulates the firearms and explosives industries. Directly and

through partnerships, the ATFE investigates and deters violent crime involving arson, firearms and explosives,

and trafficking of alcohol and tobacco products. The Bureau provides training and support to its Federal, State,

local, and international law enforcement partners and works primarily in 25 field divisions nationwide, including

Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and Guam. It also has foreign offices in Canada, El Salvador, Mexico, and

Europe.

https://www.atf.gov/about/what-we-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that ATFE records have

been assigned to record group 436.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/436.html

Career Opportunities
ATFE employees conduct criminal investigations and regulate the firearms and explosives industries. They also

assist other law enforcement agencies, help to prevent terrorism, reduce violent crime, and protect the public in

a manner that is consistent with the Constitution and the laws of the United States.

https://www.atf.gov/careers
In 2020, the ATFE ranked 23d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TR40

Contact Information
Contact information for media inquiries is available on the "Media and Congressional Contacts" web page.

https://www.atf.gov/news/media-and-congressional-contacts

Data / Statistics
The ATFE maintains a comprehensive collection of agency-related data from national surveys, State-based

surveys, other collected license statistics, and other data sources. The data reflect trends in commerce, firearms,

and use of Federal services in the United States.

https://www.atf.gov/resource-center/data-statistics
Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the ATFE recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/alcohol-tobacco-firearms-and-explosives-bureau

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA provides that a person may request access to Federal agency records or information. The ATFE must

disclose records that any person properly requests in writing. Pursuant to one or more of nine exemptions and

three exclusions that the Act contains, a Federal agency may withhold certain records or parts of them. The FOIA

applies only to Federal agencies and does not create a right of access to records held by the U.S. Congress, the

courts, State or local government agencies, and private entities.

https://www.atf.gov/resource-center/freedom-information-act-foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The ATFE posts answers to FAQs on its "Questions and Answers" web page.

https://www.atf.gov/questions-and-answers

History
A history timeline is available on the ATFE website.

https://www.atf.gov/our-history/atf-history-timeline

Social Media
The ATFE maintains accounts on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, and YouTube.

https://www.atf.gov/news/social-media

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Bureau of Prisons
320 First Street NW., Washington, DC 20534


202-307-3198

http://www.bop.gov


  DIRECTOR                                                 Michael Carvajal


  Deputy Director                                          Gene Beasley


https://www.bop.gov/about/agency/leadership.jsp



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.
The BOP was established in 1930 to provide more progressive and humane care for Federal inmates, to

professionalize the prison service, and to ensure consistent and centralized administration of the 11 Federal

prisons in operation at that time. Today, the Bureau comprises more than 100 institutions and 6 regional offices.

The Bureau has its headquarters, also known as Central Office, in Washington, DC. The Central Office is divided

into 10 divisions, including the National Institute of Corrections.


The Correctional Programs Division (CPD) is responsible for inmate classification and programming, including

psychology and religious services, substance abuse treatment, case management, and programs for special

needs offenders. CPD provides policy direction and daily operational oversight of institution security, emergency

preparedness, intelligence gathering, inmate discipline, inmate sentence computations, receiving and discharge,

and inmate transportation, as well as coordinating international treaty transfers and overseeing the special

security needs of inmates placed in the Federal Witness Protection Program. CPD administers contracts and

intergovernmental agreements for the confinement of offenders in community-based programs, community

corrections centers, and other facilities, including privately managed facilities. CPD staff is also involved in the

Bureau's privatization efforts.


The Industries, Education, and Vocational Training Division oversees Federal Prison Industries, or UNICOR, which

is a wholly owned Government corporation that provides employment and training opportunities for inmates

confined in Federal correctional facilities. Additionally, it is responsible for oversight of educational, occupational,

and vocational training and leisure-time programs, as well as those related to inmate release preparation.


The National Institute of Corrections (NIC) provides technical assistance, training, and information to State and

local corrections agencies throughout the country, as well as the Bureau. It also provides research assistance and

documents through the NIC Information Center.

https://www.bop.gov/about/agency



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
An alphabetical subject index helps visitors navigate the website's content.

https://www.bop.gov/website/a_to_z_topics.jsp

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that BOP records have

been assigned to record group 129.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/129.html

Business Opportunities
Information is available on the "Let's Do Business" web page.

http://www.bop.gov/business

Career Opportunities
Job openings are posted online. For additional career-related information, contact any regional or field office or

the Central Office, 320 First Street NW., Washington, DC 20534. Phone, 202-307-3082.

http://www.bop.gov/jobs
In 2020, the BOP ranked 387th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJ03

Contact Information
The BOP has a "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.bop.gov/contact

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the BOP recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/prisons-bureau

Find an Inmate
The Department's website features a search tool for locating Federal inmates who were incarcerated after 1981.

https://www.bop.gov/inmateloc

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Enacted in 1966, the FOIA took effect on July 4, 1967. The law gives a right to obtain access to Federal agency

records to any person, except a fugitive from the law. Some records, or portions of them, are shielded, however,

from disclosure by one or more of nine statutory exemptions or by specific harm that disclosure may cause.

https://www.bop.gov/foia/index.jsp#tabs-0 | Email: ogc_efoia@bop.gov
The BOP posts records online. Before filing a formal FOIA request, an information seeker should visit the BOP's

"Freedom of Information" web page and view the records section to ensure that the desired information is not

already freely accessible.

https://www.bop.gov/foia/index.jsp#tabs-1

Locations
The "Our Locations" web page features a list of locations, a search tool that requires the facility's name, and

location maps (national, regional, type of facility).

https://www.bop.gov/locations

Population Statistics
Federal inmate population statistics are online.

https://www.bop.gov/about/statistics/population_statistics.jsp

Reading Room
The reading room is located at the Bureau of Prisons, 320 First Street NW., Washington, DC 20534. Phone, 202-

307-3029.
Resources by Audience
Resources to help Bureau of Prisons staff and their families access frequently used services are online.

https://www.bop.gov/resources/employee_resources.jsp
Resources to help former inmates make the transition from incarceration to normal life within a community are

online.

https://www.bop.gov/resources/former_inmate_resources.jsp
The Attorney General and the Secretary of Health and Human Services provide health management guidelines

for infectious disease prevention, detection, and treatment of inmates and correctional employees who are

exposed to infectious diseases in correctional facilities.

https://www.bop.gov/resources/health_care_mngmt.jsp
Resources to help qualified media representatives visit institutions and gather information on programs and

activities or conduct interviews are online.

https://www.bop.gov/resources/media_resources.jsp
Resources to help victims or witnesses of Federal crimes find information on complaint procedures, notifications,

and payments are online.

https://www.bop.gov/resources/victim_resources.jsp

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse for content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.bop.gov/website/site_map.jsp

Social Media
The BOP has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/BOPCareers
The BOP tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/officialfbop

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Drug Enforcement Administration
8701 Morrissette Drive, Springfield, VA 22152


202-307-1000

http://www.dea.gov/index.shtml


  ADMINISTRATOR                                              Anne Milgram


  Principal Deputy Administrator                             Preston L. Grubbs
https://www.dea.gov/about/dea-leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is the lead Federal agency in enforcing narcotics and controlled

substances laws and regulations. The DEA also enforces the Federal money laundering and bulk currency
smuggling statutes when the funds involved in the transactions or smuggling are derived from the sale of

narcotics. It was created in July 1973 by Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1973 (5 U.S.C. app.).

https://www.dea.gov/history
The DEA enforces the provisions of the controlled substances and chemical diversion and trafficking laws and

regulations of the United States, operating on a worldwide basis. It presents cases to the criminal and civil justice

systems of the United States—or any other competent jurisdiction—on those significant organizations and their

members involved in cultivation, production, smuggling, distribution, laundering of proceeds, or diversion of

controlled substances appearing in or destined for illegal traffic in the United States. The DEA disrupts and

dismantles these organizations by arresting their members, confiscating their drugs, and seizing their assets; and

it creates, manages, and supports enforcement-related programs—domestically and internationally—to reduce

the availability of and demand for illicit controlled substances.


The DEA's responsibilities include: investigation of major narcotic, chemical, drug-money laundering, and bulk

currency smuggling violators who operate at interstate and international levels; seizure and forfeiture of assets

derived from, traceable to, or intended to be used for illicit drug trafficking; seizure and forfeiture of assets

derived from or traceable to drug-money laundering or the smuggling of bulk currency derived from illegal

drugs; enforcement of regulations governing the legal manufacture, distribution, and dispensing of controlled

substances; management of an intelligence program that supports drug investigations, initiatives, and operations

worldwide; coordination with Federal, State, and local law enforcement authorities and cooperation with

counterpart agencies abroad; assistance to State and local law enforcement agencies in addressing their most

significant drug and drug-related violence problems; leadership and influence over international counterdrug

and chemical policy and support for institution building in host nations; training, scientific research, and

information exchange in support of drug traffic prevention and control; and education and assistance to the

public community on the prevention, treatment, and dangers of drugs.

https://www.dea.gov/mission
The DEA maintains liaison with the United Nations, INTERPOL, and other organizations on matters relating to

international narcotics control programs. It has 239 domestic offices in 23 Divisions nationwide, and 91 foreign

offices in 68 countries.

https://www.dea.gov/domestic-divisions



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that DEA records have

been assigned to record group 170.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/170.html

Asset Forfeiture
The DEA posts public notices of forfeiture in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading on

the Department of Justice's forfeiture.gov website.

https://www.forfeiture.gov

Business Opportunities
The DEA obtains supplies and services through its Office of Acquisition and Relocation Management. The Office

acquires supplies and services for local needs and all DEA agency-level procurements. DEA field activities also

have procurement authority, but it is limited.

https://www.dea.gov/resources/doing-business-dea | Email: deasmallbusinessprogram@usdoj.gov

Career Opportunities
For career information, contact the nearest DEA field division recruitment office. The DEA also posts information

on its "Careers" web page.

https://www.dea.gov/careers
In 2020, the DEA ranked 96th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJAA

Contact Information
The DEA posts contact information on its "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.dea.gov/who-we-are/contact-us | Email: info@dea.gov
Contact information for each of the DEA's 23 domestic divisions is available online.

https://www.dea.gov/divisions

Controlled Substances Act Registration
For information on registration under the Controlled Substances Act, contact the Office of Diversion Control,

8701 Morrissette Drive, Springfield, VA 22152. Phone: 800-882-9539.

http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/drugreg/index.html | Email: DEA.Registration.Help@usdoj.gov

Data / Statistics
The DEA posts data and statistics online.

https://www.dea.gov/resources/data-and-statistics

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the DEA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.
https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/drug-enforcement-administration

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives a right for public access to Government records. A FOIA request must be submitted in writing.

The DEA generally follows the FOIA guidelines that the Department of Justice has adopted.

https://www.dea.gov/foia

Museum
The DEA Museum and visitors' center are located in Arlington, VA. The museum posts virtual exhibits on its

deamuseum.org website. Phone, 202–307–3463.

https://deamuseum.org/exhibits

Press Releases
The DEA posts press releases online.

https://www.dea.gov/what-we-do/news/press-releases

Publications
The DEA posts various types of documents and publications online.

https://www.dea.gov/resources/documents?field_document_document_type_value=Publication

Resources
The "Resources" web page provides convenient access to data and statistics, drug information, Freedom of

Information Act guidance, media galleries, and publications.

https://www.dea.gov/resources

Social Media
The DEA maintains Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, and Twitter accounts. A social media directory is part of the

"Contact Us" web page.

https://www.dea.gov/who-we-are/contact-us | Email: DEA.Public.Affairs@usdoj.gov

Victim Witness Assistance
Victims' rights laws resulted in the implementation of the victim witness assistance program. These laws provide

for fair and just treatment of crime victims, immediate emergency treatment, and referrals to appropriate adult

and child service agencies. The Department of Justice also gives guidance to Federal law enforcement agencies

through the Attorney General's guidelines for victim witness assistance.

https://www.dea.gov/resources/vwap | Email: VWAP.DEA@usdoj.gov

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Federal Bureau of Investigation
935 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20535
202-324-3000

http://www.fbi.gov


  DIRECTOR                                                  Kashyap Patel


  Deputy Director                                           Dan Bongino


https://www.fbi.gov/about/leadership-and-structure



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is the Department of Justice's principal investigative arm. It is primarily

charged with gathering and reporting facts, locating witnesses, and compiling evidence in cases involving

Federal jurisdiction. It also provides law enforcement leadership and assistance to State and international law

enforcement agencies.


The FBI was established in 1908 by the Attorney General, who directed that Department of Justice investigations

be handled by its own staff. The Bureau is charged with investigating all violations of Federal law except those

that have been assigned by legislative enactment or otherwise to another Federal agency. Its jurisdiction includes

a wide range of responsibilities in the national security, criminal, and civil fields. Priority has been assigned to

areas such as counterterrorism, counterintelligence, cybercrimes, internationally and nationally organized crime

and drug-related activities, and financial crimes.


The FBI also offers cooperative services to local, State, and international law enforcement agencies. These

services include fingerprint identification, laboratory examination, police training, the Law Enforcement Online

communication and information service for use by the law enforcement community, the National Crime

Information Center, and the National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FBI records have

been assigned to record group 065.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/065.html

Career Opportunities
The FBI relies on professionals with diverse expertise and skills to analyze data for the intelligence community,

safeguard national security, and support the structure of the Bureau. Information on career opportunities,

including student internships, is available online.

https://www.fbijobs.gov
In 2020, the FBI ranked 223d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best
Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJ02

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page provides convenient access to information for contacting FBI headquarters, field

offices, and overseas offices.

https://www.fbi.gov/contact-us
Members of the public may report a violation of U.S. Federal law or suspected terrorism or criminal activity to

the FBI.

https://www.fbi.gov/tips

Crime Statistics
The Uniform Crime Reporting program generates reliable statistics for use in law enforcement. It also releases

information that is relevant for students of criminal justice, researchers, the media, and the public. The program

has been generating crime statistics since 1930. The crime reporting program includes data from more than

18,000 city, university and college, county, State, Tribal, and Federal law enforcement agencies. Agencies

participate voluntarily and submit their crime data either through a State UCR program or directly to the FBI's

UCR Program.

https://www.fbi.gov/services/cjis/ucr

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the FBI recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-bureau-of-investigation

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA provides that a person may request access to Federal agency records or information. The FBI must

disclose records that any person properly requests in writing. Pursuant to one or more of nine exemptions and

three exclusions that the Act contains, a Federal agency can withhold certain records or parts of them. The FOIA

applies only to Federal agencies and does not create a right of access to records held by the U.S. Congress, the

courts, State or local government agencies, and private entities.

https://www.fbi.gov/services/information-management/foipa
The FBI's electronic FOIA library, which contains nearly 7,000 documents and other media that have been

scanned from paper and made into more accessible digital copies, is named the "Vault." The library includes new

files that have been released to the public, but never added to the FBI website; dozens of records previously

posted on the FBI website, but removed when requests diminished; files from the previous FBI FOIA Library; and

new and previously unreleased files.

https://vault.fbi.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The FBI posts answers to FAQs.
https://www.fbi.gov/about/faqs

History
The FBI posted a brief agency history on its website.

https://www.fbi.gov/history

Most Wanted
The FBI maintains the official "Ten Most Wanted Fugitives" list on its website.

https://www.fbi.gov/wanted/topten

News
The FBI posts top news stories, press releases, podcasts, radio broadcasts, speeches, and Tweets on its "News"

web page.

https://www.fbi.gov/news

Publications
The FBI's training division maintains the "Law Enforcement Bulletin" website.

https://leb.fbi.gov
The FBI maintains an extensive "Reports and Publications" database.

https://www.fbi.gov/stats-services/publications

Resources
The "Resources" web page provides convenient access to information on business opportunities and victim

services. It also has links to featured publications and frequently requested forms and services.

https://www.fbi.gov/resources

Safe Online Surfing
The FBI maintains a "Safe Online Surfing" website for children.

https://www.fbi.gov/fbi-kids

Services
Services that the FBI provides are presented on a single "Services" web page.

https://www.fbi.gov/services

Social Media
The FBI started its presence on social media in 2008. Today, the Bureau has dozens of pages and sites.

https://www.fbi.gov/news/fbi-social-media-sites

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




International Criminal Police Organization
(INTERPOL)–Washington
Department of Justice, Washington, DC 20530


202-616-9000

202-616-8400

http://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington


  DIRECTOR                                                 Michael A. Hughes


https://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/meet-leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



INTERPOL–Washington is a separate component under the supervision of the Deputy Attorney General and

comanaged with the Department of Homeland Security. It provides an essential communications link between

the U.S. police community and their counterparts in the foreign member countries.


INTERPOL is an association of 190 countries that promotes mutual assistance among law enforcement

authorities to prevent and suppress international crime. With no police force of its own, INTERPOL has no

powers of arrest or search and seizure and, therefore, relies on the law enforcement authorities of its member

countries. Each member country is required to have a national central bureau, such as INTERPOL–Washington,

to act as the primary point of contact for police affairs. INTERPOL serves as a channel of communication for its

member countries to cooperate in the investigation and prosecution of crime; provides a forum for discussions,

working group meetings, and symposia to help police focus on specific areas of criminal activity affecting their

countries; and issues information and maintains databases—supplied and used by member countries—on crime,

fugitives, humanitarian concerns, missing persons, and stolen passports and vehicles.


INTERPOL–Washington has permanent staff and detailed special agents from numerous Federal law

enforcement agencies. It is organized into seven divisions: the Alien and Fugitive, Counterterrorism, Drug,

Economic Crimes, Human Trafficking and Child Protection, State and Local Police Liaison, and Violent Crimes

Divisions.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
Information on career opportunities is available online.

http://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/employment

Contact Information
The "Contact the Agency" web page contains a postal address for INTERPOL–Washington.
https://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/contact-agency

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives any person a right to access Government records. A request for information must be submitted

in writing. INTERPOL–Washington, U.S. National Central Bureau, generally follows the guidelines that the

Department of Justice has set forth in its FOIA reference guide.

https://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/interpol-washington-foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
INTERPOL posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/frequently-asked-questions

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Office of Justice Programs
810 Seventh Street NW., Washington, DC 20531


202-307-0703

http://www.ojp.gov | Email: askojp@ojp.usdoj.gov


  Assistant Attorney General                               Amy L. Solomon, Acting


  Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General              Amy L. Solomon


https://www.ojp.gov/about/offices/office-assistant-attorney-general-oaag



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Office of Justice Programs (OJP) was established by the Justice Assistance Act of 1984 (42 U.S.C. 3711) and

reauthorized in 1994 and 2005 to provide Federal leadership, coordination, and assistance needed to make the

Nation's justice system more efficient and effective in preventing and controlling crime. OJP is responsible for

collecting statistical data and conducting analyses; identifying emerging criminal justice issues; developing and

testing promising approaches to address these issues; evaluating program results; and disseminating these

findings and other information to State and local governments.

https://www.ojp.gov/about
The OJP is comprised of the following bureaus and offices: the Bureau of Justice Assistance provides funding,

training, and technical assistance to State and local governments to combat violent and drug-related crime and

help improve the criminal justice system; the Bureau of Justice Statistics is responsible for collecting and

analyzing data on crime, criminal offenders, crime victims, and the operations of justice systems at all levels of

government; the National Institute of Justice sponsors research and development programs, conducts

demonstrations of innovative approaches to improve criminal justice, and develops new criminal justice
technologies; the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention provides grants and contracts to States

to help them improve their juvenile justice systems and sponsors innovative research, demonstration, evaluation,

statistics, replication, technical assistance, and training programs to increase the Nation's understanding of and

improve its response to juvenile violence and delinquency; the Office for Victims of Crime administers victim

compensation and assistance grant programs and provides funding, training, and technical assistance to victim

service organizations, criminal justice agencies, and other professionals to improve the Nation's response to

crime victims; and the Office of Sex Offender Sentencing, Monitoring, Apprehending, Registering, and Tracking

(SMART) maintains the standards of the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act as defined by the Adam

Walsh Act. The SMART Office also provides technical assistance and supports innovative and best practices in

the field of sex offender management.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Law Enforcement

Assistance Administration (LEAA) records have been assigned to record group 423. The OJP is one of the LEAA's

successor agencies.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/423.html

Blog
OJP Blog posts highlight OJP programs, as well as Department of Justice initiatives that support OJP's mission.

https://www.ojp.gov/news/ojp-blogs/2020-ojp-blogs

Career Opportunities
The OJP relies on accountants, attorneys, grant and project managers, information technology specialists, policy

advisors, public affairs specialists, researchers, scientists, statisticians, writers and editors, and many other

professionals to carry out its mission.

https://www.ojp.gov/about/jobs
In 2020, the OJP ranked 337th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJ07

Congressional Resources
Resources for Members of Congress and their staff are posted on the "For Congress" web page.

https://www.ojp.gov/congress | Email: OJPCongressionalAffairs@usdoj.gov

Contact
The "Contact Us" web page has a mailing address, as well as email addresses and phone numbers.

https://www.ojp.gov/contact | Email: askojp@ncjrs.gov
The OJP has a "For Media" web page that also contains contact information.
https://www.ojp.gov/news/for-media

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the OJP recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/justice-programs-office

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Enacted in 1966, the FOIA took effect on July 4, 1967. The law gives a right to obtain access to Federal agency

records to any person, except a fugitive from the law. Some records, or portions of them, are shielded, however,

from disclosure by one or more of nine statutory exemptions or by specific harm that disclosure may cause.

https://www.ojp.gov/program/freedom-information-act/overview

Juvenile Justice / Delinquency Prevention
The Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention publishes the bimonthly electronic newsletter "OJJDP

News @ a Glance." This award winning newsletter highlights office activities, funding opportunities, publications,

Tribal connections, and upcoming events.

https://ojjdp.ojp.gov/news/newsletter

News Releases
News releases are posted on the OJP website.

https://www.ojp.gov/news/news-releases

Publications
The OJP posts publications on its website.

https://www.ojp.gov/news/publications

Social Media
The OJP has social media accounts. The "Social Media" web page provides convenient access to all of them:

Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, and YouTube.

https://www.ojp.gov/news/social-media

State Administering Agencies
The OJP awards formula grants directly to State governments, which then set priorities and allocate funds within

their respective States.

https://www.ojp.gov/funding/state-administering-agencies/overview

Topics
The "All Topics" web page provides convenient access to information on American Indian and Alaska Native

Affairs, civil rights, corrections, courts, juvenile justice, law enforcement, research and statistics and evaluation,

substance abuse and crime, technology to fight crime, and victims of crime.

https://www.ojp.gov/topics/all-topics
Training / Technical Assistance
The OJP offers training on and technical assistance with financial management, grant writing, and other subjects

that are relevant to criminal and juvenile justice professionals and victim service providers.

https://www.ojp.gov/training-and-technical-assistance

Virtual Library
the National Criminal Justice Reference Service (NCJRS) is an informational resource that supports policy,

program development, and research. The NCJRS Virtual Library contains bibliographic information on and

abstracts of more than 230,000 collection resources and over 80,000 online materials.

https://www.ojp.gov/ncjrs/virtual-library

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




United States Marshals Service
Department of Justice, Washington, DC 20530


703-740-1699

http://www.usmarshals.gov


  DIRECTOR                                                   Donald W. Washington


https://www.usmarshals.gov/contacts/leadership.html

  Deputy Director                                            Jeffrey R. Tyler


https://www.usmarshals.gov/contacts/index.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The United States Marshals Service (USMS) is the Nation's oldest Federal law enforcement agency, having served

as a vital link between the executive and judicial branches of the Government since 1789. The USMS performs

tasks that are essential to the operation of virtually every aspect of the Federal justice system.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/duties/factsheets/overview.pdf
The USMS has these responsibilities: providing support and protection for the Federal courts, including security

for 800 judicial facilities and nearly 2,000 judges and magistrates, as well as countless other trial participants such

as jurors and attorneys; apprehending the majority of Federal fugitives; operating the Federal Witness Security

Program and ensuring the safety of endangered Government witnesses; maintaining custody of and

transporting thousands of Federal prisoners annually; executing court orders and arrest warrants; managing and

selling seized property forfeited to the Government by drug traffickers and other criminals and assisting the

Justice Department's asset forfeiture program; responding to emergency circumstances, including civil
disturbances, terrorist incidents, and other crisis situations through its Special Operations Group; restoring order
in riot and mob-violence situations; providing housing, transportation, and medical care of federal detainees;

and operating the USMS Training Academy.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that USMS records have

been assigned to record group 527.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/527.html
Notable references to USMS activities also are found in the following National Archives record groups: 021

(records of Federal courts); 060 (letters received by the Department of Justice); 118 (records of U.S. Attorneys,

and formerly U.S. Marshals); and 206 (records of the Solicitor of the Treasury).

https://www.usmarshals.gov/history/records_assistance.htm

Business Opportunities
The USMS posts products and services that it purchases.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/business/index.html

Career Opportunities
The USMS relies on administrative personnel, aviation enforcement officers, deputy U.S. Marshals, detention

enforcement officers, and other professionals to carry out its mission.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/careers/index.html
In 2020, the USMS ranked 92d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJ08

Contact
The "U.S. Marshals Service Contacts" web page contains a lot of names, phone numbers, and titles.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/contacts/index.html
The USMS posts contact information for its district offices.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/contacts/districts.html

Factsheets
The USMS posts factsheets on its website.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/duties/factsheets/index.html

Federal Register
Documents that the USMS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/united-states-marshals-service
     Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
     To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

     executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded

     from disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute. Phone, 703-740-3943.

     https://www.usmarshals.gov/foia/index.html | Email: usms.foia@usdoj.gov
     The USMS maintains an electronic reading room. Before submitting a FOIA request, seekers of information

     should search the reading room's holdings to verify that the desired information is not already accessible, free of

     charge and without delay.

     https://www.usmarshals.gov/readingroom/files.html

     History
     A historical timeline of the USMS is available online.

     https://www.usmarshals.gov/history/timeline.html

     Most Wanted
     The USMS posts information on its 15 most-wanted fugitives. The USMS considers these individuals armed and

     dangerous. Phone, 800-336-0102.

     https://www.usmarshals.gov/investigations/most_wanted/index.html

     News
     The USMS posts news releases.

     https://www.usmarshals.gov/news/index.html

     Site Map
     The USMS website index allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their

     interests.

     https://www.usmarshals.gov/site_map/index.html

        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility
Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                 Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives




The United States Government Manual




     BUREAU OF ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, FIREARMS AND EXPLOSIVES
    99 New York Avenue NE., Washington, DC 20226


    202-648-8500

    http://www.atf.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Marvin G. Richardson, Acting


      Deputy Director                                                                       Marvin G. Richardson
https://www.atf.gov/about-atf/executive-staff



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives protects the public from crimes involving arson, explosives,

firearms, and the diversion of alcohol and tobacco products; regulates lawful commerce in explosives and firearms; and
supports law enforcement, public safety, and industry partners worldwide.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 6, 1972, Acting Secretary of the Treasury Charles E. Walker signed an order affecting the Department's

organization and procedure. Order No. 221 transferred "the functions, powers and duties of the Internal Revenue

Service arising under laws relating to alcohol, tobacco, firearms, and explosives (including the Alcohol, Tobacco and

Firearms Division of the Internal Revenue Service), to the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms . . . which is hereby

established." On June 10, 1972, Treasury Department Order 221 was published as a notice in the Federal Register (37

FR 11696).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1972-06-10/pdf/FR-1972-06-10.pdf
On November 25, 2002, President George W. Bush approved Public Law 107–296, which also may be cited as the

Homeland Security Act of 2002, "to establish the Department of Homeland Security, and for other purposes" (116 Stat.

2135). One of the other purposes was to separate the functions of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF).

The alcohol and tobacco excise tax functions and regulations remained within the Department of the Treasury, and a

new bureau became responsible for them. The Act also transferred ATF firearms and explosives functions to the

Department of Justice and made the newly established Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATFE)

responsible for them (116 Stat. 2274).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-116/pdf/STATUTE-116-Pg2135.pdf
The ATFE posts an organizational chart on its website.

https://www.atf.gov/about/organization-structure

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
"Subchapter XI—Department of Justice Divisions" is part of "Chapter 1—Homeland Security Organization" in 6 U.S.C.

Parts 531–533 contain codified statutory material associated with the transfer of the ATFE to the Department of Justice.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title6/chapter1/subchapter11&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that affect firearms and ammunition, explosives, alcohol and tobacco, and explosive license and

permit proceedings are codified in chapter II, parts 400–799, of 27 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=c5bb1cb9dbe3c7d2134a728d6b30c7ea&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title27/27chapterII.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The ATFE enforces Federal criminal laws and regulates the firearms and explosives industries. Directly and through

partnerships, the ATFE investigates and deters violent crime involving arson, firearms and explosives, and trafficking of

alcohol and tobacco products. The Bureau provides training and support to its Federal, State, local, and international
law enforcement partners and works primarily in 25 field divisions nationwide, including Puerto Rico, the U.S. Virgin

Islands, and Guam. It also has foreign offices in Canada, El Salvador, Mexico, and Europe.

https://www.atf.gov/about/what-we-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that ATFE records have been

assigned to record group 436.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/436.html

Career Opportunities
ATFE employees conduct criminal investigations and regulate the firearms and explosives industries. They also assist

other law enforcement agencies, help to prevent terrorism, reduce violent crime, and protect the public in a manner

that is consistent with the Constitution and the laws of the United States.

https://www.atf.gov/careers
In 2020, the ATFE ranked 23d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TR40

Contact Information
Contact information for media inquiries is available on the "Media and Congressional Contacts" web page.

https://www.atf.gov/news/media-and-congressional-contacts

Data / Statistics
The ATFE maintains a comprehensive collection of agency-related data from national surveys, State-based surveys,

other collected license statistics, and other data sources. The data reflect trends in commerce, firearms, and use of

Federal services in the United States.

https://www.atf.gov/resource-center/data-statistics

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the ATFE recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/alcohol-tobacco-firearms-and-explosives-bureau

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA provides that a person may request access to Federal agency records or information. The ATFE must

disclose records that any person properly requests in writing. Pursuant to one or more of nine exemptions and three

exclusions that the Act contains, a Federal agency may withhold certain records or parts of them. The FOIA applies

only to Federal agencies and does not create a right of access to records held by the U.S. Congress, the courts, State

or local government agencies, and private entities.
     https://www.atf.gov/resource-center/freedom-information-act-foia

     Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
     The ATFE posts answers to FAQs on its "Questions and Answers" web page.

     https://www.atf.gov/questions-and-answers

     History
     A history timeline is available on the ATFE website.

     https://www.atf.gov/our-history/atf-history-timeline

     Social Media
     The ATFE maintains accounts on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter, and YouTube.

     https://www.atf.gov/news/social-media

        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                      Bureau of Prisons




The United States Government Manual




     BUREAU OF PRISONS
    320 First Street NW., Washington, DC 20534


    202-307-3198

    http://www.bop.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Michael Carvajal


      Deputy Director                                                                       Gene Beasley
https://www.bop.gov/about/agency/leadership.jsp



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The BOP was established in 1930 to provide more progressive and humane care for Federal inmates, to professionalize

the prison service, and to ensure consistent and centralized administration of the 11 Federal prisons in operation at that
time. Today, the Bureau comprises more than 100 institutions and 6 regional offices. The Bureau has its headquarters,

also known as Central Office, in Washington, DC. The Central Office is divided into 10 divisions, including the National

Institute of Corrections.


The Correctional Programs Division (CPD) is responsible for inmate classification and programming, including

psychology and religious services, substance abuse treatment, case management, and programs for special needs

offenders. CPD provides policy direction and daily operational oversight of institution security, emergency

preparedness, intelligence gathering, inmate discipline, inmate sentence computations, receiving and discharge, and

inmate transportation, as well as coordinating international treaty transfers and overseeing the special security needs

of inmates placed in the Federal Witness Protection Program. CPD administers contracts and intergovernmental

agreements for the confinement of offenders in community-based programs, community corrections centers, and

other facilities, including privately managed facilities. CPD staff is also involved in the Bureau's privatization efforts.


The Industries, Education, and Vocational Training Division oversees Federal Prison Industries, or UNICOR, which is a

wholly owned Government corporation that provides employment and training opportunities for inmates confined in

Federal correctional facilities. Additionally, it is responsible for oversight of educational, occupational, and vocational

training and leisure-time programs, as well as those related to inmate release preparation.


The National Institute of Corrections (NIC) provides technical assistance, training, and information to State and local

corrections agencies throughout the country, as well as the Bureau. It also provides research assistance and

documents through the NIC Information Center.

https://www.bop.gov/about/agency



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
An alphabetical subject index helps visitors navigate the website's content.

https://www.bop.gov/website/a_to_z_topics.jsp

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that BOP records have been

assigned to record group 129.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/129.html

Business Opportunities
Information is available on the "Let's Do Business" web page.

http://www.bop.gov/business

Career Opportunities
Job openings are posted online. For additional career-related information, contact any regional or field office or the

Central Office, 320 First Street NW., Washington, DC 20534. Phone, 202-307-3082.

http://www.bop.gov/jobs
In 2020, the BOP ranked 387th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJ03

Contact Information
The BOP has a "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.bop.gov/contact

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the BOP recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/prisons-bureau

Find an Inmate
The Department's website features a search tool for locating Federal inmates who were incarcerated after 1981.

https://www.bop.gov/inmateloc

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Enacted in 1966, the FOIA took effect on July 4, 1967. The law gives a right to obtain access to Federal agency records

to any person, except a fugitive from the law. Some records, or portions of them, are shielded, however, from

disclosure by one or more of nine statutory exemptions or by specific harm that disclosure may cause.

https://www.bop.gov/foia/index.jsp#tabs-0 | Email: ogc_efoia@bop.gov
The BOP posts records online. Before filing a formal FOIA request, an information seeker should visit the BOP's

"Freedom of Information" web page and view the records section to ensure that the desired information is not already

freely accessible.

https://www.bop.gov/foia/index.jsp#tabs-1

Locations
The "Our Locations" web page features a list of locations, a search tool that requires the facility's name, and location

maps (national, regional, type of facility).

https://www.bop.gov/locations

Population Statistics
Federal inmate population statistics are online.

https://www.bop.gov/about/statistics/population_statistics.jsp
    Reading Room
    The reading room is located at the Bureau of Prisons, 320 First Street NW., Washington, DC 20534. Phone, 202-307-

    3029.


    Resources by Audience
    Resources to help Bureau of Prisons staff and their families access frequently used services are online.

    https://www.bop.gov/resources/employee_resources.jsp
    Resources to help former inmates make the transition from incarceration to normal life within a community are online.

    https://www.bop.gov/resources/former_inmate_resources.jsp
    The Attorney General and the Secretary of Health and Human Services provide health management guidelines for

    infectious disease prevention, detection, and treatment of inmates and correctional employees who are exposed to

    infectious diseases in correctional facilities.

    https://www.bop.gov/resources/health_care_mngmt.jsp
    Resources to help qualified media representatives visit institutions and gather information on programs and activities

    or conduct interviews are online.

    https://www.bop.gov/resources/media_resources.jsp
    Resources to help victims or witnesses of Federal crimes find information on complaint procedures, notifications, and

    payments are online.

    https://www.bop.gov/resources/victim_resources.jsp

    Site Map
    The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse for content that aligns with their interests.

    https://www.bop.gov/website/site_map.jsp

    Social Media
    The BOP has a Facebook account.

    https://www.facebook.com/BOPCareers
    The BOP tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/officialfbop

        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                             Drug Enforcement Administration




The United States Government Manual




     DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION
    8701 Morrissette Drive, Springfield, VA 22152


    202-307-1000

    http://www.dea.gov/index.shtml


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         Anne Milgram


      Principal Deputy Administrator                                                        Preston L. Grubbs
https://www.dea.gov/about/dea-leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) is the lead Federal agency in enforcing narcotics and controlled

substances laws and regulations. The DEA also enforces the Federal money laundering and bulk currency smuggling
statutes when the funds involved in the transactions or smuggling are derived from the sale of narcotics. It was created

in July 1973 by Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1973 (5 U.S.C. app.).

https://www.dea.gov/history
The DEA enforces the provisions of the controlled substances and chemical diversion and trafficking laws and

regulations of the United States, operating on a worldwide basis. It presents cases to the criminal and civil justice

systems of the United States—or any other competent jurisdiction—on those significant organizations and their

members involved in cultivation, production, smuggling, distribution, laundering of proceeds, or diversion of

controlled substances appearing in or destined for illegal traffic in the United States. The DEA disrupts and dismantles

these organizations by arresting their members, confiscating their drugs, and seizing their assets; and it creates,

manages, and supports enforcement-related programs—domestically and internationally—to reduce the availability of

and demand for illicit controlled substances.


The DEA's responsibilities include: investigation of major narcotic, chemical, drug-money laundering, and bulk

currency smuggling violators who operate at interstate and international levels; seizure and forfeiture of assets derived

from, traceable to, or intended to be used for illicit drug trafficking; seizure and forfeiture of assets derived from or

traceable to drug-money laundering or the smuggling of bulk currency derived from illegal drugs; enforcement of

regulations governing the legal manufacture, distribution, and dispensing of controlled substances; management of an

intelligence program that supports drug investigations, initiatives, and operations worldwide; coordination with

Federal, State, and local law enforcement authorities and cooperation with counterpart agencies abroad; assistance to

State and local law enforcement agencies in addressing their most significant drug and drug-related violence

problems; leadership and influence over international counterdrug and chemical policy and support for institution

building in host nations; training, scientific research, and information exchange in support of drug traffic prevention

and control; and education and assistance to the public community on the prevention, treatment, and dangers of

drugs.

https://www.dea.gov/mission
The DEA maintains liaison with the United Nations, INTERPOL, and other organizations on matters relating to

international narcotics control programs. It has 239 domestic offices in 23 Divisions nationwide, and 91 foreign offices

in 68 countries.

https://www.dea.gov/domestic-divisions



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that DEA records have been

assigned to record group 170.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/170.html

Asset Forfeiture
The DEA posts public notices of forfeiture in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading on the

Department of Justice's forfeiture.gov website.

https://www.forfeiture.gov

Business Opportunities
The DEA obtains supplies and services through its Office of Acquisition and Relocation Management. The Office

acquires supplies and services for local needs and all DEA agency-level procurements. DEA field activities also have

procurement authority, but it is limited.

https://www.dea.gov/resources/doing-business-dea | Email: deasmallbusinessprogram@usdoj.gov

Career Opportunities
For career information, contact the nearest DEA field division recruitment office. The DEA also posts information on its

"Careers" web page.

https://www.dea.gov/careers
In 2020, the DEA ranked 96th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJAA

Contact Information
The DEA posts contact information on its "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.dea.gov/who-we-are/contact-us | Email: info@dea.gov
Contact information for each of the DEA's 23 domestic divisions is available online.

https://www.dea.gov/divisions

Controlled Substances Act Registration
For information on registration under the Controlled Substances Act, contact the Office of Diversion Control, 8701

Morrissette Drive, Springfield, VA 22152. Phone: 800-882-9539.

http://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/drugreg/index.html | Email: DEA.Registration.Help@usdoj.gov

Data / Statistics
The DEA posts data and statistics online.

https://www.dea.gov/resources/data-and-statistics

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the DEA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/drug-enforcement-administration
    Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
    The FOIA gives a right for public access to Government records. A FOIA request must be submitted in writing. The

    DEA generally follows the FOIA guidelines that the Department of Justice has adopted.

    https://www.dea.gov/foia

    Museum
    The DEA Museum and visitors' center are located in Arlington, VA. The museum posts virtual exhibits on its

    deamuseum.org website. Phone, 202–307–3463.

    https://deamuseum.org/exhibits

    Press Releases
    The DEA posts press releases online.

    https://www.dea.gov/what-we-do/news/press-releases

    Publications
    The DEA posts various types of documents and publications online.

    https://www.dea.gov/resources/documents?field_document_document_type_value=Publication

    Resources
    The "Resources" web page provides convenient access to data and statistics, drug information, Freedom of

    Information Act guidance, media galleries, and publications.

    https://www.dea.gov/resources

    Social Media
    The DEA maintains Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, and Twitter accounts. A social media directory is part of the

    "Contact Us" web page.

    https://www.dea.gov/who-we-are/contact-us | Email: DEA.Public.Affairs@usdoj.gov

    Victim Witness Assistance
    Victims' rights laws resulted in the implementation of the victim witness assistance program. These laws provide for fair

    and just treatment of crime victims, immediate emergency treatment, and referrals to appropriate adult and child

    service agencies. The Department of Justice also gives guidance to Federal law enforcement agencies through the

    Attorney General's guidelines for victim witness assistance.

    https://www.dea.gov/resources/vwap | Email: VWAP.DEA@usdoj.gov

        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About
Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Federal Bureau of Investigation




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
    935 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20535


    202-324-3000

    http://www.fbi.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Kashyap Patel


      Deputy Director                                                                       Dan Bongino
https://www.fbi.gov/about/leadership-and-structure



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) is the Department of Justice's principal investigative arm. It is primarily

charged with gathering and reporting facts, locating witnesses, and compiling evidence in cases involving Federal
jurisdiction. It also provides law enforcement leadership and assistance to State and international law enforcement

agencies.


The FBI was established in 1908 by the Attorney General, who directed that Department of Justice investigations be

handled by its own staff. The Bureau is charged with investigating all violations of Federal law except those that have

been assigned by legislative enactment or otherwise to another Federal agency. Its jurisdiction includes a wide range

of responsibilities in the national security, criminal, and civil fields. Priority has been assigned to areas such as

counterterrorism, counterintelligence, cybercrimes, internationally and nationally organized crime and drug-related

activities, and financial crimes.


The FBI also offers cooperative services to local, State, and international law enforcement agencies. These services

include fingerprint identification, laboratory examination, police training, the Law Enforcement Online communication

and information service for use by the law enforcement community, the National Crime Information Center, and the

National Center for the Analysis of Violent Crime.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FBI records have been

assigned to record group 065.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/065.html

Career Opportunities
The FBI relies on professionals with diverse expertise and skills to analyze data for the intelligence community,

safeguard national security, and support the structure of the Bureau. Information on career opportunities, including

student internships, is available online.

https://www.fbijobs.gov
In 2020, the FBI ranked 223d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJ02

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page provides convenient access to information for contacting FBI headquarters, field offices,

and overseas offices.
https://www.fbi.gov/contact-us
Members of the public may report a violation of U.S. Federal law or suspected terrorism or criminal activity to the FBI.

https://www.fbi.gov/tips

Crime Statistics
The Uniform Crime Reporting program generates reliable statistics for use in law enforcement. It also releases

information that is relevant for students of criminal justice, researchers, the media, and the public. The program has

been generating crime statistics since 1930. The crime reporting program includes data from more than 18,000 city,

university and college, county, State, Tribal, and Federal law enforcement agencies. Agencies participate voluntarily

and submit their crime data either through a State UCR program or directly to the FBI's UCR Program.

https://www.fbi.gov/services/cjis/ucr

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the FBI recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-bureau-of-investigation

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA provides that a person may request access to Federal agency records or information. The FBI must disclose

records that any person properly requests in writing. Pursuant to one or more of nine exemptions and three exclusions

that the Act contains, a Federal agency can withhold certain records or parts of them. The FOIA applies only to Federal

agencies and does not create a right of access to records held by the U.S. Congress, the courts, State or local

government agencies, and private entities.

https://www.fbi.gov/services/information-management/foipa
The FBI's electronic FOIA library, which contains nearly 7,000 documents and other media that have been scanned

from paper and made into more accessible digital copies, is named the "Vault." The library includes new files that have

been released to the public, but never added to the FBI website; dozens of records previously posted on the FBI

website, but removed when requests diminished; files from the previous FBI FOIA Library; and new and previously

unreleased files.

https://vault.fbi.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The FBI posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.fbi.gov/about/faqs

History
The FBI posted a brief agency history on its website.

https://www.fbi.gov/history

Most Wanted
The FBI maintains the official "Ten Most Wanted Fugitives" list on its website.

https://www.fbi.gov/wanted/topten
     News
     The FBI posts top news stories, press releases, podcasts, radio broadcasts, speeches, and Tweets on its "News" web

     page.

     https://www.fbi.gov/news

     Publications
     The FBI's training division maintains the "Law Enforcement Bulletin" website.

     https://leb.fbi.gov
     The FBI maintains an extensive "Reports and Publications" database.

     https://www.fbi.gov/stats-services/publications

     Resources
     The "Resources" web page provides convenient access to information on business opportunities and victim services. It

     also has links to featured publications and frequently requested forms and services.

     https://www.fbi.gov/resources

     Safe Online Surfing
     The FBI maintains a "Safe Online Surfing" website for children.

     https://www.fbi.gov/fbi-kids

     Services
     Services that the FBI provides are presented on a single "Services" web page.

     https://www.fbi.gov/services

     Social Media
     The FBI started its presence on social media in 2008. Today, the Bureau has dozens of pages and sites.

     https://www.fbi.gov/news/fbi-social-media-sites

        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act
No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                         International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL)–Washington




The United States Government Manual




     INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL POLICE ORGANIZATION (INTERPOL)–WASHINGTON
    Department of Justice, Washington, DC 20530


    202-616-9000

    202-616-8400

    http://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Michael A. Hughes


    https://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/meet-leadership
  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



INTERPOL–Washington is a separate component under the supervision of the Deputy Attorney General and

comanaged with the Department of Homeland Security. It provides an essential communications link between the U.S.
police community and their counterparts in the foreign member countries.


INTERPOL is an association of 190 countries that promotes mutual assistance among law enforcement authorities to

prevent and suppress international crime. With no police force of its own, INTERPOL has no powers of arrest or search

and seizure and, therefore, relies on the law enforcement authorities of its member countries. Each member country is

required to have a national central bureau, such as INTERPOL–Washington, to act as the primary point of contact for

police affairs. INTERPOL serves as a channel of communication for its member countries to cooperate in the

investigation and prosecution of crime; provides a forum for discussions, working group meetings, and symposia to

help police focus on specific areas of criminal activity affecting their countries; and issues information and maintains

databases—supplied and used by member countries—on crime, fugitives, humanitarian concerns, missing persons,

and stolen passports and vehicles.


INTERPOL–Washington has permanent staff and detailed special agents from numerous Federal law enforcement

agencies. It is organized into seven divisions: the Alien and Fugitive, Counterterrorism, Drug, Economic Crimes, Human

Trafficking and Child Protection, State and Local Police Liaison, and Violent Crimes Divisions.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
Information on career opportunities is available online.

http://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/employment

Contact Information
The "Contact the Agency" web page contains a postal address for INTERPOL–Washington.

https://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/contact-agency

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives any person a right to access Government records. A request for information must be submitted in

writing. INTERPOL–Washington, U.S. National Central Bureau, generally follows the guidelines that the Department of

Justice has set forth in its FOIA reference guide.

https://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/interpol-washington-foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
INTERPOL posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.justice.gov/interpol-washington/frequently-asked-questions
        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                            Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                   Search                                                    Search
                                                                                             Search




                                                    Office of Justice Programs




The United States Government Manual




     OFFICE OF JUSTICE PROGRAMS
    810 Seventh Street NW., Washington, DC 20531


    202-307-0703

    http://www.ojp.gov | Email: askojp@ojp.usdoj.gov


      Assistant Attorney General                                                               Amy L. Solomon, Acting


      Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General                                              Amy L. Solomon
https://www.ojp.gov/about/offices/office-assistant-attorney-general-oaag



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Office of Justice Programs (OJP) was established by the Justice Assistance Act of 1984 (42 U.S.C. 3711) and

reauthorized in 1994 and 2005 to provide Federal leadership, coordination, and assistance needed to make the
Nation's justice system more efficient and effective in preventing and controlling crime. OJP is responsible for

collecting statistical data and conducting analyses; identifying emerging criminal justice issues; developing and testing

promising approaches to address these issues; evaluating program results; and disseminating these findings and other

information to State and local governments.

https://www.ojp.gov/about
The OJP is comprised of the following bureaus and offices: the Bureau of Justice Assistance provides funding, training,

and technical assistance to State and local governments to combat violent and drug-related crime and help improve

the criminal justice system; the Bureau of Justice Statistics is responsible for collecting and analyzing data on crime,

criminal offenders, crime victims, and the operations of justice systems at all levels of government; the National

Institute of Justice sponsors research and development programs, conducts demonstrations of innovative approaches

to improve criminal justice, and develops new criminal justice technologies; the Office of Juvenile Justice and

Delinquency Prevention provides grants and contracts to States to help them improve their juvenile justice systems

and sponsors innovative research, demonstration, evaluation, statistics, replication, technical assistance, and training

programs to increase the Nation's understanding of and improve its response to juvenile violence and delinquency;

the Office for Victims of Crime administers victim compensation and assistance grant programs and provides funding,

training, and technical assistance to victim service organizations, criminal justice agencies, and other professionals to

improve the Nation's response to crime victims; and the Office of Sex Offender Sentencing, Monitoring,

Apprehending, Registering, and Tracking (SMART) maintains the standards of the Sex Offender Registration and

Notification Act as defined by the Adam Walsh Act. The SMART Office also provides technical assistance and supports

innovative and best practices in the field of sex offender management.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Law Enforcement

Assistance Administration (LEAA) records have been assigned to record group 423. The OJP is one of the LEAA's

successor agencies.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/423.html

Blog
OJP Blog posts highlight OJP programs, as well as Department of Justice initiatives that support OJP's mission.

https://www.ojp.gov/news/ojp-blogs/2020-ojp-blogs
Career Opportunities
The OJP relies on accountants, attorneys, grant and project managers, information technology specialists, policy

advisors, public affairs specialists, researchers, scientists, statisticians, writers and editors, and many other professionals

to carry out its mission.

https://www.ojp.gov/about/jobs
In 2020, the OJP ranked 337th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJ07

Congressional Resources
Resources for Members of Congress and their staff are posted on the "For Congress" web page.

https://www.ojp.gov/congress | Email: OJPCongressionalAffairs@usdoj.gov

Contact
The "Contact Us" web page has a mailing address, as well as email addresses and phone numbers.

https://www.ojp.gov/contact | Email: askojp@ncjrs.gov
The OJP has a "For Media" web page that also contains contact information.

https://www.ojp.gov/news/for-media

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the OJP recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/justice-programs-office

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Enacted in 1966, the FOIA took effect on July 4, 1967. The law gives a right to obtain access to Federal agency records

to any person, except a fugitive from the law. Some records, or portions of them, are shielded, however, from

disclosure by one or more of nine statutory exemptions or by specific harm that disclosure may cause.

https://www.ojp.gov/program/freedom-information-act/overview

Juvenile Justice / Delinquency Prevention
The Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention publishes the bimonthly electronic newsletter "OJJDP News

@ a Glance." This award winning newsletter highlights office activities, funding opportunities, publications, Tribal

connections, and upcoming events.

https://ojjdp.ojp.gov/news/newsletter

News Releases
News releases are posted on the OJP website.

https://www.ojp.gov/news/news-releases

Publications
The OJP posts publications on its website.
     https://www.ojp.gov/news/publications

     Social Media
     The OJP has social media accounts. The "Social Media" web page provides convenient access to all of them: Facebook,

     LinkedIn, Twitter, and YouTube.

     https://www.ojp.gov/news/social-media

     State Administering Agencies
     The OJP awards formula grants directly to State governments, which then set priorities and allocate funds within their

     respective States.

     https://www.ojp.gov/funding/state-administering-agencies/overview

     Topics
     The "All Topics" web page provides convenient access to information on American Indian and Alaska Native Affairs,

     civil rights, corrections, courts, juvenile justice, law enforcement, research and statistics and evaluation, substance

     abuse and crime, technology to fight crime, and victims of crime.

     https://www.ojp.gov/topics/all-topics

     Training / Technical Assistance
     The OJP offers training on and technical assistance with financial management, grant writing, and other subjects that

     are relevant to criminal and juvenile justice professionals and victim service providers.

     https://www.ojp.gov/training-and-technical-assistance

     Virtual Library
     the National Criminal Justice Reference Service (NCJRS) is an informational resource that supports policy, program

     development, and research. The NCJRS Virtual Library contains bibliographic information on and abstracts of more

     than 230,000 collection resources and over 80,000 online materials.

     https://www.ojp.gov/ncjrs/virtual-library

        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act
No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               United States Marshals Service




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES MARSHALS SERVICE
    Department of Justice, Washington, DC 20530


    703-740-1699

    http://www.usmarshals.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Donald W. Washington


    https://www.usmarshals.gov/contacts/leadership.html

      Deputy Director                                                                       Jeffrey R. Tyler
https://www.usmarshals.gov/contacts/index.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The United States Marshals Service (USMS) is the Nation's oldest Federal law enforcement agency, having served as a

vital link between the executive and judicial branches of the Government since 1789. The USMS performs tasks that are

essential to the operation of virtually every aspect of the Federal justice system.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/duties/factsheets/overview.pdf
The USMS has these responsibilities: providing support and protection for the Federal courts, including security for 800

judicial facilities and nearly 2,000 judges and magistrates, as well as countless other trial participants such as jurors and

attorneys; apprehending the majority of Federal fugitives; operating the Federal Witness Security Program and

ensuring the safety of endangered Government witnesses; maintaining custody of and transporting thousands of

Federal prisoners annually; executing court orders and arrest warrants; managing and selling seized property forfeited

to the Government by drug traffickers and other criminals and assisting the Justice Department's asset forfeiture

program; responding to emergency circumstances, including civil disturbances, terrorist incidents, and other crisis

situations through its Special Operations Group; restoring order in riot and mob-violence situations; providing

housing, transportation, and medical care of federal detainees; and operating the USMS Training Academy.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that USMS records have been

assigned to record group 527.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/527.html
Notable references to USMS activities also are found in the following National Archives record groups: 021 (records of

Federal courts); 060 (letters received by the Department of Justice); 118 (records of U.S. Attorneys, and formerly U.S.

Marshals); and 206 (records of the Solicitor of the Treasury).

https://www.usmarshals.gov/history/records_assistance.htm

Business Opportunities
The USMS posts products and services that it purchases.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/business/index.html

Career Opportunities
The USMS relies on administrative personnel, aviation enforcement officers, deputy U.S. Marshals, detention

enforcement officers, and other professionals to carry out its mission.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/careers/index.html
In 2020, the USMS ranked 92d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places
To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=DJ08

Contact
The "U.S. Marshals Service Contacts" web page contains a lot of names, phone numbers, and titles.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/contacts/index.html
The USMS posts contact information for its district offices.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/contacts/districts.html

Factsheets
The USMS posts factsheets on its website.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/duties/factsheets/index.html

Federal Register
Documents that the USMS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/united-states-marshals-service

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded from

disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute. Phone, 703-740-3943.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/foia/index.html | Email: usms.foia@usdoj.gov
The USMS maintains an electronic reading room. Before submitting a FOIA request, seekers of information should

search the reading room's holdings to verify that the desired information is not already accessible, free of charge and

without delay.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/readingroom/files.html

History
A historical timeline of the USMS is available online.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/history/timeline.html

Most Wanted
The USMS posts information on its 15 most-wanted fugitives. The USMS considers these individuals armed and

dangerous. Phone, 800-336-0102.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/investigations/most_wanted/index.html

News
The USMS posts news releases.

https://www.usmarshals.gov/news/index.html

Site Map
The USMS website index allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.
     https://www.usmarshals.gov/site_map/index.html

        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                    Search
                                                                                            Search




                                                      Offices / Boards
                                          Executive Office for Immigration Review
                                Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States
                                      Office of Community Oriented Policing Services
                                            Office on Violence Against Women
                                             United States Parole Commission




The United States Government Manual




     OFFICES / BOARDS

    Executive Office for Immigration Review
    Falls Church, VA 22041


    703-305-0289
http://www.justice.gov/eoir


  DIRECTOR                                                    Jean King, Acting


https://www.justice.gov/eoir/staff-profile/meet-the-director



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR), under a delegation of authority from the Attorney General,

is charged with adjudicating matters brought under various immigration statutes before its three administrative

tribunals: the Office of the Chief Immigration Judge, the Board of Immigration Appeals, and the Office of the

Chief Administrative Hearing Officer.


The Office of the Chief Immigration Judge provides overall direction for more than 300 immigration judges

located in 58 immigration courts throughout the Nation. Immigration judges are responsible for conducting

formal administrative proceedings and act independently in their decision-making capacity. Their decisions are

administratively final, unless appealed or certified to the BIA.


In removal proceedings, an immigration judge determines whether an alien should be removed or allowed to

remain in the United States. Judges are located throughout the United States, and each judge has jurisdiction to

consider various forms of relief available under the law.


The Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) has nationwide jurisdiction to hear appeals from certain decisions made

by immigration judges and by district directors of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). In addition, the

BIA is responsible for hearing appeals involving disciplinary actions against attorneys and representatives before

DHS and EOIR.


Decisions of the BIA are binding on all DHS officers and immigration judges unless modified or overruled by the

Attorney General or a Federal court. All BIA decisions are subject to judicial review in Federal court. The majority

of appeals reaching the BIA involve orders of removal and applications for relief from removal. Other cases

before the BIA include petitions to classify the status of alien relatives for the issuance of preference immigrant

visas, fines imposed upon carriers for the violation of the immigration laws, and motions for reopening or

reconsideration of decisions previously rendered.


The Office of the Chief Administrative Hearing Officer (OCAHO) is headed by a Chief Administrative Hearing

Officer (CAHO), who is responsible for the general supervision and management of administrative law judges

(ALJs). OCAHO ALJs preside at hearings that are mandated by provisions of immigration law concerning

allegations of unlawful employment of aliens, employment eligibility verification violations (“employer sanctions),

unfair immigration-related employment practices, and immigration document fraud. ALJ decisions in employer

sanctions and document fraud cases may be reviewed by the CAHO and the Attorney General, and all OCAHO

cases may be appealed to the appropriate U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that EOIR records have

been assigned to record group 582. The guide does not contain, however, a description that is currently

associated with this record group.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/501-to-600.html

Contact
Phone numbers and email and postal addresses are available on the "Contact EOIR" web page.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/contact-eoir | Email: PAO.EOIR@usdoj.gov

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the EOIR recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/executive-office-for-immigration-review

Forms
The "EOIR Forms" web page has most of the forms that one needs for filing with the Board of Immigration

Appeals, the Immigration Courts, and the Office of the Chief Administrative Hearing Officer.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/forms

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded

from disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute. The EOIR maintains four electronic

libraries: archived resources, frequently requested agency records, proactive disclosures, and reference materials.

Before submitting a FOIA request, an information seeker should browse these library collections to verify that the

desired information is not available, immediately and free of charge.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/freedom-information-act-foia

Immigration Courts
An alphabetical list of immigration courts, which are arranged by State and by cities within a State, is available

online.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/eoir-immigration-court-listing

Legal Representation
The "Find Legal Representation" web page has resources for those seeking representation.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/find-legal-representation

Library
A virtual law library that serves as a complement to the Law Library and Immigration Research Center is available
online.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/virtual-law-library

Social Media
The EOIR has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/doj.eoir
The EOIR tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/DOJ_EOIR

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of
the United States
Suite 6002, 600 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20579


202-616-6975

202-616-6993

http://www.justice.gov/fcsc


  COMMISSIONER                                             Sylvia M. Becker


  COMMISSIONER                                             Patrick Hovakimian


https://www.justice.gov/fcsc



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States is a quasi-judicial, independent agency within

the Department of Justice, which adjudicates claims of U.S. nationals against foreign governments, either under

specific jurisdiction conferred by Congress or the Department of State or pursuant to international claims

settlement agreements. The decisions of the Commission are final and are not reviewable under any standard by

any court or other authority. Funds for payment of the Commission's awards are derived from congressional

appropriations, international claims settlements, or the liquidation of foreign assets in the United States by the

Departments of Justice and the Treasury.


The Commission also has authority to receive, determine the validity and amount, and provide for the payment

of claims by members of the U.S. Armed Services and civilians held as prisoners of war or interned by a hostile

force in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam conflict or by the survivors of such servicemembers and civilians.


The Commission is also responsible for maintaining records and responding to inquiries related to the various

claims programs it has conducted against the Governments of Albania, Bulgaria, China, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Egypt, Ethiopia, the Federal Republic of Germany, the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Iran, Italy,

Panama, Poland, Romania, the Soviet Union, Vietnam, and Yugoslavia, as well as those authorized under the

War Claims Act of 1948 and other statutes.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
General information on career opportunities is available on the Department of Justice's "Careers" web page. For

additional information on attorney positions, contact the Office of the Chief Counsel, 600 E Street NW., Suite

6002, Washington, DC 20579. Phone, 202-616-6975.

http://www.justice.gov/careers

Contact Information
The Commission may be contacted by sending electronic or postal mail. Addresses are posted on the "Contact

the Commission" web page.

https://www.justice.gov/fcsc/contact-commission | Email: info.FCSC@usdoj.gov

Publications
Annual reports, starting with the year 2008, are available on the "Publications" web page.

http://www.justice.gov/fcsc/publications

Reading Room
The reading room is located at 600 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20579. Phone, 202-616-6975.


  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Office of Community Oriented Policing
Services
935 N. Street NE., Washington, DC 20530


202-514-2058

http://www.cops.usdoj.gov


  DIRECTOR                                                 Robert Chapman, Acting


https://m.facebook.com/DOJCOPS/photos/a.180221468674616/4732389816791069/?
_se_imp=0vbs31vCvpgh7MTD3



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.
The Office of Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) was established to assist law enforcement agencies

in enhancing public safety through the implementation of community policing strategies. The Office gives

assistance by providing training to enhance law enforcement officers' problem-solving and community

interaction skills and helping law enforcement and community members develop initiatives to prevent crime;

increasing the number of law enforcement officers directly interacting with communities; and supporting the

development of new technologies to shift law enforcement's focus to preventing crime and disorder within

communities.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Resources
The "Dispatch" is a monthly electronic newsletter. The article "Ten Recruiting Tips for Finding Good Officers" ran

in the SEP 2019 issue.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/html/dispatch/09-2019/recruitment.html
The "Dispatch" article "Surviving the Job" ran in the DEC 2019 issue.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/html/dispatch/12-2019/surviving.html

Contact Information
https://cops.usdoj.gov/contactcops | Email: askcopsRC@usdoj.gov

Grants and Funding
COPS grants and funding opportunities support State, local, and tribal law enforcement efforts to advance

community policing. Current applicant and grantee information—announcements, fiscal year grant programs,

current funding opportunities, and resources for grantees—is available online.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/grants

News
The "News" web page provides easy access to photo galleries, press releases, " the podcast series "The Beat," the

video series "What's New in Blue, and the Office's news feed.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/news

Resources
COPS is a valuable resource for smart approaches to preventing and reducing crime. COPS works with

researchers, practitioners, and trailblazers to implement effective strategies in the field.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/resources

Training / Technical Assistance
Resources for training and technical assistance are available on the COPS website.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/training-technical-assistance

Social Media
COPS has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/DOJCOPS
COPS tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/COPSOffice

  The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Office on Violence Against Women
145 N Street NE., Suite 10W–121, Washington, DC 20530


Phone: 202-307-6026

http://www.justice.gov/ovw


  DIRECTOR                                                Allison Randall, Acting


https://www.justice.gov/ovw/about-office



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Office on Violence Against Women (OVW) was established in 1995 to reduce violence against women

through the implementation of the Violence Against Women Act. The Office administers financial and technical

assistance to communities that are developing programs, policies, and practices to end domestic and dating

violence, sexual assault, and stalking.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
Information on employment and internship opportunities is available online.

http://www.justice.gov/ovw/careers

Publications
Portable Document Format (PDF) files of selected publications are available online.

http://www.justice.gov/ovw/selected-publications
http://www.justice.gov/ovw/contact-office | Email: ovw.info@usdoj.gov
For further information, contact the Office on Violence Against Women, 145 N Street NE., Suite 10W–121,

Washington, DC, 20530. Phone, 202-307-6026.



United States Parole Commission
90 K Street NE., Washington, DC 20530. Phone, 202-346-7000.
    http://www.usdoj.gov/uspc


        CHAIR                                                 Patricia K. Cushwa, Acting


    https://www.justice.gov/uspc/about-commission



        The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



    The U.S. Parole Commission (USPC) makes parole release decisions for eligible Federal and District of Columbia

    prisoners; authorizes methods of release and conditions under which release occurs; prescribes, modifies, and

    monitors compliance with the terms and conditions governing offenders' behavior while on parole or mandatory

    or supervised release; issues warrants for violation of supervision; determines probable cause for the revocation

    process; revokes parole, mandatory, or supervised release; releases from supervision those offenders who are no

    longer a risk to public safety; and promulgates the rules, regulations, and guidelines for the exercise of USPC's

    authority and the implementation of a national parole policy.


    USPC has sole jurisdiction over the following: Federal offenders who committed offenses before November 1,

    1987; DC Code offenders who committed offenses before August 5, 2000; DC Code offenders sentenced to a

    term of supervised release; Uniform Code of Military Justice offenders who are in Bureau of Prison's custody;

    transfer treaty cases; and State probationers and parolees in the Federal Witness Protection Program.




    SOURCES OF INFORMATION

    Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
    The Commission maintains an online FOIA library. Information on Freedom of Information Act requests is

    available online.

    http://www.justice.gov/uspc/freedom-information-act-foia/foia-library
    http://www.justice.gov/uspc/freedom-information-act-foia | Email: USPC.FOIA@usdoj.gov

    Reading Room
    The reading room is located at 90 K Street NE., Washington, DC 20530. Phone, 202-346-7000.

    http://www.justice.gov/uspc/contact-commission
    For further information, contact the U.S. Parole Commission, Department of Justice, 90 K Street NE., Washington,

    DC 20530. Phone, 202-346-7000.




Home


The Government of the United States


About
Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                    Search
                                                                                            Search




                                            Executive Office for Immigration Review




The United States Government Manual




     EXECUTIVE OFFICE FOR IMMIGRATION REVIEW
    Falls Church, VA 22041


    703-305-0289

    http://www.justice.gov/eoir


      DIRECTOR                                                                                Jean King, Acting


    https://www.justice.gov/eoir/staff-profile/meet-the-director
  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Executive Office for Immigration Review (EOIR), under a delegation of authority from the Attorney General, is

charged with adjudicating matters brought under various immigration statutes before its three administrative tribunals:
the Office of the Chief Immigration Judge, the Board of Immigration Appeals, and the Office of the Chief

Administrative Hearing Officer.


The Office of the Chief Immigration Judge provides overall direction for more than 300 immigration judges located in

58 immigration courts throughout the Nation. Immigration judges are responsible for conducting formal administrative

proceedings and act independently in their decision-making capacity. Their decisions are administratively final, unless

appealed or certified to the BIA.


In removal proceedings, an immigration judge determines whether an alien should be removed or allowed to remain

in the United States. Judges are located throughout the United States, and each judge has jurisdiction to consider

various forms of relief available under the law.


The Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) has nationwide jurisdiction to hear appeals from certain decisions made by

immigration judges and by district directors of the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). In addition, the BIA is

responsible for hearing appeals involving disciplinary actions against attorneys and representatives before DHS and

EOIR.


Decisions of the BIA are binding on all DHS officers and immigration judges unless modified or overruled by the

Attorney General or a Federal court. All BIA decisions are subject to judicial review in Federal court. The majority of

appeals reaching the BIA involve orders of removal and applications for relief from removal. Other cases before the

BIA include petitions to classify the status of alien relatives for the issuance of preference immigrant visas, fines

imposed upon carriers for the violation of the immigration laws, and motions for reopening or reconsideration of

decisions previously rendered.


The Office of the Chief Administrative Hearing Officer (OCAHO) is headed by a Chief Administrative Hearing Officer

(CAHO), who is responsible for the general supervision and management of administrative law judges (ALJs). OCAHO

ALJs preside at hearings that are mandated by provisions of immigration law concerning allegations of unlawful

employment of aliens, employment eligibility verification violations (“employer sanctions), unfair immigration-related

employment practices, and immigration document fraud. ALJ decisions in employer sanctions and document fraud

cases may be reviewed by the CAHO and the Attorney General, and all OCAHO cases may be appealed to the

appropriate U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that EOIR records have been

assigned to record group 582. The guide does not contain, however, a description that is currently associated with this

record group.
https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/501-to-600.html

Contact
Phone numbers and email and postal addresses are available on the "Contact EOIR" web page.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/contact-eoir | Email: PAO.EOIR@usdoj.gov

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the EOIR recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/executive-office-for-immigration-review

Forms
The "EOIR Forms" web page has most of the forms that one needs for filing with the Board of Immigration Appeals,

the Immigration Courts, and the Office of the Chief Administrative Hearing Officer.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/forms

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded from

disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute. The EOIR maintains four electronic libraries:

archived resources, frequently requested agency records, proactive disclosures, and reference materials. Before

submitting a FOIA request, an information seeker should browse these library collections to verify that the desired

information is not available, immediately and free of charge.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/freedom-information-act-foia

Immigration Courts
An alphabetical list of immigration courts, which are arranged by State and by cities within a State, is available online.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/eoir-immigration-court-listing

Legal Representation
The "Find Legal Representation" web page has resources for those seeking representation.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/find-legal-representation

Library
A virtual law library that serves as a complement to the Law Library and Immigration Research Center is available

online.

https://www.justice.gov/eoir/virtual-law-library

Social Media
The EOIR has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/doj.eoir
The EOIR tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/DOJ_EOIR
        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                    Search
                                                                                            Search




                                Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States




The United States Government Manual




     FOREIGN CLAIMS SETTLEMENT COMMISSION OF THE UNITED STATES
    Suite 6002, 600 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20579


    202-616-6975

    202-616-6993

    http://www.justice.gov/fcsc


      COMMISSIONER                                                                            Sylvia M. Becker


      COMMISSIONER                                                                            Patrick Hovakimian
https://www.justice.gov/fcsc



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States is a quasi-judicial, independent agency within the

Department of Justice, which adjudicates claims of U.S. nationals against foreign governments, either under specific

jurisdiction conferred by Congress or the Department of State or pursuant to international claims settlement

agreements. The decisions of the Commission are final and are not reviewable under any standard by any court or

other authority. Funds for payment of the Commission's awards are derived from congressional appropriations,

international claims settlements, or the liquidation of foreign assets in the United States by the Departments of Justice

and the Treasury.


The Commission also has authority to receive, determine the validity and amount, and provide for the payment of

claims by members of the U.S. Armed Services and civilians held as prisoners of war or interned by a hostile force in

Southeast Asia during the Vietnam conflict or by the survivors of such servicemembers and civilians.


The Commission is also responsible for maintaining records and responding to inquiries related to the various claims

programs it has conducted against the Governments of Albania, Bulgaria, China, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Egypt,

Ethiopia, the Federal Republic of Germany, the German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Iran, Italy, Panama, Poland,

Romania, the Soviet Union, Vietnam, and Yugoslavia, as well as those authorized under the War Claims Act of 1948

and other statutes.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
General information on career opportunities is available on the Department of Justice's "Careers" web page. For

additional information on attorney positions, contact the Office of the Chief Counsel, 600 E Street NW., Suite 6002,

Washington, DC 20579. Phone, 202-616-6975.

http://www.justice.gov/careers

Contact Information
The Commission may be contacted by sending electronic or postal mail. Addresses are posted on the "Contact the

Commission" web page.

https://www.justice.gov/fcsc/contact-commission | Email: info.FCSC@usdoj.gov

Publications
Annual reports, starting with the year 2008, are available on the "Publications" web page.

http://www.justice.gov/fcsc/publications

Reading Room
     The reading room is located at 600 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20579. Phone, 202-616-6975.


        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                    Office of Community Oriented Policing Services




The United States Government Manual




     OFFICE OF COMMUNITY ORIENTED POLICING SERVICES
    935 N. Street NE., Washington, DC 20530


    202-514-2058

    http://www.cops.usdoj.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Robert Chapman, Acting


    https://m.facebook.com/DOJCOPS/photos/a.180221468674616/4732389816791069/?_se_imp=0vbs31vCvpgh7MTD3
  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The Office of Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) was established to assist law enforcement agencies in

enhancing public safety through the implementation of community policing strategies. The Office gives assistance by
providing training to enhance law enforcement officers' problem-solving and community interaction skills and helping

law enforcement and community members develop initiatives to prevent crime; increasing the number of law

enforcement officers directly interacting with communities; and supporting the development of new technologies to

shift law enforcement's focus to preventing crime and disorder within communities.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Resources
The "Dispatch" is a monthly electronic newsletter. The article "Ten Recruiting Tips for Finding Good Officers" ran in the

SEP 2019 issue.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/html/dispatch/09-2019/recruitment.html
The "Dispatch" article "Surviving the Job" ran in the DEC 2019 issue.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/html/dispatch/12-2019/surviving.html

Contact Information
https://cops.usdoj.gov/contactcops | Email: askcopsRC@usdoj.gov

Grants and Funding
COPS grants and funding opportunities support State, local, and tribal law enforcement efforts to advance community

policing. Current applicant and grantee information—announcements, fiscal year grant programs, current funding

opportunities, and resources for grantees—is available online.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/grants

News
The "News" web page provides easy access to photo galleries, press releases, " the podcast series "The Beat," the

video series "What's New in Blue, and the Office's news feed.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/news

Resources
COPS is a valuable resource for smart approaches to preventing and reducing crime. COPS works with researchers,

practitioners, and trailblazers to implement effective strategies in the field.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/resources

Training / Technical Assistance
Resources for training and technical assistance are available on the COPS website.

https://cops.usdoj.gov/training-technical-assistance
     Social Media
     COPS has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/DOJCOPS
     COPS tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/COPSOffice

        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                             Office on Violence Against Women




The United States Government Manual




     OFFICE ON VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN
    145 N Street NE., Suite 10W–121, Washington, DC 20530


    Phone: 202-307-6026

    http://www.justice.gov/ovw


      DIRECTOR                                                                               Allison Randall, Acting


    https://www.justice.gov/ovw/about-office
        The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



     The Office on Violence Against Women (OVW) was established in 1995 to reduce violence against women through the

     implementation of the Violence Against Women Act. The Office administers financial and technical assistance to
     communities that are developing programs, policies, and practices to end domestic and dating violence, sexual

     assault, and stalking.




     SOURCES OF INFORMATION

     Employment
     Information on employment and internship opportunities is available online.

     http://www.justice.gov/ovw/careers

     Publications
     Portable Document Format (PDF) files of selected publications are available online.

     http://www.justice.gov/ovw/selected-publications
     http://www.justice.gov/ovw/contact-office | Email: ovw.info@usdoj.gov

        For further information, contact the Office on Violence Against Women, 145 N Street NE., Suite 10W–121,
        Washington, DC, 20530. Phone, 202-307-6026.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                             United States Parole Commission




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES PAROLE COMMISSION
    90 K Street NE., Washington, DC 20530. Phone, 202-346-7000.


    http://www.usdoj.gov/uspc


      CHAIR                                                                                 Patricia K. Cushwa, Acting


    https://www.justice.gov/uspc/about-commission



      The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.
     The U.S. Parole Commission (USPC) makes parole release decisions for eligible Federal and District of Columbia

     prisoners; authorizes methods of release and conditions under which release occurs; prescribes, modifies, and

     monitors compliance with the terms and conditions governing offenders' behavior while on parole or mandatory or

     supervised release; issues warrants for violation of supervision; determines probable cause for the revocation process;

     revokes parole, mandatory, or supervised release; releases from supervision those offenders who are no longer a risk

     to public safety; and promulgates the rules, regulations, and guidelines for the exercise of USPC's authority and the

     implementation of a national parole policy.


     USPC has sole jurisdiction over the following: Federal offenders who committed offenses before November 1, 1987; DC

     Code offenders who committed offenses before August 5, 2000; DC Code offenders sentenced to a term of

     supervised release; Uniform Code of Military Justice offenders who are in Bureau of Prison's custody; transfer treaty

     cases; and State probationers and parolees in the Federal Witness Protection Program.




     SOURCES OF INFORMATION

     Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
     The Commission maintains an online FOIA library. Information on Freedom of Information Act requests is available

     online.

     http://www.justice.gov/uspc/freedom-information-act-foia/foia-library
     http://www.justice.gov/uspc/freedom-information-act-foia | Email: USPC.FOIA@usdoj.gov

     Reading Room
     The reading room is located at 90 K Street NE., Washington, DC 20530. Phone, 202-346-7000.

     http://www.justice.gov/uspc/contact-commission

        For further information, contact the U.S. Parole Commission, Department of Justice, 90 K Street NE.,
        Washington, DC 20530. Phone, 202-346-7000.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act
No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                Department of Labor
                                        Bureau of International Labor Affairs
                                              Bureau of Labor Statistics
                                      Employee Benefits Security Administration
                                      Employment and Training Administration
                                       Mine Safety and Health Administration
                                    Occupational Safety and Health Administration
                                     Veterans' Employment and Training Service
                                              Wage and Hour Division
                                                  Women's Bureau




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF LABOR
    200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210
202-693-6000

http://www.dol.gov


 SECRETARY OF LABOR                                                     Eugene Scalia


 Deputy Secretary                                                       Patrick Pizzella


https://www.dol.gov/agencies/osec

 CHAIRS OF BOARDS


 Administrative Review                                                  Thomas H. Burrell, Acting


 Benefits Review                                                        Judith S. Boggs


 Employees' Compensation Appeals                                        Alec J. Koromilas




 Chief Administrative Law Judge                                         Stephen R. Henley




 Chief Information Officer                                              Gundeep Ahluwalia




 DIRECTORS


 Centers for Faith and Opportunity Initiative                           Mark Zelden


 Executive Secretariat                                                  Caroline H. Robinson


 Office of Public Liaison                                               Dean A. Heyl




 Ombudsman for the Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation
                                                                        Malcolm Nelson
 Program


https://www.dol.gov/general/dol-agencies

 ADMINISTRATOR


 Wage and Hour Division                                                 Cheryl M. Stanton




 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES
Administration and Management                 G. Bryan Slater


Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs   (vacancy)


Disability Employment Policy                  (vacancy)


Employee Benefits Security                    Jeanne K. Wilson, Acting


Employment and Training                       John P. Pallasch


Mine Safety and Health                        David G. Zatezalo


Occupational Safety and Health                (vacancy)


Policy                                        (vacancy)


Public Affairs                                Robert Bozzuto


Veterans' Employment and Training             John Lowry III




Chief Financial Officer                       James E. Williams




COMMISSIONER


Labor Statistics                              William W. Beach




DEPUTY UNDERSECRETARY


International Affairs                         (vacancy)




DIRECTOR


Women's Bureau                                Laurie Todd-Smith




OFFICE DIRECTORS


Federal Contract Compliance Programs          Craig E. Leen


Labor-Management Standards                    (vacancy)
  Workers' Compensation Programs                                                              Julia K. Hearthway




  Solicitor of Labor                                                                          Kate S. O'Scannlain


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel

  Inspector General                                                                           Larry D. Turner, Acting


https://www.oig.dol.gov/digbio.htm



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.



The Department of Labor promotes the welfare of job seekers, wage earners, and retirees by improving working

conditions, advancing opportunities for profitable employment, protecting retirement and health care benefits, matching

workers to employers, strengthening free collective bargaining, and tracking changes in economic indicators on a

national scale.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On March 4, 1913, President William H. Taft approved Public Law 62–426, which "created an executive department in

the Government to be called the Department of Labor, with a Secretary of Labor, who shall be the head thereof, to be

appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate." The Act also stated the purpose of the

new Department of Labor (DOL): "to foster, promote, and develop the welfare of the wager earners of the United

States, to improve their working conditions, and to advance their opportunities for profitable employment" (37 Stat.

736).

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/62nd-congress/session-3/c62s3ch141.pdf
The U.S. Congress first established a Bureau of Labor in the Department of the Interior. President Chester A. Arthur

approved the legislative action on June 27, 1884. The Act placed the new Bureau "under the charge of a Commissioner

of Labor . . . [who] shall collect information upon the subject of labor, its relation to capital, the hours of labor, and the

earnings of laboring men and women, and the means of promoting their material, social, intellectual, and moral

prosperity" (23 Stat. 60 and 61).

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/48th-congress/Session%201/c48s1ch127.pdf
Four years later, the U.S. Congress acted again, establishing the Bureau of Labor as an independent department

without executive rank. On June 13, 1888, President Grover Cleveland approved the law to make room "at the seat of

Government [for] a Department of Labor, the general design and duties of which shall be to acquire and diffuse

among the people of the United States useful information on subjects connected with labor, in the most general and

comprehensive sense of that word, and especially upon its relation to capital, the hours of labor, the earnings of

laboring men and women, and the means of promoting their material, social, intellectual, and moral prosperity."
http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/50th-congress/session-1/c50s1ch389.pdf
Fifteen years later, it returned to the status of a bureau within an expanded department that now acquired executive

rank. On February 14, 1903, President Theodore Roosevelt approved Public Law 57–87, which established "an executive

department to be known as the Department of Commerce and Labor" (32 Stat. 825).

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/57th-congress/session-2/c57s2ch552.pdf
The DOL posts its organizational chart online.

https://www.dol.gov/general/aboutdol/orgchart
The DOL relies on a number of offices and agencies to carry out its mission. These components are organized into

major program areas, and an Assistant Secretary or other official heads each of them.

https://www.dol.gov/general/dol-agencies



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material on matters of "Labor" is codified in 29 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/browse/prelim@title29&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations associated with the Office of the Secretary of Labor are codified in subtitle A, parts 0–99, of 29

CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=b05b0c24dcef5daf53fdf059f2fdfd28&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title29/29cfrv1_02.tpl#0
Rules and regulations that relate to "Labor" are codified in subtitle B, 100–4999, of 29 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=b05b0c24dcef5daf53fdf059f2fdfd28&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title29/29subtitleB.tpl



ACTIVITIES
The DOL administers a variety of Federal labor laws to guarantee workers' rights to fair, safe, and healthy working

conditions, including minimum hourly wage and overtime pay, protection against employment discrimination, and

unemployment insurance. The Secretary advises the President on the development and execution of policies and the

administration and enforcement of laws relating to wage earners, their working conditions, and their employment

opportunities.


Administrative Law
Administrative law judges from the Office of Administrative Law Judges preside over formal adversarial hearings

involving labor-related matters: the Longshore and Harbor Workers' Compensation, the Defense Base, the Black Lung

Benefits, the McNamara O'Hara Service Contract, and the Davis Bacon Act; environmental, transportation, and

securities whistleblower protection laws; permanent and temporary immigration; child labor law violations;

employment discrimination; training; seasonal and migrant workers; and Federal construction and service contracts.

The Office is comprised of headquarters in Washington, D.C. and seven district offices. Its judges are nonpolitical

appointees: They are appointed under and guaranteed decisional independence by the Administrative Procedure Act.
The Administrative Review Board or Benefits Review Board typically reviews appeals of the decisions made by the

Office's judges. Depending upon the statute at issue, appeals then go to Federal district or appellate courts and,

ultimately, may go to the U.S. Supreme Court.

http://www.oalj.dol.gov

Administration and Management
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Administration and Management is responsible for the development and

promulgation of policies, standards, procedures, systems, and materials related to the resource and administrative

management of the Department and for the execution of such policies and directives at Headquarters and in the field.

http://www.dol.gov/oasam

Audits / Investigations
The Office of Inspector General (OIG) conducts audits to review the economy, effectiveness, efficiency, and integrity of

all DOL programs and operations, including those performed by its contractors and grantees. The Inspector General

works to answer the following types of questions: Do Department programs and operations comply with the

applicable laws and regulations; are departmental resources being utilized efficiently and economically; and are DOL

programs achieving their intended results? The Office also conducts administrative, civil, and criminal investigations

relating to violations of Federal laws, regulations, or rules—including violations committed by DOL contractors and

grantees—as well as investigations of allegations of misconduct on the part of DOL employees. In addition, the OIG

has an "external" program function to conduct criminal investigations to combat the influence of labor racketeering

and organized crime in the nation's labor unions. The OIG conducts labor racketeering investigations in three areas:

employee benefit plans, labor-management relations, and internal union affairs. The OIG also works with other law

enforcement partners on human trafficking matters.

http://www.oig.dol.gov

Communications / Public Affairs
The Office of Public Affairs (OPA) directs and coordinates all public and employee communications activities. The

Assistant Secretary of the Office acts as the chief adviser to the Secretary of Labor and his or her Deputy Secretary and

to the agency heads and departmental staff for developing and implementing strategies that engage and connect

with the public and educate it about the work and mission of the Department.


The Assistant Secretary also acts as the Secretary’s chief adviser on crisis communications. The OPA serves as the first

point of contact for news media inquiries, as the clearance and dissemination point for DOL public-facing materials,

and it develops and maintains the Department's Web-based, audiovisual, and contact center communications. The

OPA also administers "lock ups" when sensitive economic data are released to the press under an embargo.

https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/media-contact

Disability Employment Policy
The Office of Disability Employment Policy (ODEP) is the only non-regulatory federal agency that promotes policies

and coordinates with employers and all levels of government to increase workplace success for people with disabilities.

ODEP helps employers foster inclusive workplaces where all employees can contribute and succeed, and works to

improve government workforce systems so people with disabilities can secure good jobs and excel in the workplace.
http://www.dol.gov/odep

Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation
The Office of the Ombudsman for the Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Program was established

in 2004 under Part E of the Energy Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Program Act (EEOICPA), as

amended (42 U.S.C. 7385s-15). The EEOICPA is a system of Federal payments to compensate certain nuclear workers

for occupational illnesses caused by exposure to toxic substances. This small and independent Office is headed by the

Ombudsman, whom the Secretary of Labor appoints. It provides information to claimants on the benefits available

under Parts B and E of the EEOICPA and issues annual reports to Congress detailing the complaints, grievances, and

requests for assistance that the Office receives.

http://www.dol.gov/eeombd

Federal Contract Compliance
The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs administers and enforces three equal employment opportunity

laws: Executive Order 11246, Section 503 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, and the Vietnam Era Veterans'

Readjustment Assistance Act of 1974. As amended, these laws prohibit Federal contractors and subcontractors from

discriminating based on race, color, religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, national origin, disability, or status

as a protected veteran. Executive Order 11246 prohibits Federal contractors and subcontractors, with limited

exceptions, from taking adverse employment actions against applicants and employees for asking about, discussing, or

sharing information on their pay or the pay of their coworkers. These laws also require Federal contractors and

subcontractors to take affirmative action to ensure equal employment opportunity.

http://www.dol.gov/ofccp | Email: OFCCP-Public@dol.gov

Labor-Management Standards
The Office of Labor-Management Standards (OLMS) administers and enforces most provisions of the Labor-

Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (LMRDA). The LMRDA primarily promotes union democracy and

financial integrity in private sector labor unions through standards for union officer elections and union trusteeships

and safeguards for union assets. Additionally, the LMRDA promotes labor union and labor-management transparency

through reporting and disclosure requirements for labor unions and their officials, employers, labor relations

consultants, and surety companies.


OLMS also administers provisions of the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 and the Foreign Service Act of 1980, which

extend comparable protections to Federal labor unions. OLMS does not have jurisdiction over unions representing

solely state, county, or municipal employees. In addition, the Division of Statutory Programs (DSP) administers DOL

responsibilities under the Federal Transit Act by ensuring that fair and equitable arrangements protecting mass transit

employees are in place before the release of Federal transit grant funds.

http://www.dol.gov/olms

Legal Services
The Office of the Solicitor of Labor (SOL) provides comprehensive legal services to help the Department achieve its

mission. More specifically, the Solicitor serves dual roles in the Department. The Solicitor is the Department's chief

enforcement officer, pursuing affirmative litigation on behalf of the Secretary before administrative law judges, review
boards and commissions, and in the Federal district courts and courts of appeals. The Solicitor is also the Department's

general counsel, assisting in the development of regulations, standards, and legislative proposals; providing legal

opinions and advice on all of the Department’s activities; advising the Solicitor General on Supreme Court litigation;

and coordinating with the Department of Justice, as appropriate, to defend the Department in litigation.

http://www.dol.gov/sol

Policy / Rulemaking
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy advises and assists the Secretary, Deputy Secretary, and Department on

policy development, policy evaluation, regulation, and legislation that improve the lives of workers, retirees, and their

families. The Office also serves as the DOL’s regulatory policy officer and regulatory reform officer to ensure that the

Department complies with the regulatory and guidance development requirements of Executive Order 12866, as

amended, Executive Order 13777, and any other related Office of Management and Budget circular or bulletin. The

Office leads special initiatives and manages department-wide and interdepartmental activities. In its capacity as the

DOL's policy innovation arm, it invests in research and analysis of current and emerging labor issues.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/oasp

Workers' Compensation
The Office of Workers' Compensation Programs (OWCP) protects workers who are injured or become ill on the job by

making decisions on claims, paying benefits, and helping workers return to their jobs. OWCP administers eight major

disability compensation statutes: the Federal Employees' Compensation Act; the Longshore and Harbor Workers'

Compensation Act; the Defense Base Act (DBA); the Nonappropriated Fund Instrumentalities Act; the Outer

Continental Shelf Lands Act; the War Hazards Compensation Act; the Black Lung Benefits Act; and the Energy

Employees Occupational Illness Compensation Act. OWCP serves specific employee groups that are covered under

the relevant statutes and regulations by mitigating the financial burden resulting from workplace injury or illness and

promoting return to work when appropriate. Dependents or survivors may also be eligible for benefits.

http://www.dol.gov/owcp

BOARDS

Administrative Review
The Administrative Review Board (ARB) consists of five members appointed by the Secretary. It issues final agency

decisions for appeals cases under a wide range of worker protection laws, including the Service Contract Act (SCA)

and the Davis Bacon Act (DBA). The appeals cases primarily address environmental, transportation, and securities

whistleblower protection; H-1B immigration provisions; child labor law violations; employment discrimination; job

training; seasonal and migrant workers. The Board's cases generally arise upon appeal from decisions of Department

of Labor Administrative Law Judges (OALJ) or the Administrator of the Department's Wage and Hour Division (WHD).

Depending upon the statute at issue, the parties may appeal the Board's decisions to Federal district or appellate

courts and, ultimately, to the U.S. Supreme Court.

http://www.dol.gov/arb/welcome.html

Benefits Review
The Benefits Review Board (BRB) consists of five members appointed by the Secretary. In 1972, Congress created the
Board to review and issue decisions on appeals of workers' compensation cases arising under the Longshore and

Harbor Workers’ Compensation Act, and its extensions, and the Black Lung Benefits amendments to the Federal Coal

Mine Safety Act of 1969. Board decisions may be appealed to the U.S. Courts of Appeals and to the U.S. Supreme

Court.

http://www.dol.gov/brb/welcome.html

Employees' Compensation Appeals
The Employees' Compensation Appeals Board (ECAB) is a five-member quasi-judicial body appointed by the Secretary

and delegated exclusive jurisdiction by Congress to hear and make final decisions on appeals filed by Federal workers

arising under the Federal Employees' Compensation Act (FECA). The Board was created by Reorganization Plan No. 2

of 1946 (60 Stat. 1095). The Board's decisions are not reviewable and are binding upon the Office of Workers'

Compensation Programs (OWCP).

http://www.dol.gov/ecab/welcome.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The DOL website features an alphabetical index to help visitors search for information or browse topics of interest.

https://www.dol.gov/general/siteindex

Agencies / Programs
The DOL carries out its mission through a number of offices and agencies, which are organized into major program

areas. An Assistant Secretary, Director, or other official oversees each of these offices and agencies.

https://www.dol.gov/general/dol-agencies

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that DOL records have been

assigned to record group 174.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/174.html

Business Opportunities
The Office of Acquisition Services is the primary procurement office for the DOL national office. It carries out most

contracting, grants, and related activities. The Office procures a variety of goods and services on a recurring basis:

auditors, expert witnesses, moving services, printing and graphics, support services, technical studies, and video

productions. It also acts as the central procurement center for the Department’s information technology needs. Phone,

202-693-4570.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/oasam/centers-offices/office-of-the-senior-procurement-executive/office-of-
acquisition-services
The Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization administers the DOL's small business program in

accordance with the Small Business Act. It seeks to ensure a fair share of procurement opportunities for small

businesses, as well as for Historically Underutilized Business Zone (HUBZone) certified, service-disabled veteran-
owned, small disadvantaged, and woman-owned small businesses. Phone, 202-603-7299 or 866-487-2365.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/oasam/centers-offices/office-of-the-senior-procurement-executive/office-of-small-and-
disadvantaged-business-utilization

Career Opportunities
Each year, the DOL hires hundreds of professionals to help carry out its mission. These new employees enrich the

Department by bringing with them a vast range of knowledge and skills. A sample of their areas of expertise include

accounting and auditing, computer programming, criminal investigation, engineering, health inspection, industrial

hygiene, personnel management, and statistics.

https://www.dol.gov/general/jobs
In 2019, the DOL ranked 17th among 25 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DL00

Contact Information
Email addresses, phone numbers, and postal addresses are available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.dol.gov/general/contact
Contact information for representatives of the media is available on the DOL website. They should direct their inquiries

to the Office of Public Affairs. Phone, 202-693-4676 (main line). Phone, 202-577-5744 (after-hours).

https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/media-contact

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the DOL recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/labor-department

Find It!
The "Find It" web page allows online visitors to look for information by audience or by topic. Available on the same

page are the following internal links: A–Z index, DOL agencies, DOL forms, DOL services by location, and top 20

requested items.

https://www.dol.gov/general/findit

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA provides that a person may request access to Federal agency records or information. The DOL must disclose

records that any person properly requests in writing. Pursuant to one or more of nine exemptions and three exclusions

that the Act contains, a Federal agency can withhold certain records or parts of them. The FOIA applies only to Federal

agencies and does not create a right of access to records held by the U.S. Congress, the courts, State or local

government agencies, and private entities.

https://www.dol.gov/general/foia | Email: foiarequests@dol.gov
The DOL maintains a departmentwide electronic library. Before submitting a FOIA request, a requester should browse

or search the holdings of the online library to ensure that the desired information is not already accessible,

immediately and free of charge.
https://www.dol.gov/general/foia/readroom

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The DOL posts answers to FAQs on its website.

http://webapps.dol.gov/dolfaq/dolfaq.asp

Glossary
The OIG maintains a glossary of terms related to its activities and mission.

https://www.oig.dol.gov/hotlineterms.htm

History
A Defeated and departing incumbent, President William Howard Taft reluctantly approved Public Law 62–426 to

establish the Department of Labor on March 4, 1913. To learn more of the story, read Judson MacLaury's online article

"A Brief History: The U.S. Department of Labor."

https://www.dol.gov/general/aboutdol/history/webannalspage
The "Online History Sources" web page has links to historical resources that are available on the DOL website and

those of its subagencies.

https://www.dol.gov/general/aboutdol/history/hiswebesources

Minimum Wage
The DOL website has a list of DOL web pages that deal with the topic of minimum wage. The Wage and Hour Division

administers and enforces the Federal minimum wage law.

https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/wages/minimumwage

News
The DOL posts press releases on its website.

https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases

Open Government
The DOL has an Open Government plan to support making Government more accountable, responsive, and

transparent .

https://www.dol.gov/open

Plain Language
The DOL is committed to producing documents whose content complies with Federal plain language guidelines. It

trains its employees and has adopted an oversight process to ensure the use of plain language in any document that

is necessary for obtaining Federal Government benefits or services or filing taxes, provides information on Federal

Government benefits or services, or explains to the public how to comply with a requirement that the Federal

Government administers or enforces.

https://www.dol.gov/general/plainwriting

Popular Topics
The DOL website features a "Topics" page with links for convenient access to popular material.

https://www.dol.gov/general/topic

Public Disclosure
The Office of Labor-Management Standards maintains an online disclosure room where online visitors can search for

union annual financial reports starting with the year 2000; view and print reports filed by unions, union officers and

employees, employers, and labor relations consultants starting with the year 2000; and order copies of reports for the

years prior to 2000. Certain collective bargaining agreements are also available. OLMS has public disclosure room: 200

Constitution Avenue NW., Room N–1519, Washington, DC 20210, which offers the same materials.

http://www.unionreports.gov | Email: OLMS-Public@dol.gov

Social Media
The DOL has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/departmentoflabor
The DOL tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/USDOL
The DOL posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/USDepartmentofLabor

Spanish
The DOL supports the Hispanic workforce. An online list highlights some of the Department's Spanish resources. This

list is intended for English-speakers who are looking for information in Spanish to share with the Hispanic community.

https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/spanish-speakingtopic

Unemployment Insurance Relief
The DOL has created a web page that is dedicated to providing information on unemployment insurance relief during

the COVID–19 pandemic.

https://www.dol.gov/coronavirus/unemployment-insurance

Wirtz Labor Library
The library maintains an online card catalog of holdings added to the library after January of 1975. The online catalog

also includes collections of historical significance: for example, the Folio and James Taylor Collections. The library is

open to the public from 8:15 a.m. to 4:45 p.m. on weekdays, excluding Federal holidays. If the purpose of a visit is to

access research material, contact the library in advance: Wirtz Labor Library, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Frances

Perkins Building, Room N–2445, Washington, DC 20210. Phone, 202-693-6600.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/oasam/centers-offices/business-operations-center/library | Email: library@dol.gov
The Sources of Information were updated 9–2020.



Bureau of International Labor Affairs
200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210
202-693-4770

http://www.dol.gov/ilab


  DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY                                   (vacancy)


  Associate Deputy Undersecretary                          Mark A. Mittelhauser


  Chief of Staff                                           Grant Lebens


https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/about-us/organization



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs promotes a fair competitive environment for workers in the United States

and other countries worldwide.


The Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) promotes a fair global playing field for workers and businesses in

the United States by enforcing trade commitments; strengthening labor standards; and combating international

child labor, forced labor, and human trafficking. ILAB combines trade and labor monitoring and enforcement,

policy engagement, technical assistance, and research to carry out the Department of Labor's international

responsibilities.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/our-work



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that ILAB records have

been assigned to record group 174.5.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/174.html#174.5

Career Opportunities
ILAB relies on professionals with backgrounds in development economics and comparative labor law, as well as

with firsthand experience designing and implementing international technical assistance programs.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/about-us/careers-at-ilab
In 2019, ILAB ranked 356th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLBL

Hotline
The Interagency Labor Committee for Monitoring and Enforcement maintains a web-based hotline that allows
for the receipt of confidential information from affected and concerned parties, regarding labor issues involving

countries of the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/our-work/trade/labor-rights-usmca/hotline

News
ILAB-related news is posted on the Department of Labor's website.

https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases?agency=34

Projects
ILAB grants help prevent and stop abusive labor practices like the use of child labor and forced labor and human

trafficking. ILAB-funded projects also promote compliance by trade partners' with the labor requirements of U.S.

trade agreements and preference programs.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/projects

Reports / Publications
ILAB conducts and funds research, whose results it relies on to inform the design and implementation of policy

and programs.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/research-impact-evaluation

Workers' Rights
The International Labor Organization (ILO) has identified "fundamental principles and rights at work." All ILO

members are obligated to respect these principles and rights and promote them.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/our-work/workers-rights
The Sources of Information were updated 9–2020.



Bureau of Labor Statistics
2 Massachusetts Avenue NE., Washington, DC 20212


202-691-7800

800-877-8339 (TDD)

http://www.bls.gov


  COMMISSIONER                                             William W. Beach


  Deputy Commissioner                                      William J. Wiatrowski


https://www.bls.gov/bls/senior_staff/home.htm



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Bureau of Labor Statistics measures labor market activity, working conditions, price changes, and productivity
in the Nation's economy to support decision making in both the public and private sectors.


The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) was established, in the Department of the Interior, as the Bureau of Labor by

the act of June 27, 1884 (23 Stat. 60). It was renamed the Bureau of Labor Statistics by the act of March 4, 1913

(37 Stat. 737). The BLS measures labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy. It

also collects, analyzes, and disseminates essential economic information to support public and private

decisionmaking.


The Bureau strives to have its data satisfy a number of criteria, including: relevance to current social and

economic issues, timeliness in reflecting today's rapidly changing economic conditions, accuracy and consistently

high statistical quality, and impartiality in both subject matter and presentation.


Basic data are published in news releases on a monthly, quarterly, and annual basis. Basic data also are

published in bulletins, reports, special publications, and periodicals. Regional offices issue additional reports and

releases that often contain content of local or regional relevance.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/infohome.htm



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The BLS website has an A–Z index to help visitors navigate its content.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/topicsaz.htm

Announcements
The BLS posts announcements on its website.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/announcement.htm

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that BLS records have

been assigned to record group 257.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/257.html

Blog
The official BLS blog is called "Commissioner's Corner."

https://blogs.bls.gov/blog

Calculators
The "Databases, Tables, and Calculators by Subject" web page has an inflation calculator that allows users to

calculate change in the buying power of the dollar over the years. An injury and illness calculator allows users to

calculate injury and illness incidence rates for a specific establishment or firm and to compare those rates with

the averages for the Nation, for States, and for the sector of industry to which the establishment or firm belongs.

https://www.bls.gov/data/#calculators
Career Opportunities
To carry out its mission, the BLS relies on professionals who have diverse educational backgrounds, skills, and

training. The agency relies heavily on the work of economists, information technology specialists, and

mathematical statisticians.

https://www.bls.gov/jobs/home.htm
In 2019, the BLS ranked 93d among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLLS

Contact Information
The "Information and Help" web page has an electronic form for requesting information and asking questions.

Postal correspondence should be addressed to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Postal Square Building, 2

Massachusetts Avenue NE., Washington, DC 20212–0001. Phone, 202-691-5200; Federal Relay Service, 800-877-

8339.

https://data.bls.gov/forms/opb.htm?/home.htm
Contact information for the eight BLS regional offices is available online: Atlanta, 404-331-3415; Boston, 617-565-

2327; Chicago, 312-353-1880; Dallas, 972-850-4800; Kansas City, 816-285-7000; New York, 646-264-3600;

Philadelphia, 215-597-3282; and San Francisco, 415-625-2270.

https://www.bls.gov/regions/contacts.htm

Data Sources
Much of the information (e.g., databases and historical news release tables) that the BLS publishes is available

from the "Databases, Tables, and Calculators by Subject" web page.

https://www.bls.gov/data | Email: blsdata_staff@bls.gov
Some BLS data are available only through the home pages of individual programs—rather than from the

"Databases, Tables, and Calculators by Subject" web page. These programs are listed on the "Subject Areas"

page. For example, tables of employment projections data are available through the "Employment Projections"

page; American time use survey data are available through the "American Time Use Survey" page; and national

longitudinal surveys data are available through the "National Longitudinal Surveys" page.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/proghome.htm
Certain BLS program data are available in compressed ZIP files. Some of these files are accessible on

download.bls.gov. Other ZIP files may be located by starting at the home page of a specific program.

https://download.bls.gov/pub/time.series/compressed/tape.format

Economic Summaries
The BLS regional information offices produce economic summaries that are organized by State and posted in

Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading. Each summary presents a sampling of economic

information on benefits, employment, prices, spending, wages, and unemployment for a particular area (e.g.,

Boston or Sacramento).
https://www.bls.gov/regions/economic-summaries.htm

Economy at a Glance
The "Economy at a Glance" web page has at-a-glance economic tables for many metropolitan areas nationwide.

https://www.bls.gov/eag
Monthly and quarterly economic data for the Nation are also posted in an at-a-glance format.

https://www.bls.gov/eag/eag.us.htm

Educational Resources
The "K–12" web pages include games and quizzes, sections for students and their teachers, a history timeline,

and biographies of former Commissioners.

https://www.bls.gov/k12

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the BLS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/labor-statistics-bureau

Finding Data
The "BLS Data Finder 1.1" web page has a search tool that uses the conjunction "and" as the default search

operator. This feature produces display results that contain all of the search terms. To find data that contains a

particular combination of terms, the user must separate the terms by inserting the conjunction "or" between

them.

https://beta.bls.gov/dataQuery/search

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The BLS posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/faqs.htm

Glossary
The BLS has a glossary on its website.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/glossary.htm

History
The Bureau has been collecting data and crunching numbers for over 135 years. Over its long history, the BLS

started out as the Bureau of Labor and part of the Department of the Interior; became an independent

department for nearly 15 years; was incorporated into the former Department of Commerce and Labor; and was

transferred to the newly created Department of Labor in 1913. To learn more of the story, visit the "BLS History"

section.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/history/home.htm

News
The BLS posts economic news releases, some of which are released on a monthly, quarterly, and annual basis.
https://www.bls.gov/bls/newsrels.htm#latest-releases

Publications
The BLS publishes bulletins and reports and economic news releases. Its major publications include "Beyond the

Numbers," "Career Outlook," "Monthly Labor Review," "Occupational Outlook Handbook," "The Economics

Daily", and "Spotlight on Statistics."

https://www.bls.gov/opub

Regional Information
Economic data and statistics according to geographic areas are available on the "Regional Information Offices"

page.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/regnhome.htm

Research Papers
The Office of Survey Methods Research maintains an online research paper database.

https://www.bls.gov/osmr/research-papers

Resources
BLS economists, information technology specialists, and mathematical statisticians place a premium on accuracy,

currency, innovation, objectivity, relevancy, and transparency. They strive to invest BLS datasets and

informational products with these qualities, which help make them useful to a variety of audiences: business

leaders, consumers, developers, economists, educators, investors, job seekers, members of the media,

policymakers, researchers, and students.

https://www.bls.gov/audience | Email: blsdata_staff@bls.gov

Select Datasets and Indices
The "Top Picks" web page allows easy access to the most requested price indices, as well as to the most

requested employment, compensation, and productivity data tables.

https://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/surveymost?bls
A "Help and Tutorials" page is dedicated to the "Top Picks" application.

https://www.bls.gov/help/hlpmrs.htm

Site Map
The BLS website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their

interests.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/sitemap.htm

Social Media
The BLS tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/BLS_gov
The BLS posts videos on its YouTube channel.
https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCijn3WBpHtx4AvSya7NER9Q

Statistical Websites
The "Statistical Sites on the World Wide Web" allows easy access to a collection of Internet sites that are not

administered by the BLS.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/other.htm
The Sources of Information were updated 9–2020.



Employee Benefits Security Administration
Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20210


866-444-3272

http://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa


  ASSISTANT SECRETARY                                      Jeanne K. Wilson, Acting


  Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary                     Jeanne K. Wilson




  DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


  National Office Operations / Chief Operating Officer     Timothy D. Hauser


  Regional Office Operations                               Amy J. Turner


https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/about-us/organization-chart#section1



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Employee Benefits Security Administration assures the security of the retirement, health, and other workplace

related benefits of American workers and their families.


The Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) educates and assists the over 154 million participants in

and beneficiaries of approximately 710,000 private retirement plans, 2.4 million health plans, and similar numbers

of other welfare benefit plans. The EBSA balances proactive enforcement with compliance assistance and

supports enrollees and beneficiaries by developing effective regulations; assisting and educating fiduciaries, plan

sponsors, service providers, and workers; and enforcing the law.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/about-us/what-we-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Ask EBSA
EBSA's workers and families assistance web page provides accessible information on programs and services,

answers to frequently asked questions, and assistance where a health or retirement benefit has been denied

inappropriately.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/ask-a-question/ask-ebsa

Career Opportunities
In 2019, the EBSA ranked 229th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLPW

Contact Information
The "Regional Offices" web page has contact information for EBSA regional and district offices.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/about-us/regional-offices

Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA)
ERISA is a Federal law that sets minimum standards for most voluntarily established retirement and health plans

in private industry. This statute provides protection for individuals who are enrolled in these plans. The

Department of Labor has a web page that it has dedicated to the ERISA.

https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/health-plans/erisa
On September 2, 1974, President Gerald R. Ford approved Public Law 93–406, which is also cited as the

"Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974." Senators and Representatives of the U.S. Congress wrote

this 207-page piece of legislation "to provide for pension reform" (88 Stat. 829).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-88/pdf/STATUTE-88-Pg829.pdf

En Español
The EBSA posts information in Spanish on its website.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/es/about-ebsa/our-activities/informacion-en-espanol

ERISA Advisory Council
The membership of the council is posted on the "ERISA Advisory Council" web page. The council posts issue

statements on the same page.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/about-us/erisa-advisory-council
ERISA Advisory Council reports are posted online.


Factsheets
The EBSA posts factsheets.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/our-activities/resource-center/fact-sheets

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the EBSA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible
online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/employee-benefits-security-administration

Forms
The EBSA posts forms and filing instructions online.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/employers-and-advisers/plan-administration-and-compliance/reporting-
and-filing/forms

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The EBSA posts answers to frequently asked questions.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/our-activities/resource-center/faqs

History
The EBSA administers and enforces the fiduciary, reporting, and disclosure provisions of the first title of the

Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA). The histories of the ERISA and EBSA are tightly

intertwined.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/about-us/history-of-ebsa-and-erisa

Information for Researchers
EBSA researchers expand the knowledge of employee benefits and their role in meeting the Nation's economic

security needs.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/researchers

Key Topics
The EBSA website features a page with links to key topics: health and other employee benefits, reporting and

filing, and retirement.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/key-topics

News
The EBSA posts news items on the Department of Labor's website.

https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases?agency=37&state=All&topic=All&year=all

Publications
The EBSA distributes booklets, factsheets, and pamphlets on employer responsibilities and employee rights

under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act. A list of publications is available online or from the Office

of Outreach, Education, and Assistance. Phone, 866-444-3272.

http://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/our-activities/resource-center/publications
The Sources of Information were updated 9–2020.



Employment and Training Administration
Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20520
877-872-5627

http://www.doleta.gov


  ASSISTANT SECRETARY                                    John P. Pallasch




  Deputy Assistant Secretaries                           Matthew Hunter


                                                         Nancy Rooney


                                                         Amy Simon


https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/about



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Employment and Training Administration helps the U.S. labor market function more efficiently by providing

job training, employment, labor market information, and income maintenance services.




ACTIVITIES
In addition to training, employment, information, and services, which are provided primarily through State and

local workforce development systems, the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) also administers

programs to enhance employment opportunities and promote business prosperity.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/program-areas

Apprenticeships
The Office of Apprenticeship oversees the National Apprenticeship System, sets standards for apprenticeship,

and assists States, industry, and labor in developing apprenticeship programs that meet required standards,

while promoting equal opportunity and safeguarding the welfare of apprentices.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/apprenticeship

  For more information, call 202-693-2796.



Contracts Management
The Office of Contracts Management advises the Assistant Secretary of the ETA, in a manner that is consistent

with Federal statutes and regulations, on mission-critical procurement matters. The Office applies procurement

services to ETA organizational components to address business challenges with best practices and cost-effective

solutions.
http://www.doleta.gov/contracts

  For further information, call 202-693-3110.



Financial Administration
The Office of Financial Administration (OFA) manages all ETA fiscal resources for programs and activities for

which funds are appropriated through the Office's functions of accounting, budget, and financial system

oversight. The Office provides budgetary, accounting, audit, and internal control management. It coordinates

with the departmental budget center and the Office of the Chief Financial Officer to provide financial

management that supports carrying out the ETA's mission.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/budget

  For further information, call 202-693-3162.



Foreign Labor Certification
The Office of Foreign Labor Certification (OFLC) carries out the delegated responsibility of the Secretary of Labor

under the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended, concerning the admission of foreign workers into the

United States for employment. In carrying out this responsibility, the Office administers temporary nonimmigrant

and permanent labor certification programs through the ETA's national processing centers that are located in

Chicago and Atlanta.


The OFLC also administers nationally the issuance of employer-requested prevailing wage determinations

through the ETA's National Prevailing Wage and Helpdesk Center, which is located in Washington, DC.

Prevailing wage determinations are issued for use in all nonagricultural temporary labor certification programs

and the permanent labor certification program.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/foreign-labor

  For more information, call 202-693-3010.



Grants Management
The Office of Grants Management provides grants management expertise to ETA offices and stakeholders

throughout the life cycle of a grant. The Office delivers centralized grants administration and policy expertise to

support pre-award, award, period of performance, audit resolution, and closeout of ETA Federal assistance

awards.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/grants

  For further information, call 202-693-2800.



Job Training
Job Corps is the largest nationwide residential career training program in the Nation and has been operating for
more than half of a century. The program helps eligible young people who are 16–24 years old complete their

high school education, trains them for meaningful careers, and assists them with obtaining employment.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/jobcorps

  For further information, call 202-693-3000.



Policy Development and Research
The Office of Policy Development and Research (OPDR) supports ETA policies and investments to improve the

public workforce system by analyzing, formulating, and recommending legislative changes and options for

policy initiatives. The Office coordinates the ETA's legislative and regulatory activities and their interactions with

international organizations and foreign countries. The OPDR maintains the ETA's portion of the Department of

Labor's regulatory agenda and disseminates advisories and publications. The Office provides the ETA with

strategic approaches to improve performance and outcomes through research, demonstrations, and evaluation

of its major programs. The Office manages the Workforce Investment Act performance accountability reporting

system; oversees the maintenance of wage record exchange systems for State and other grantees; coordinates

the development of the ETA's operating plan; and disseminates workforce program performance results. The

OPDR also provides policy guidance on and technical assistance for the Worker Adjustment and Retraining

Notification Act.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/policy

  For further information, call 202-693-3700.



Trade Adjustment Assistance
The Office of Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) administers a workers assistance program for those who have

lost or may lose their jobs because of foreign trade. The TAA program provides reemployment services and

allowances for eligible individuals.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/tradeact

  For further information, call 202-693-3560.



Unemployment Compensation
The Office of Unemployment Insurance provides national leadership, oversight, policy guidance, and technical

assistance to the Federal-State unemployment compensation system. The Office also interprets Federal

legislative requirements.

https://oui.doleta.gov/unemploy/aboutoui.asp

  For more information, call 202-693-3029.



Workforce Investment
The Office of Workforce Investment implements an integrated national workforce investment system that

supports economic growth and provides workers with information, advice, job search assistance, supportive

services, and training for employment. The Office also helps employers hire skilled workers.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/workforce-investment

  For further information, call 202-693-3980.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that ETA records have

been assigned to record group 369.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/369.html

Advisories
The ETA uses its advisory system to disseminate its interpretations of Federal laws; procedural, administrative,

management, and program direction; and other information to the States, direct grant recipients, and other

interested parties.

https://wdr.doleta.gov/directives

Career Opportunities
In 2019, the ETA ranked 369th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLET

Contact Information
ETA contact information is available on its website.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/contact | Email: eta.webportal@dol.gov
Contact information for the ETA's six regional offices is available online.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/regions

Data
The Division of Research and Evaluation posts datasets for public use on the ETA's website.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/research/public-use-datasets
The Office of Unemployment Insurance posts unemployment insurance data as part of the ETA's contribution to

the Department of Labor's collection and publication of data.

https://oui.doleta.gov/unemploy/DataDashboard.asp
The Office of Foreign Labor Certification posts employment-based immigration data on the ETA's website. Three

main categories are used to organize the data: selected statistics that provide cumulative quarterly data by
major immigration program; cumulative quarterly and fiscal year releases of program disclosure data; and

historical fiscal year annual program and performance report information.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/foreign-labor/performance
The Office of Trade Adjustment Assistance posts charts, statistics, and other information on the ETA's website.

Three main categories are used to organize the data: petitions and determinations, participants, and financial.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/tradeact/data

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the ETA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/employment-and-training-administration

Job Corps
An online directory has contact information for the Office of Job Corps, including the national Job Corps hotline

and phone numbers and email addresses for Office of the Administrator staff. It also allows convenient access to

information for contacting Job Corps regional offices.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/jobcorps/contact

Job Seekers
The ETA posts resources for job seekers on its website.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/job-seekers

Library
A large repository of information is available online from the "ETA Library" web page.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/reports

National Agricultural Workers Survey
This employment-based and random-sample survey of U.S. crop workers brings together demographic,

employment, and health data that are collected during face-to-face interviews.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/national-agricultural-workers-survey

News
The ETA posts news releases on the Department of Labor's website.

https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases?agency=39&state=All&topic=All&year=all

Rapid Response Services
Rapid Response is designed to respond to layoffs and plant closings by quickly coordinating services and

providing immediate aid to companies and their affected workers. Rapid Response teams work with employers

and employee representatives to quickly maximize public and private resources to minimize disruptions

associated with job loss.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/layoffs
Reducing Recidivism
The Reentry and Employment Opportunities—Adult Program strengthens urban communities through an

employment-centered program of mentoring, job training, and other comprehensive transitional services.

Helping former inmates find employment when they return to their communities reduces recidivism.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/reentry

Research
The research publication database provides access to a collection of research and evaluation reports. The ETA

commissioned the research and evaluation reports to help guide the workforce investment system in

administering effective programs that enhance employment opportunity and business.

https://wdr.doleta.gov/research/eta_default.cfm

Veterans
The ETA website has a section dedicated to veterans. It offers resources for veteran who are job seekers and for

providers of employment and training programs.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/jobs-for-veterans-act

Youth Services
A section of the ETA's website is dedicated to youth programs and services.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/youth
The Sources of Information were updated 9–2020.



Mine Safety and Health Administration
201 12th Street South, Suite 400, Arlington, Virginia 22202


202-693-9400

http://www.msha.gov


  ASSISTANT SECRETARY                                         David G. Zatezalo




  DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


  Operations                                                  Patricia W. Silvey


  Policy                                                      Wayne D. Palmer


https://www.msha.gov/about/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.
https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Mine Safety and Health Administration works to prevent mine-related deaths, illnesses, and injuries and

promotes safe and healthy work environments.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On November 9, 1977, President James E. Carter approved Public Law 95–164, which is also cited as the Federal

Mine Safety and Health Amendments Act of 1977. This statute amended the Federal Coal Mine Health and

Safety Act of 1969 (PL 91–173), including its short title, which was changed to the Federal Mine Safety and Health

Act of 1977 (91 Stat. 1290).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-91/pdf/STATUTE-91-Pg1290.pdf
The Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 created the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) in

1978 by transferring the Federal mine safety program and its functions from the Department of the Interior to

the Department of Labor.

https://www.msha.gov/about/history
The MSHA is organized into program areas.

https://www.msha.gov/about/program-areas
The MSHA posts its organizational chart online in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and

downloading.

https://www.msha.gov/sites/default/files/Organizational_Charts/OAS-Org-Chart.pdf

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
"Chapter 22—Mine Safety and Health" has been assigned to 30 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title30/chapter22&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that are associated with the MSHA are assigned to the first chapter of 30 CFR. The chapter

includes parts 1–199.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=2f9b3d9dbb071240550f37a930d0135d&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title30/30cfrv1_02.tpl#0

ACTIVITIES
The MSHA helps protect the Nation's miners by promoting healthy and safe work environments for them. It

works toward the elimination of fatal mining accidents, the reduction of the frequency and severity of accidents,

and the minimization of health hazards through enforcement of mandatory safety and health standards in the

mining industry. It also provides technical, educational, and other assistance, including the testing and approval

of equipment for use in the industry, to mine operators. The MSHA cooperates with industry, labor, and other

Federal and State agencies to improve safety and health conditions for miners.

https://www.msha.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that MSHA records have

been assigned to record group 433. That record group does not have a description that is associated with it.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/000.html

Career Opportunities
Information on employment opportunities is available online.

http://www.msha.gov/about/careers
In 2019, the MSHA ranked 260th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLMS

Contact Information
The "Contact MSHA" web page has emergency and general contact information.

https://www.msha.gov/about/contact-msha | Email: AskMSHA@dol.gov

Data Sources / Calculators
The "Data Sources and Calculators" web page allows convenient access to a range of mine safety and health

data (e.g., information on accidents, air sampling, employment, injuries, illnesses, inspections, production totals,

and violations). Compliance calculator tools can be used to illuminate the history of key health and safety

violations of a mine.

https://www.msha.gov/data-reports/data-sources-calculators

Educational Resources
The MSHA posts training and educational resources on its website.

https://www.msha.gov/training-education
The National Mine Health and Safety Academy conducts education and training programs in health and safety

and related subjects for Federal mine inspectors and other government mining and industry personnel.

https://arlweb.msha.gov/PROGRAMS/MineAcademy/Academy.asp

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the MSHA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/mine-safety-and-health-administration

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The MSHA posts answers to FAQs on rulemaking.

https://www.msha.gov/rulemaking-frequently-asked-questions

Historical Statutes / Legislative History
The "Laws" web page has key historical statutes and their legislative history.

https://www.msha.gov/regulations/laws
Library
The MSHA digital library's holdings include accident reports, images, photographs, and research material.

https://arlweb.msha.gov/TRAINING/LIBRARY/mshaPortal/index.html

Media Gallery
Online visitors may browse or search historical photographs and videos, including mine training and health

training videos.

https://www.msha.gov/news-media/media-gallery

Mine Disasters
Five or more fatalities define a mining disaster. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health posts

data tables that summarize all U.S. mining disasters from 1839 to the present. Starting with the year 1900, graphs

are also available.

https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/mining/statistics/minedisasters.html

News / Media
The MSHA posts alerts and hazards, announcements, congressional testimonies, events, news releases,

photographs and videos, and speeches on its website.

https://www.msha.gov/news-media

Reports
Current and historical preliminary accident reports, fatalgrams, and fatal investigation reports for metal,

nonmetal, and coal mines are accessible on the MSHA website. Quarterly and annual summaries of mining

fatalities along with associated best practices and preventative recommendations are also accessible.

https://www.msha.gov/data-reports/fatality-reports
Part 50 of Title 30 of the Code of Federal Regulations (30 CFR 50) requires mine operators to notify the MSHA

when accidents occur and to investigate those accidents, while restricting disturbance of accident-related areas.

Part 50 also requires mine operators to file reports on accidents, occupational injuries, and occupational

illnesses, as well as employment and coal production data.

https://www.msha.gov/data-reports/reports

Resources / Tools
The MSHA posts mine emergency operations information, miners' resources, and technical resources on its

"Resources and Tools" web page.

https://www.msha.gov/support-resources/resources-tools

Spanish
In the top right corner of the MSHA's home page are an Español option and an Inglés option. Using these

options, visitors to the website can toggle between content in either language.

https://www.msha.gov

State Mining Agencies
A list of links to the websites of State mining agencies is available on the MSHA website.

https://www.msha.gov/support-resources/external-mining-resources/state-mining-agencies

Statistics
The "Statistics" web page allows easy access to numbers on mine employment and coal production; the most

frequently cited standards (i.e., regulatory violations) by year, mine type, and industry group; and graphs, maps,

and tables that The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health has created to summarize a range of

information on employees, fatalities, injuries, and mines.

https://www.msha.gov/data-reports/statistics

Targeted Inspections
The MSHA conducts targeted inspections each month at mines that merit increased attention and enforcement

due to their poor compliance history or particular compliance concerns. Each month's inspection results are

posted online.

https://www.msha.gov/monthly-targeted-inspection-results
The Sources of Information were updated 9–2020.


Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID–19): For employee and employer Coronavirus pandemic information, which

includes links to interim guidance and other resources for preventing exposure to and infection with the virus, go

to https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/covid-19.



Occupational                                   Safety                       and                  Health
Administration
Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20210


800-321-6742

http://www.osha.gov


  ASSISTANT SECRETARY                                        James Frederick, Acting


  Deputy Assistant Secretaries                               Amanda Edens


                                                             James Frederick




  Chief of Staff                                             Leah Ford


https://www.osha.gov/aboutosha



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2021.
https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel

ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) was created pursuant to the Occupational Safety

and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-84/pdf/STATUTE-84-Pg1590.pdf
OSHA posts an organizational chart online in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.osha.gov/html/OSHAorgchart.pdf

ACTIVITIES
OSHA assures safe and healthful working conditions for men and women by promulgating common sense,

protective health, and safety standards; enforcing workplace safety and health rules; providing training, outreach,

education, and assistance to workers and employers in their efforts to control workplace hazards; prevent work-

related injuries, illnesses, and fatalities; and partnering with States that run their own OSHA-approved programs.

https://www.osha.gov/aboutosha



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
An alphabetized topical index is available on the OSHA website to help visitors find information.

https://www.osha.gov/a-z

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that OSHA records have

been assigned to record group 100.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/100.html

Career Opportunities
In 2019, OSHA ranked 196th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLSH

Contact Information
OSHA posts contact information on its "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.osha.gov/contactus

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID–19)
The OSHA has posted a "COVID–19" web page containing employee and employer Coronavirus pandemic

information that includes links to interim guidance and other resources for reducing exposure and preventing

infection.

https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/covid-19
Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that OSHA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/occupational-safety-and-health-administration

File a Complaint
Information on how to file a safety and health complaint and an electronic complaint form are available on the

OSHA website. Phone, 800-321-6742.

https://www.osha.gov/workers/file_complaint.html

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The OSHA is required to disclose records that are properly requested in writing by any person. An agency may

withhold information pursuant to one or more of nine exemptions and three exclusions contained in the FOIA.

The act applies only to Federal agencies and does not create a right of access to records held by Congress, the

courts, State or local government agencies, and private entities.

https://www.osha.gov/foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The OSHA posts answers to FAQs online.

https://www.osha.gov/faq

Injury and Illness Data
The OSHA website has a searchable, establishment-specific database for establishments that provided OSHA

with valid data from 1996 through 2011.

https://www.osha.gov/pls/odi/establishment_search.html
Workplace injury, illness, and fatality statistics are available on the OSHA website.

https://www.osha.gov/oshstats/work.html

Make a Report
Employers must notify OSHA when an employee is killed on the job or suffers a work-related amputation,

hospitalization, or loss of an eye. A fatality must be reported within 8 hours; an amputation, in-patient

hospitalization, or eye loss must be reported within 24 hours. An employer should be prepared to supply the

name of the business, the names of employees who were affected, the location and time of the incident, a brief

description of the incident, and a contact person and phone number.

https://www.osha.gov/report.html

Map
A "Heat Fatalities Map" shows the locations of outdoor worker heat-related deaths between 2008 and 2014.

https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/heatillness/map.html
A nationwide map of enforcement cases with initial penalties above $40,000 is available online.

https://www.osha.gov/enforcement/toppenalties/bystate
News
The OSHA newsroom has a collection of quick links for relevant news sources.

https://www.osha.gov/news
The "What's New" web page features news items that are organized chronologically.

https://www.osha.gov/whatsnew.html

Newsletter
OSHA's online newsletter has the latest news on compliance assistance, enforcement actions, outreach activities,

rulemaking, and training and educational resources.

https://www.osha.gov/quicktakes

Offices
A complete listing of OSHA regional and area offices is available online.

http://www.osha.gov/html/RAmap.html

OSHA Card
Facts on obtaining an OSHA card are available online.

https://www.osha.gov/dte/oshacardfacts.html

Publications
OSHA publications are accessible online.

https://www.osha.gov/pls/publications/publication.html

Social Media
OSHA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/OSHA_DOL

Spanish
In the top right corner of the OSHA's home page are an Español option and an Inglés option. Using these

options, visitors to the website can toggle between content in Spanish or English.

https://www.osha.gov

Training / Education
Stand-alone, interactive, web-based training tools—eTools and the eMatrix—are available on the OSHA website.

These tools are highly illustrated and utilize graphical menus.

https://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/oshasoft/index.html
Prevention video training tools (v-tools) on construction hazards are available on the OSHA website. These

videos show how workers can be injured suddenly or even killed on the job. The videos assist those who are in

the construction industry with identifying, reducing, and eliminating hazards. The videos are presented in clear,

accessible vocabulary; show common construction worksite activities; and most are 2–4 minutes long.

https://www.osha.gov/dts/vtools/construction.html
The Sources of Information were updated 10–2020.



Veterans' Employment and Training Service
Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20210


866-487-2365

http://www.dol.gov/agencies/vets


 ASSISTANT SECRETARY                                     John Lowry III




 DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Operations and Management                               J. Sam Shellenberger


 Policy                                                  (vacancy)




 Chief of Staff                                          Jonathan VanderPlas


https://www.dol.gov/agencies/vets/about



 The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Veterans' Employment and Training Service helps America's veterans, servicemembers, and their spouses who

are eligible prepare for careers; provides them with employment resources and expertise; protects their

employment rights; and promotes their employment opportunities.


On March 24, 1983, former Secretary of Labor Raymond J. Donovan signed Order 4–83, which redesignated the

Office of the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Veterans Employment as the Veterans' Employment and Training

Service. The Secretary's order of redesignation was published in the Federal Register on April 1, 1983 (48 FR

14092).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1983-04-01/pdf/FR-1983-04-01.pdf
The Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS) administers employment and training programs and

compliance activities that help veterans and servicemembers succeed in their civilian careers. VETS also

administers the jobs for veterans State grant program, which gives grants to States to fund personnel who are

dedicated to serving the employment needs of veterans. VETS field staff works closely with and gives technical

assistance to State employment workforce agencies to ensure that veterans receive priority of service and gain

meaningful employment. VETS has two competitive grants programs: the homeless veterans reintegration

program and the incarcerated veterans transition program. VETS also helps servicemembers who are separating
from the Armed Forces prepare for the civilian labor market.


VETS has three compliance programs: the Federal contractor program, veterans' preference in Federal hiring,

and the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA). With respect to the

Federal contractor program, VETS promulgates regulations and oversees the program by helping contractors

comply with their affirmative action and reporting obligations. Although the Office of Personnel Management

administers and interprets statutes and regulations that govern veterans' preference in Federal hiring, VETS

investigates allegations that veterans' preference rights have been violated.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/vets/about
In addition, VETS preserves servicemembers' employment and reemployment rights through its administration

and enforcement of USERRA. VETS conducts investigations of alleged violations, and it carries out a USERRA

outreach program.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-108/pdf/STATUTE-108-Pg3149.pdf



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
In 2019, the VETS ranked 227th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLVE

Contact Information
A national office directory is available online.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/vets/about/nationaloffice
A regional and State directory is available online.

https://www.dol.gov/vets/aboutvets/regionaloffices/map.htm

Find Employment
The "Find a Job" web page has resources to help veterans find employment.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/vets/veterans/findajob

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that VETS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/veterans-employment-and-training-service

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Any person has the right to request access to Federal agency records or information. VETS is required to

disclose records that are properly requested in writing by any person. An agency may withhold information

pursuant to nine exemptions and three exclusions contained in the FOIA. The act applies only to Federal

agencies and does not create a right of access to records held by Congress, the courts, or by State or local

government agencies. A FOIA request should be submitted to the appropriate national or regional VETS office
by email, fax, or mail. The subject line, cover page, or envelope should be clearly labeled "Freedom of

Information Act Request." The content of the request should indicate that it is a FOIA request, and it should

contain as much information as possible describing the record or records being sought.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/vets/about/foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
VETS posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.dol.gov/vets/resources/faqs.htm
The Department of Labor posts answers to FAQs regarding veterans on its website.

https://webapps.dol.gov/dolfaq/dolfaqbytopic.asp?topicID=12&topictitle=Veterans

Grants
Information on grants and other opportunities is available online.

http://www.dol.gov/vets/resources/grants.htm

News / Media
VETS posts news releases and public service announcements on its website.

https://www.dol.gov/vets/news.htm
The Sources of Information were updated 10–2020.



Wage and Hour Division
Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20210


866-487-9243

http://www.dol.gov/whd


  ADMINISTRATOR                                            Cheryl M. Stanton


  Deputy Administrator                                     Susan Boone




  Chief of Staff                                           Michael Stojsavljevich


https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/about/organizational-chart#Keypersonnel



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Wage and Hour Division protects and enhances the welfare of the Nation's workers by promoting and

achieving compliance with labor standards.
ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 25, 1938, President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved Public Law 75–718, which also is cited as the Fair

Labor Standards Act of 1938. Among its findings, the U.S. Congress noted that the existence "in industries

engaged in commerce or in the production of goods for commerce, of labor conditions detrimental to the

maintenance of the minimum standard of living necessary for health, efficiency, and general well-being of

workers" causes these adverse labor conditions to spread and perpetuate, burdens commerce and the free flow

of goods, undermines fair competition, leads to disputes that burden and obstruct commerce and the free flow

of goods, and interferes with the commercial marketing of goods (52 Stat. 1060).

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/75th-congress/session-3/c75s3ch676.pdf
The statute also "created in the Department of Labor a Wage and Hour Division [WHD] which shall be under the

direction of an Administrator" who "shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of

the Senate" (52 Stat. 1061).


Secretary Frances Perkins's order of October 15, 1942, established the Wage and Hour and Public Contracts

Divisions (WHPCD) by consolidating the WHD and the Public Contracts Division to administer Federal minimum

wage, overtime pay, and child labor laws.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/155.html
In 1967, the Wage and Labor Standards Administration (WLSA) was established in the Department of Labor to

direct and coordinate Federal wage and labor standards programs. On May 5, 1969, by secretarial order, the

WHPCD was assigned to the WLSA.


On November 8, 2009, the Employments Standards Administration was dissolved into its four constituent

components: The WHD, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, the Office of Workers'

Compensation Programs, and the Office of Labor Management Standards. Authorities were delegated and

responsibilities were assigned to the Administrator of the WHD (74 FR 58836).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2009-11-13/pdf/FR-2009-11-13.pdf
The WHD posts an organizational chart on its website.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/about/organizational-chart

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
"Chapter 8—Fair Labor Standards" has been assigned to 29 U.S.C. Title 29 is dedicated to codified statutory

material that affects labor.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title29/chapter8&edition=prelim
"Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Labor" has been assigned to 29 CFR. The fifth chapter (sections 500–899) of

that subtitle is dedicated to the WHD.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=efbbc65896d0d414403dfadb6f5d8d83&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title29/29cfrv3_02.tpl#0

ACTIVITIES
The WHD enforces Federal minimum wage, overtime pay, recordkeeping, and child labor law requirements of

the Fair Labor Standards Act. The WHD also enforces the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection
Act, the Employee Polygraph Protection Act, the Family and Medical Leave Act, wage garnishment provisions of

the Consumer Credit Protection Act, and a number of employment standards and worker protections as

provided in several immigration-related statutes. Additionally, the WHD administers and enforces the prevailing

wage requirements of the Davis Bacon Act and the Service Contract Act and other statutes applicable to Federal

contracts for construction and for the provision of goods and services.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that WHD records have

been assigned to record group 155.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/155.html

Career Opportunities
In 2019, the WHD ranked 170th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLWH

Contact Information
The WHD posts contact information on its "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/contact

Evaluations / Studies
The WHD posts evaluations and studies on its website in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.dol.gov/whd/resources/evaluations.htm

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the WHD recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/wage-and-hour-division

File a Complaint
Instructions for filing a complaint are available online. Phone, 866-487-9243.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/contact/complaints

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The WHD is required to disclose records that are properly requested in writing by any person. The WHD may

withhold information pursuant to nine exemptions and three exclusions contained in the FOIA. The WHD does

not require a special FOIA request form. A request must reasonably describe the desired record. Providing its

name or title is not mandatory, but the more specific the record description, the more likely that WHD staff can
locate it. A FOIA request must be made in writing and may be submitted by courier service, email, fax, or postal

mail.

https://www.dol.gov/whd/foia/index.htm

History
The WHD has posted a historical summary on its website.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/about/history

News
The WHD posts national and State news releases.

https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases/whd

Offices
Contact information for WHD area, district, and regional offices is available on the "WHD Local Offices" web

page.

https://www.dol.gov/whd/america2.htm

Resources
Resources for workers are available on the WHD website.

https://www.dol.gov/whd/workers.htm
Resources for employers are available on the WHD website.

https://www.dol.gov/whd/foremployers.htm
Resources for State and local governments are available on the WHD website.

https://www.dol.gov/whd/forstatelocalgovernments.htm
The Sources of Information were updated 10–2020.



Women's Bureau
Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20210


202-693-6710

http://www.dol.gov/wb


  DIRECTOR                                                Laurie Todd-Smith


  Chief of Staff                                          Jillian Rogers




  Deputy Director of Operations                           Joan Harrigan-Farrelly


https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/about
  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Women's Bureau develops policies and standards and conducts inquiries to safeguard the interests of working

women, to advocate for their equality and the economic security of their families, and to promote quality work

environments.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 5, 1920, President Woodrow Wilson signed Public Law 66–259, which established "a bureau to be

known as the Women's Bureau" in the Department of Labor. The Director of the Women's Bureau (WB) may not

be a man, but is required by law to be a woman whom the President appoints by the advice and with the

consent of the Senate. The U.S. Congress assigned the following duty to the WB: "to formulate standards and

policies which shall promote the welfare of wage-earning women, improve their working conditions, increase

their efficiency, and advance their opportunities for profitable employment." The WB has "authority to investigate

and report" to the Department of Labor ""upon all matters pertaining to the welfare of women in industry."

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/66th-congress/session-2/c66s2ch248.pdf

ACTIVITIES
The Bureau identifies, researches, and analyzes topics that are relevant for working women; pioneers policies

and programs to address those topics; and enhances public education and outreach efforts to raise awareness

on key issues and developments affecting women in the workforce.

https://www.dol.gov/wb/overview.htm



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that WB records have

been assigned to record group 086.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/086.html

Centennial Anniversary
One of the Department of Labor's longest-serving agencies, the WB celebrates its centennial anniversary

throughout the year 2020.

https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases/wb/wb20200128

Contact Information
The WB has a toll-free phone number: 800-827-5335. Phone, 202-693-6710. Fax, 202-693-6725

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/contact | Email: womens.bureau@dol.gov

Data / Statistics
Current and historical statistics on a broad range of topics and subpopulations of women in the labor force are
available online.

http://www.dol.gov/wb/stats/stats_data.htm

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the WB recently published in the Federal Register are listed under

the Department of Labor.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/labor-department

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives a right to access Federal Government records to any person. The FOIA is designed to make

Government actions and operations more transparent. It applies to existing records and does not require an

agency to create new records for compliance. The FOIA also does not require an agency to collect information

that it does not have or to do research or analyze data to fulfill a request. Certain records, or parts of them, may

be exempt from disclosure by the Act if one of nine exemptions shields their content.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/foia

Grants
The Women in Apprenticeship and Nontraditional Occupations grant expands pathways for women to enter all

industries and assume leadership roles in them.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/grants/wanto-grants
Re-Employment, Support, and Training for the Opioid Related Epidemic grants help women who have been

affected by the opioid crisis to rejoin the workforce.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/grants/restore

History
Before the outbreak of the First World War, 75% of all women who worked in manufacturing made apparel or its

materials, food, or tobacco products. The war changed the U.S. economy and how women participated in it:

their numbers in the industrial workforce increased and the range of occupations open to them expanded, even

though women remained concentrated in clerical occupations, domestic and personal service, and factory work.

The Second World War, accelerated technological advancements, and changes in social attitude have created a

different reality today. To learn more about the ever changing employment situation of women in the U.S.

workforce and the role that the WB has played in shaping it for the better, visit the "History: An Overview 1920–

2020" web page.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/about/history

Maps
The "Equal Pay and Pay Transparency Protections" map is interactive and displays information on Federal and

State equal pay and pay transparency protections for workers.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/equal-pay-protections
The "Employment Protections for Workers Who Are Pregnant or Nursing" map is interactive and displays

information on Federal and State employment protections against pregnancy discrimination, provisions for
     pregnancy accommodation, and workplace breastfeeding rights.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/pregnant-nursing-employment-protections

     Newsletter
     The "WB Updates Newsletter" is available online.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/news/newsletter

     Press Releases
     The Bureau posts press releases online.

     https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases/wb

     Regional Offices
     A complete listing of WB regional offices is available online.

     http://www.dol.gov/wb/info_about_wb/regions/regional_offices.htm

     Resources
     The WB posts Federal resources for women on its website.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/federal-agency-resources
     "Meeting in a Box" is a communication resource that allows the WB to share information about its current

     activities, while also providing messaging tools for the general public. This communications resource includes a

     presentation slide deck with notes, factsheet, and talking points. It offers tools for conducting a meeting,

     incorporating information into speeches, or incorporating messages as part of a meeting presentation. A tool

     may be used singly as a stand-alone piece, or in combination, depending on the audience and setting.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/meetinginabox
     The Sources of Information were updated 10–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                            Bureau of International Labor Affairs




The United States Government Manual




     BUREAU OF INTERNATIONAL LABOR AFFAIRS
    200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210


    202-693-4770

    http://www.dol.gov/ilab


      DEPUTY UNDER SECRETARY                                                                (vacancy)


      Associate Deputy Undersecretary                                                       Mark A. Mittelhauser


      Chief of Staff                                                                        Grant Lebens
https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/about-us/organization



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Bureau of International Labor Affairs promotes a fair competitive environment for workers in the United States and

other countries worldwide.


The Bureau of International Labor Affairs (ILAB) promotes a fair global playing field for workers and businesses in the

United States by enforcing trade commitments; strengthening labor standards; and combating international child

labor, forced labor, and human trafficking. ILAB combines trade and labor monitoring and enforcement, policy

engagement, technical assistance, and research to carry out the Department of Labor's international responsibilities.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/our-work



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that ILAB records have been

assigned to record group 174.5.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/174.html#174.5

Career Opportunities
ILAB relies on professionals with backgrounds in development economics and comparative labor law, as well as with

firsthand experience designing and implementing international technical assistance programs.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/about-us/careers-at-ilab
In 2019, ILAB ranked 356th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLBL

Hotline
The Interagency Labor Committee for Monitoring and Enforcement maintains a web-based hotline that allows for the

receipt of confidential information from affected and concerned parties, regarding labor issues involving countries of

the United States-Mexico-Canada Agreement.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/our-work/trade/labor-rights-usmca/hotline

News
ILAB-related news is posted on the Department of Labor's website.

https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases?agency=34

Projects
     ILAB grants help prevent and stop abusive labor practices like the use of child labor and forced labor and human

     trafficking. ILAB-funded projects also promote compliance by trade partners' with the labor requirements of U.S. trade

     agreements and preference programs.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/projects

     Reports / Publications
     ILAB conducts and funds research, whose results it relies on to inform the design and implementation of policy and

     programs.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/research-impact-evaluation

     Workers' Rights
     The International Labor Organization (ILO) has identified "fundamental principles and rights at work." All ILO members

     are obligated to respect these principles and rights and promote them.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ilab/our-work/workers-rights

        The Sources of Information were updated 9–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                  Bureau of Labor Statistics




The United States Government Manual




     BUREAU OF LABOR STATISTICS
    2 Massachusetts Avenue NE., Washington, DC 20212


    202-691-7800

    800-877-8339 (TDD)

    http://www.bls.gov


      COMMISSIONER                                                                          William W. Beach


      Deputy Commissioner                                                                   William J. Wiatrowski
https://www.bls.gov/bls/senior_staff/home.htm



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Bureau of Labor Statistics measures labor market activity, working conditions, price changes, and productivity in the

Nation's economy to support decision making in both the public and private sectors.


The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) was established, in the Department of the Interior, as the Bureau of Labor by the

act of June 27, 1884 (23 Stat. 60). It was renamed the Bureau of Labor Statistics by the act of March 4, 1913 (37 Stat.

737). The BLS measures labor market activity, working conditions, and price changes in the economy. It also collects,

analyzes, and disseminates essential economic information to support public and private decisionmaking.


The Bureau strives to have its data satisfy a number of criteria, including: relevance to current social and economic

issues, timeliness in reflecting today's rapidly changing economic conditions, accuracy and consistently high statistical

quality, and impartiality in both subject matter and presentation.


Basic data are published in news releases on a monthly, quarterly, and annual basis. Basic data also are published in

bulletins, reports, special publications, and periodicals. Regional offices issue additional reports and releases that often

contain content of local or regional relevance.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/infohome.htm



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The BLS website has an A–Z index to help visitors navigate its content.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/topicsaz.htm

Announcements
The BLS posts announcements on its website.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/announcement.htm

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that BLS records have been

assigned to record group 257.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/257.html

Blog
The official BLS blog is called "Commissioner's Corner."

https://blogs.bls.gov/blog

Calculators
The "Databases, Tables, and Calculators by Subject" web page has an inflation calculator that allows users to calculate

change in the buying power of the dollar over the years. An injury and illness calculator allows users to calculate injury

and illness incidence rates for a specific establishment or firm and to compare those rates with the averages for the

Nation, for States, and for the sector of industry to which the establishment or firm belongs.

https://www.bls.gov/data/#calculators

Career Opportunities
To carry out its mission, the BLS relies on professionals who have diverse educational backgrounds, skills, and training.

The agency relies heavily on the work of economists, information technology specialists, and mathematical statisticians.

https://www.bls.gov/jobs/home.htm
In 2019, the BLS ranked 93d among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLLS

Contact Information
The "Information and Help" web page has an electronic form for requesting information and asking questions. Postal

correspondence should be addressed to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Postal Square Building, 2 Massachusetts

Avenue NE., Washington, DC 20212–0001. Phone, 202-691-5200; Federal Relay Service, 800-877-8339.

https://data.bls.gov/forms/opb.htm?/home.htm
Contact information for the eight BLS regional offices is available online: Atlanta, 404-331-3415; Boston, 617-565-2327;

Chicago, 312-353-1880; Dallas, 972-850-4800; Kansas City, 816-285-7000; New York, 646-264-3600; Philadelphia, 215-

597-3282; and San Francisco, 415-625-2270.

https://www.bls.gov/regions/contacts.htm

Data Sources
Much of the information (e.g., databases and historical news release tables) that the BLS publishes is available from the

"Databases, Tables, and Calculators by Subject" web page.

https://www.bls.gov/data | Email: blsdata_staff@bls.gov
Some BLS data are available only through the home pages of individual programs—rather than from the "Databases,

Tables, and Calculators by Subject" web page. These programs are listed on the "Subject Areas" page. For example,

tables of employment projections data are available through the "Employment Projections" page; American time use

survey data are available through the "American Time Use Survey" page; and national longitudinal surveys data are

available through the "National Longitudinal Surveys" page.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/proghome.htm
Certain BLS program data are available in compressed ZIP files. Some of these files are accessible on

download.bls.gov. Other ZIP files may be located by starting at the home page of a specific program.

https://download.bls.gov/pub/time.series/compressed/tape.format

Economic Summaries
The BLS regional information offices produce economic summaries that are organized by State and posted in Portable
Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading. Each summary presents a sampling of economic information

on benefits, employment, prices, spending, wages, and unemployment for a particular area (e.g., Boston or

Sacramento).

https://www.bls.gov/regions/economic-summaries.htm

Economy at a Glance
The "Economy at a Glance" web page has at-a-glance economic tables for many metropolitan areas nationwide.

https://www.bls.gov/eag
Monthly and quarterly economic data for the Nation are also posted in an at-a-glance format.

https://www.bls.gov/eag/eag.us.htm

Educational Resources
The "K–12" web pages include games and quizzes, sections for students and their teachers, a history timeline, and

biographies of former Commissioners.

https://www.bls.gov/k12

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the BLS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/labor-statistics-bureau

Finding Data
The "BLS Data Finder 1.1" web page has a search tool that uses the conjunction "and" as the default search operator.

This feature produces display results that contain all of the search terms. To find data that contains a particular

combination of terms, the user must separate the terms by inserting the conjunction "or" between them.

https://beta.bls.gov/dataQuery/search

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The BLS posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/faqs.htm

Glossary
The BLS has a glossary on its website.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/glossary.htm

History
The Bureau has been collecting data and crunching numbers for over 135 years. Over its long history, the BLS started

out as the Bureau of Labor and part of the Department of the Interior; became an independent department for nearly

15 years; was incorporated into the former Department of Commerce and Labor; and was transferred to the newly

created Department of Labor in 1913. To learn more of the story, visit the "BLS History" section.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/history/home.htm

News
The BLS posts economic news releases, some of which are released on a monthly, quarterly, and annual basis.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/newsrels.htm#latest-releases

Publications
The BLS publishes bulletins and reports and economic news releases. Its major publications include "Beyond the

Numbers," "Career Outlook," "Monthly Labor Review," "Occupational Outlook Handbook," "The Economics Daily", and

"Spotlight on Statistics."

https://www.bls.gov/opub

Regional Information
Economic data and statistics according to geographic areas are available on the "Regional Information Offices" page.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/regnhome.htm

Research Papers
The Office of Survey Methods Research maintains an online research paper database.

https://www.bls.gov/osmr/research-papers

Resources
BLS economists, information technology specialists, and mathematical statisticians place a premium on accuracy,

currency, innovation, objectivity, relevancy, and transparency. They strive to invest BLS datasets and informational

products with these qualities, which help make them useful to a variety of audiences: business leaders, consumers,

developers, economists, educators, investors, job seekers, members of the media, policymakers, researchers, and

students.

https://www.bls.gov/audience | Email: blsdata_staff@bls.gov

Select Datasets and Indices
The "Top Picks" web page allows easy access to the most requested price indices, as well as to the most requested

employment, compensation, and productivity data tables.

https://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/surveymost?bls
A "Help and Tutorials" page is dedicated to the "Top Picks" application.

https://www.bls.gov/help/hlpmrs.htm

Site Map
The BLS website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.bls.gov/bls/sitemap.htm

Social Media
The BLS tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/BLS_gov
The BLS posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCijn3WBpHtx4AvSya7NER9Q
     Statistical Websites
     The "Statistical Sites on the World Wide Web" allows easy access to a collection of Internet sites that are not

     administered by the BLS.

     https://www.bls.gov/bls/other.htm

        The Sources of Information were updated 9–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                         Employee Benefits Security Administration




The United States Government Manual




     EMPLOYEE BENEFITS SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
    Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20210


    866-444-3272

    http://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa


      ASSISTANT SECRETARY                                                                   Jeanne K. Wilson, Acting


      Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary                                                  Jeanne K. Wilson
  DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


  National Office Operations / Chief Operating Officer                                    Timothy D. Hauser


  Regional Office Operations                                                              Amy J. Turner


https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/about-us/organization-chart#section1



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Employee Benefits Security Administration assures the security of the retirement, health, and other workplace related

benefits of American workers and their families.


The Employee Benefits Security Administration (EBSA) educates and assists the over 154 million participants in and

beneficiaries of approximately 710,000 private retirement plans, 2.4 million health plans, and similar numbers of other

welfare benefit plans. The EBSA balances proactive enforcement with compliance assistance and supports enrollees

and beneficiaries by developing effective regulations; assisting and educating fiduciaries, plan sponsors, service

providers, and workers; and enforcing the law.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/about-us/what-we-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Ask EBSA
EBSA's workers and families assistance web page provides accessible information on programs and services, answers

to frequently asked questions, and assistance where a health or retirement benefit has been denied inappropriately.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/ask-a-question/ask-ebsa

Career Opportunities
In 2019, the EBSA ranked 229th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLPW

Contact Information
The "Regional Offices" web page has contact information for EBSA regional and district offices.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/about-us/regional-offices

Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA)
ERISA is a Federal law that sets minimum standards for most voluntarily established retirement and health plans in

private industry. This statute provides protection for individuals who are enrolled in these plans. The Department of

Labor has a web page that it has dedicated to the ERISA.
https://www.dol.gov/general/topic/health-plans/erisa
On September 2, 1974, President Gerald R. Ford approved Public Law 93–406, which is also cited as the "Employee

Retirement Income Security Act of 1974." Senators and Representatives of the U.S. Congress wrote this 207-page piece

of legislation "to provide for pension reform" (88 Stat. 829).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-88/pdf/STATUTE-88-Pg829.pdf

En Español
The EBSA posts information in Spanish on its website.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/es/about-ebsa/our-activities/informacion-en-espanol

ERISA Advisory Council
The membership of the council is posted on the "ERISA Advisory Council" web page. The council posts issue

statements on the same page.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/about-us/erisa-advisory-council
ERISA Advisory Council reports are posted online.


Factsheets
The EBSA posts factsheets.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/our-activities/resource-center/fact-sheets

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the EBSA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/employee-benefits-security-administration

Forms
The EBSA posts forms and filing instructions online.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/employers-and-advisers/plan-administration-and-compliance/reporting-and-
filing/forms

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The EBSA posts answers to frequently asked questions.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/our-activities/resource-center/faqs

History
The EBSA administers and enforces the fiduciary, reporting, and disclosure provisions of the first title of the Employee

Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA). The histories of the ERISA and EBSA are tightly intertwined.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/about-us/history-of-ebsa-and-erisa

Information for Researchers
EBSA researchers expand the knowledge of employee benefits and their role in meeting the Nation's economic

security needs.
     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/researchers

     Key Topics
     The EBSA website features a page with links to key topics: health and other employee benefits, reporting and filing,

     and retirement.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/key-topics

     News
     The EBSA posts news items on the Department of Labor's website.

     https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases?agency=37&state=All&topic=All&year=all

     Publications
     The EBSA distributes booklets, factsheets, and pamphlets on employer responsibilities and employee rights under the

     Employee Retirement Income Security Act. A list of publications is available online or from the Office of Outreach,

     Education, and Assistance. Phone, 866-444-3272.

     http://www.dol.gov/agencies/ebsa/about-ebsa/our-activities/resource-center/publications

        The Sources of Information were updated 9–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                         Employment and Training Administration




The United States Government Manual




     EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING ADMINISTRATION
    Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20520


    877-872-5627

    http://www.doleta.gov


      ASSISTANT SECRETARY                                                                   John P. Pallasch




      Deputy Assistant Secretaries                                                          Matthew Hunter
                                                                                        Nancy Rooney


                                                                                        Amy Simon


https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/about



 The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Employment and Training Administration helps the U.S. labor market function more efficiently by providing job

training, employment, labor market information, and income maintenance services.




ACTIVITIES
In addition to training, employment, information, and services, which are provided primarily through State and local

workforce development systems, the Employment and Training Administration (ETA) also administers programs to

enhance employment opportunities and promote business prosperity.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/program-areas

Apprenticeships
The Office of Apprenticeship oversees the National Apprenticeship System, sets standards for apprenticeship, and

assists States, industry, and labor in developing apprenticeship programs that meet required standards, while

promoting equal opportunity and safeguarding the welfare of apprentices.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/apprenticeship

 For more information, call 202-693-2796.



Contracts Management
The Office of Contracts Management advises the Assistant Secretary of the ETA, in a manner that is consistent with

Federal statutes and regulations, on mission-critical procurement matters. The Office applies procurement services to

ETA organizational components to address business challenges with best practices and cost-effective solutions.

http://www.doleta.gov/contracts

 For further information, call 202-693-3110.



Financial Administration
The Office of Financial Administration (OFA) manages all ETA fiscal resources for programs and activities for which

funds are appropriated through the Office's functions of accounting, budget, and financial system oversight. The

Office provides budgetary, accounting, audit, and internal control management. It coordinates with the departmental
budget center and the Office of the Chief Financial Officer to provide financial management that supports carrying out

the ETA's mission.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/budget

  For further information, call 202-693-3162.



Foreign Labor Certification
The Office of Foreign Labor Certification (OFLC) carries out the delegated responsibility of the Secretary of Labor

under the Immigration and Nationality Act, as amended, concerning the admission of foreign workers into the United

States for employment. In carrying out this responsibility, the Office administers temporary nonimmigrant and

permanent labor certification programs through the ETA's national processing centers that are located in Chicago and

Atlanta.


The OFLC also administers nationally the issuance of employer-requested prevailing wage determinations through the

ETA's National Prevailing Wage and Helpdesk Center, which is located in Washington, DC. Prevailing wage

determinations are issued for use in all nonagricultural temporary labor certification programs and the permanent

labor certification program.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/foreign-labor

  For more information, call 202-693-3010.



Grants Management
The Office of Grants Management provides grants management expertise to ETA offices and stakeholders throughout

the life cycle of a grant. The Office delivers centralized grants administration and policy expertise to support pre-

award, award, period of performance, audit resolution, and closeout of ETA Federal assistance awards.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/grants

  For further information, call 202-693-2800.



Job Training
Job Corps is the largest nationwide residential career training program in the Nation and has been operating for more

than half of a century. The program helps eligible young people who are 16–24 years old complete their high school

education, trains them for meaningful careers, and assists them with obtaining employment.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/jobcorps

  For further information, call 202-693-3000.



Policy Development and Research
The Office of Policy Development and Research (OPDR) supports ETA policies and investments to improve the public
workforce system by analyzing, formulating, and recommending legislative changes and options for policy initiatives.

The Office coordinates the ETA's legislative and regulatory activities and their interactions with international

organizations and foreign countries. The OPDR maintains the ETA's portion of the Department of Labor's regulatory

agenda and disseminates advisories and publications. The Office provides the ETA with strategic approaches to

improve performance and outcomes through research, demonstrations, and evaluation of its major programs. The

Office manages the Workforce Investment Act performance accountability reporting system; oversees the

maintenance of wage record exchange systems for State and other grantees; coordinates the development of the

ETA's operating plan; and disseminates workforce program performance results. The OPDR also provides policy

guidance on and technical assistance for the Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/policy

  For further information, call 202-693-3700.



Trade Adjustment Assistance
The Office of Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) administers a workers assistance program for those who have lost or

may lose their jobs because of foreign trade. The TAA program provides reemployment services and allowances for

eligible individuals.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/tradeact

  For further information, call 202-693-3560.



Unemployment Compensation
The Office of Unemployment Insurance provides national leadership, oversight, policy guidance, and technical

assistance to the Federal-State unemployment compensation system. The Office also interprets Federal legislative

requirements.

https://oui.doleta.gov/unemploy/aboutoui.asp

  For more information, call 202-693-3029.



Workforce Investment
The Office of Workforce Investment implements an integrated national workforce investment system that supports

economic growth and provides workers with information, advice, job search assistance, supportive services, and

training for employment. The Office also helps employers hire skilled workers.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/workforce-investment

  For further information, call 202-693-3980.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that ETA records have been

assigned to record group 369.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/369.html

Advisories
The ETA uses its advisory system to disseminate its interpretations of Federal laws; procedural, administrative,

management, and program direction; and other information to the States, direct grant recipients, and other interested

parties.

https://wdr.doleta.gov/directives

Career Opportunities
In 2019, the ETA ranked 369th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLET

Contact Information
ETA contact information is available on its website.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/contact | Email: eta.webportal@dol.gov
Contact information for the ETA's six regional offices is available online.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/regions

Data
The Division of Research and Evaluation posts datasets for public use on the ETA's website.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/research/public-use-datasets
The Office of Unemployment Insurance posts unemployment insurance data as part of the ETA's contribution to the

Department of Labor's collection and publication of data.

https://oui.doleta.gov/unemploy/DataDashboard.asp
The Office of Foreign Labor Certification posts employment-based immigration data on the ETA's website. Three main

categories are used to organize the data: selected statistics that provide cumulative quarterly data by major

immigration program; cumulative quarterly and fiscal year releases of program disclosure data; and historical fiscal

year annual program and performance report information.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/foreign-labor/performance
The Office of Trade Adjustment Assistance posts charts, statistics, and other information on the ETA's website. Three

main categories are used to organize the data: petitions and determinations, participants, and financial.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/tradeact/data

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the ETA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.
https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/employment-and-training-administration

Job Corps
An online directory has contact information for the Office of Job Corps, including the national Job Corps hotline and

phone numbers and email addresses for Office of the Administrator staff. It also allows convenient access to

information for contacting Job Corps regional offices.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/jobcorps/contact

Job Seekers
The ETA posts resources for job seekers on its website.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/job-seekers

Library
A large repository of information is available online from the "ETA Library" web page.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/reports

National Agricultural Workers Survey
This employment-based and random-sample survey of U.S. crop workers brings together demographic, employment,

and health data that are collected during face-to-face interviews.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/national-agricultural-workers-survey

News
The ETA posts news releases on the Department of Labor's website.

https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases?agency=39&state=All&topic=All&year=all

Rapid Response Services
Rapid Response is designed to respond to layoffs and plant closings by quickly coordinating services and providing

immediate aid to companies and their affected workers. Rapid Response teams work with employers and employee

representatives to quickly maximize public and private resources to minimize disruptions associated with job loss.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/layoffs

Reducing Recidivism
The Reentry and Employment Opportunities—Adult Program strengthens urban communities through an

employment-centered program of mentoring, job training, and other comprehensive transitional services. Helping

former inmates find employment when they return to their communities reduces recidivism.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/reentry

Research
The research publication database provides access to a collection of research and evaluation reports. The ETA

commissioned the research and evaluation reports to help guide the workforce investment system in administering

effective programs that enhance employment opportunity and business.

https://wdr.doleta.gov/research/eta_default.cfm
     Veterans
     The ETA website has a section dedicated to veterans. It offers resources for veteran who are job seekers and for

     providers of employment and training programs.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/jobs-for-veterans-act

     Youth Services
     A section of the ETA's website is dedicated to youth programs and services.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/eta/youth

        The Sources of Information were updated 9–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                            Mine Safety and Health Administration




The United States Government Manual




     MINE SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
    201 12th Street South, Suite 400, Arlington, Virginia 22202


    202-693-9400

    http://www.msha.gov


      ASSISTANT SECRETARY                                                                    David G. Zatezalo




      DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARIES
  Operations                                                                               Patricia W. Silvey


  Policy                                                                                   Wayne D. Palmer


https://www.msha.gov/about/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Mine Safety and Health Administration works to prevent mine-related deaths, illnesses, and injuries and promotes

safe and healthy work environments.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On November 9, 1977, President James E. Carter approved Public Law 95–164, which is also cited as the Federal Mine

Safety and Health Amendments Act of 1977. This statute amended the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of

1969 (PL 91–173), including its short title, which was changed to the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (91 Stat.

1290).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-91/pdf/STATUTE-91-Pg1290.pdf
The Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 created the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) in 1978 by

transferring the Federal mine safety program and its functions from the Department of the Interior to the Department

of Labor.

https://www.msha.gov/about/history
The MSHA is organized into program areas.

https://www.msha.gov/about/program-areas
The MSHA posts its organizational chart online in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.msha.gov/sites/default/files/Organizational_Charts/OAS-Org-Chart.pdf

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
"Chapter 22—Mine Safety and Health" has been assigned to 30 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title30/chapter22&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that are associated with the MSHA are assigned to the first chapter of 30 CFR. The chapter

includes parts 1–199.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=2f9b3d9dbb071240550f37a930d0135d&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title30/30cfrv1_02.tpl#0

ACTIVITIES
The MSHA helps protect the Nation's miners by promoting healthy and safe work environments for them. It works

toward the elimination of fatal mining accidents, the reduction of the frequency and severity of accidents, and the

minimization of health hazards through enforcement of mandatory safety and health standards in the mining industry.

It also provides technical, educational, and other assistance, including the testing and approval of equipment for use in
the industry, to mine operators. The MSHA cooperates with industry, labor, and other Federal and State agencies to

improve safety and health conditions for miners.

https://www.msha.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that MSHA records have been

assigned to record group 433. That record group does not have a description that is associated with it.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/000.html

Career Opportunities
Information on employment opportunities is available online.

http://www.msha.gov/about/careers
In 2019, the MSHA ranked 260th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLMS

Contact Information
The "Contact MSHA" web page has emergency and general contact information.

https://www.msha.gov/about/contact-msha | Email: AskMSHA@dol.gov

Data Sources / Calculators
The "Data Sources and Calculators" web page allows convenient access to a range of mine safety and health data

(e.g., information on accidents, air sampling, employment, injuries, illnesses, inspections, production totals, and

violations). Compliance calculator tools can be used to illuminate the history of key health and safety violations of a

mine.

https://www.msha.gov/data-reports/data-sources-calculators

Educational Resources
The MSHA posts training and educational resources on its website.

https://www.msha.gov/training-education
The National Mine Health and Safety Academy conducts education and training programs in health and safety and

related subjects for Federal mine inspectors and other government mining and industry personnel.

https://arlweb.msha.gov/PROGRAMS/MineAcademy/Academy.asp

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the MSHA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/mine-safety-and-health-administration
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The MSHA posts answers to FAQs on rulemaking.

https://www.msha.gov/rulemaking-frequently-asked-questions

Historical Statutes / Legislative History
The "Laws" web page has key historical statutes and their legislative history.

https://www.msha.gov/regulations/laws

Library
The MSHA digital library's holdings include accident reports, images, photographs, and research material.

https://arlweb.msha.gov/TRAINING/LIBRARY/mshaPortal/index.html

Media Gallery
Online visitors may browse or search historical photographs and videos, including mine training and health training

videos.

https://www.msha.gov/news-media/media-gallery

Mine Disasters
Five or more fatalities define a mining disaster. The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health posts data

tables that summarize all U.S. mining disasters from 1839 to the present. Starting with the year 1900, graphs are also

available.

https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/mining/statistics/minedisasters.html

News / Media
The MSHA posts alerts and hazards, announcements, congressional testimonies, events, news releases, photographs

and videos, and speeches on its website.

https://www.msha.gov/news-media

Reports
Current and historical preliminary accident reports, fatalgrams, and fatal investigation reports for metal, nonmetal, and

coal mines are accessible on the MSHA website. Quarterly and annual summaries of mining fatalities along with

associated best practices and preventative recommendations are also accessible.

https://www.msha.gov/data-reports/fatality-reports
Part 50 of Title 30 of the Code of Federal Regulations (30 CFR 50) requires mine operators to notify the MSHA when

accidents occur and to investigate those accidents, while restricting disturbance of accident-related areas. Part 50 also

requires mine operators to file reports on accidents, occupational injuries, and occupational illnesses, as well as

employment and coal production data.

https://www.msha.gov/data-reports/reports

Resources / Tools
The MSHA posts mine emergency operations information, miners' resources, and technical resources on its "Resources

and Tools" web page.
     https://www.msha.gov/support-resources/resources-tools

     Spanish
     In the top right corner of the MSHA's home page are an Español option and an Inglés option. Using these options,

     visitors to the website can toggle between content in either language.

     https://www.msha.gov

     State Mining Agencies
     A list of links to the websites of State mining agencies is available on the MSHA website.

     https://www.msha.gov/support-resources/external-mining-resources/state-mining-agencies

     Statistics
     The "Statistics" web page allows easy access to numbers on mine employment and coal production; the most

     frequently cited standards (i.e., regulatory violations) by year, mine type, and industry group; and graphs, maps, and

     tables that The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health has created to summarize a range of information

     on employees, fatalities, injuries, and mines.

     https://www.msha.gov/data-reports/statistics

     Targeted Inspections
     The MSHA conducts targeted inspections each month at mines that merit increased attention and enforcement due to

     their poor compliance history or particular compliance concerns. Each month's inspection results are posted online.

     https://www.msha.gov/monthly-targeted-inspection-results

        The Sources of Information were updated 9–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                    Occupational Safety and Health Administration




The United States Government Manual




    Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID–19): For employee and employer Coronavirus pandemic information, which
    includes links to interim guidance and other resources for preventing exposure to and infection with the virus, go to

    https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/covid-19.


     OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
    Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20210


    800-321-6742

    http://www.osha.gov
  ASSISTANT SECRETARY                                                                     James Frederick, Acting


  Deputy Assistant Secretaries                                                            Amanda Edens


                                                                                          James Frederick




  Chief of Staff                                                                          Leah Ford


https://www.osha.gov/aboutosha



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2021.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel

ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) was created pursuant to the Occupational Safety and

Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 651 et seq.).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-84/pdf/STATUTE-84-Pg1590.pdf
OSHA posts an organizational chart online in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.osha.gov/html/OSHAorgchart.pdf

ACTIVITIES
OSHA assures safe and healthful working conditions for men and women by promulgating common sense, protective

health, and safety standards; enforcing workplace safety and health rules; providing training, outreach, education, and

assistance to workers and employers in their efforts to control workplace hazards; prevent work-related injuries,

illnesses, and fatalities; and partnering with States that run their own OSHA-approved programs.

https://www.osha.gov/aboutosha



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
An alphabetized topical index is available on the OSHA website to help visitors find information.

https://www.osha.gov/a-z

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that OSHA records have been

assigned to record group 100.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/100.html

Career Opportunities
In 2019, OSHA ranked 196th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLSH

Contact Information
OSHA posts contact information on its "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.osha.gov/contactus

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID–19)
The OSHA has posted a "COVID–19" web page containing employee and employer Coronavirus pandemic

information that includes links to interim guidance and other resources for reducing exposure and preventing

infection.

https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/covid-19

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that OSHA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/occupational-safety-and-health-administration

File a Complaint
Information on how to file a safety and health complaint and an electronic complaint form are available on the OSHA

website. Phone, 800-321-6742.

https://www.osha.gov/workers/file_complaint.html

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The OSHA is required to disclose records that are properly requested in writing by any person. An agency may

withhold information pursuant to one or more of nine exemptions and three exclusions contained in the FOIA. The act

applies only to Federal agencies and does not create a right of access to records held by Congress, the courts, State or

local government agencies, and private entities.

https://www.osha.gov/foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The OSHA posts answers to FAQs online.

https://www.osha.gov/faq

Injury and Illness Data
The OSHA website has a searchable, establishment-specific database for establishments that provided OSHA with valid

data from 1996 through 2011.

https://www.osha.gov/pls/odi/establishment_search.html
Workplace injury, illness, and fatality statistics are available on the OSHA website.

https://www.osha.gov/oshstats/work.html

Make a Report
Employers must notify OSHA when an employee is killed on the job or suffers a work-related amputation,

hospitalization, or loss of an eye. A fatality must be reported within 8 hours; an amputation, in-patient hospitalization,

or eye loss must be reported within 24 hours. An employer should be prepared to supply the name of the business,

the names of employees who were affected, the location and time of the incident, a brief description of the incident,

and a contact person and phone number.

https://www.osha.gov/report.html

Map
A "Heat Fatalities Map" shows the locations of outdoor worker heat-related deaths between 2008 and 2014.

https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/heatillness/map.html
A nationwide map of enforcement cases with initial penalties above $40,000 is available online.

https://www.osha.gov/enforcement/toppenalties/bystate

News
The OSHA newsroom has a collection of quick links for relevant news sources.

https://www.osha.gov/news
The "What's New" web page features news items that are organized chronologically.

https://www.osha.gov/whatsnew.html

Newsletter
OSHA's online newsletter has the latest news on compliance assistance, enforcement actions, outreach activities,

rulemaking, and training and educational resources.

https://www.osha.gov/quicktakes

Offices
A complete listing of OSHA regional and area offices is available online.

http://www.osha.gov/html/RAmap.html

OSHA Card
Facts on obtaining an OSHA card are available online.

https://www.osha.gov/dte/oshacardfacts.html

Publications
OSHA publications are accessible online.

https://www.osha.gov/pls/publications/publication.html

Social Media
OSHA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/OSHA_DOL

Spanish
In the top right corner of the OSHA's home page are an Español option and an Inglés option. Using these options,
     visitors to the website can toggle between content in Spanish or English.

     https://www.osha.gov

     Training / Education
     Stand-alone, interactive, web-based training tools—eTools and the eMatrix—are available on the OSHA website.

     These tools are highly illustrated and utilize graphical menus.

     https://www.osha.gov/dts/osta/oshasoft/index.html
     Prevention video training tools (v-tools) on construction hazards are available on the OSHA website. These videos

     show how workers can be injured suddenly or even killed on the job. The videos assist those who are in the

     construction industry with identifying, reducing, and eliminating hazards. The videos are presented in clear, accessible

     vocabulary; show common construction worksite activities; and most are 2–4 minutes long.

     https://www.osha.gov/dts/vtools/construction.html

        The Sources of Information were updated 10–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                         Veterans' Employment and Training Service




The United States Government Manual




     VETERANS' EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING SERVICE
    Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20210


    866-487-2365

    http://www.dol.gov/agencies/vets


      ASSISTANT SECRETARY                                                                   John Lowry III




      DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARIES
  Operations and Management                                                                J. Sam Shellenberger


  Policy                                                                                   (vacancy)




  Chief of Staff                                                                           Jonathan VanderPlas


https://www.dol.gov/agencies/vets/about



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Veterans' Employment and Training Service helps America's veterans, servicemembers, and their spouses who are

eligible prepare for careers; provides them with employment resources and expertise; protects their employment rights;

and promotes their employment opportunities.


On March 24, 1983, former Secretary of Labor Raymond J. Donovan signed Order 4–83, which redesignated the Office

of the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Veterans Employment as the Veterans' Employment and Training Service. The

Secretary's order of redesignation was published in the Federal Register on April 1, 1983 (48 FR 14092).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1983-04-01/pdf/FR-1983-04-01.pdf
The Veterans' Employment and Training Service (VETS) administers employment and training programs and

compliance activities that help veterans and servicemembers succeed in their civilian careers. VETS also administers the

jobs for veterans State grant program, which gives grants to States to fund personnel who are dedicated to serving

the employment needs of veterans. VETS field staff works closely with and gives technical assistance to State

employment workforce agencies to ensure that veterans receive priority of service and gain meaningful employment.

VETS has two competitive grants programs: the homeless veterans reintegration program and the incarcerated

veterans transition program. VETS also helps servicemembers who are separating from the Armed Forces prepare for

the civilian labor market.


VETS has three compliance programs: the Federal contractor program, veterans' preference in Federal hiring, and the

Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994 (USERRA). With respect to the Federal

contractor program, VETS promulgates regulations and oversees the program by helping contractors comply with

their affirmative action and reporting obligations. Although the Office of Personnel Management administers and

interprets statutes and regulations that govern veterans' preference in Federal hiring, VETS investigates allegations that

veterans' preference rights have been violated.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/vets/about
In addition, VETS preserves servicemembers' employment and reemployment rights through its administration and

enforcement of USERRA. VETS conducts investigations of alleged violations, and it carries out a USERRA outreach

program.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-108/pdf/STATUTE-108-Pg3149.pdf
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
In 2019, the VETS ranked 227th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLVE

Contact Information
A national office directory is available online.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/vets/about/nationaloffice
A regional and State directory is available online.

https://www.dol.gov/vets/aboutvets/regionaloffices/map.htm

Find Employment
The "Find a Job" web page has resources to help veterans find employment.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/vets/veterans/findajob

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that VETS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/veterans-employment-and-training-service

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Any person has the right to request access to Federal agency records or information. VETS is required to disclose

records that are properly requested in writing by any person. An agency may withhold information pursuant to nine

exemptions and three exclusions contained in the FOIA. The act applies only to Federal agencies and does not create

a right of access to records held by Congress, the courts, or by State or local government agencies. A FOIA request

should be submitted to the appropriate national or regional VETS office by email, fax, or mail. The subject line, cover

page, or envelope should be clearly labeled "Freedom of Information Act Request." The content of the request should

indicate that it is a FOIA request, and it should contain as much information as possible describing the record or

records being sought.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/vets/about/foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
VETS posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.dol.gov/vets/resources/faqs.htm
The Department of Labor posts answers to FAQs regarding veterans on its website.

https://webapps.dol.gov/dolfaq/dolfaqbytopic.asp?topicID=12&topictitle=Veterans

Grants
Information on grants and other opportunities is available online.
     http://www.dol.gov/vets/resources/grants.htm

     News / Media
     VETS posts news releases and public service announcements on its website.

     https://www.dol.gov/vets/news.htm

        The Sources of Information were updated 10–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                  Wage and Hour Division




The United States Government Manual




     WAGE AND HOUR DIVISION
    Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20210


    866-487-9243

    http://www.dol.gov/whd


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         Cheryl M. Stanton


      Deputy Administrator                                                                  Susan Boone
  Chief of Staff                                                                        Michael Stojsavljevich


https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/about/organizational-chart#Keypersonnel



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Wage and Hour Division protects and enhances the welfare of the Nation's workers by promoting and achieving

compliance with labor standards.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 25, 1938, President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved Public Law 75–718, which also is cited as the Fair Labor

Standards Act of 1938. Among its findings, the U.S. Congress noted that the existence "in industries engaged in

commerce or in the production of goods for commerce, of labor conditions detrimental to the maintenance of the

minimum standard of living necessary for health, efficiency, and general well-being of workers" causes these adverse

labor conditions to spread and perpetuate, burdens commerce and the free flow of goods, undermines fair

competition, leads to disputes that burden and obstruct commerce and the free flow of goods, and interferes with the

commercial marketing of goods (52 Stat. 1060).

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/75th-congress/session-3/c75s3ch676.pdf
The statute also "created in the Department of Labor a Wage and Hour Division [WHD] which shall be under the

direction of an Administrator" who "shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the

Senate" (52 Stat. 1061).


Secretary Frances Perkins's order of October 15, 1942, established the Wage and Hour and Public Contracts Divisions

(WHPCD) by consolidating the WHD and the Public Contracts Division to administer Federal minimum wage, overtime

pay, and child labor laws.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/155.html
In 1967, the Wage and Labor Standards Administration (WLSA) was established in the Department of Labor to direct

and coordinate Federal wage and labor standards programs. On May 5, 1969, by secretarial order, the WHPCD was

assigned to the WLSA.


On November 8, 2009, the Employments Standards Administration was dissolved into its four constituent components:

The WHD, the Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs, the Office of Workers' Compensation Programs, and

the Office of Labor Management Standards. Authorities were delegated and responsibilities were assigned to the

Administrator of the WHD (74 FR 58836).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2009-11-13/pdf/FR-2009-11-13.pdf
The WHD posts an organizational chart on its website.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/about/organizational-chart

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
"Chapter 8—Fair Labor Standards" has been assigned to 29 U.S.C. Title 29 is dedicated to codified statutory material

that affects labor.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title29/chapter8&edition=prelim
"Subtitle B—Regulations Relating to Labor" has been assigned to 29 CFR. The fifth chapter (sections 500–899) of that

subtitle is dedicated to the WHD.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=efbbc65896d0d414403dfadb6f5d8d83&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title29/29cfrv3_02.tpl#0

ACTIVITIES
The WHD enforces Federal minimum wage, overtime pay, recordkeeping, and child labor law requirements of the Fair

Labor Standards Act. The WHD also enforces the Migrant and Seasonal Agricultural Worker Protection Act, the

Employee Polygraph Protection Act, the Family and Medical Leave Act, wage garnishment provisions of the Consumer

Credit Protection Act, and a number of employment standards and worker protections as provided in several

immigration-related statutes. Additionally, the WHD administers and enforces the prevailing wage requirements of the

Davis Bacon Act and the Service Contract Act and other statutes applicable to Federal contracts for construction and

for the provision of goods and services.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that WHD records have been

assigned to record group 155.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/155.html

Career Opportunities
In 2019, the WHD ranked 170th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/DLWH

Contact Information
The WHD posts contact information on its "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/contact

Evaluations / Studies
The WHD posts evaluations and studies on its website in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.dol.gov/whd/resources/evaluations.htm

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the WHD recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/wage-and-hour-division
    File a Complaint
    Instructions for filing a complaint are available online. Phone, 866-487-9243.

    https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/contact/complaints

    Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
    The WHD is required to disclose records that are properly requested in writing by any person. The WHD may withhold

    information pursuant to nine exemptions and three exclusions contained in the FOIA. The WHD does not require a

    special FOIA request form. A request must reasonably describe the desired record. Providing its name or title is not

    mandatory, but the more specific the record description, the more likely that WHD staff can locate it. A FOIA request

    must be made in writing and may be submitted by courier service, email, fax, or postal mail.

    https://www.dol.gov/whd/foia/index.htm

    History
    The WHD has posted a historical summary on its website.

    https://www.dol.gov/agencies/whd/about/history

    News
    The WHD posts national and State news releases.

    https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases/whd

    Offices
    Contact information for WHD area, district, and regional offices is available on the "WHD Local Offices" web page.

    https://www.dol.gov/whd/america2.htm

    Resources
    Resources for workers are available on the WHD website.

    https://www.dol.gov/whd/workers.htm
    Resources for employers are available on the WHD website.

    https://www.dol.gov/whd/foremployers.htm
    Resources for State and local governments are available on the WHD website.

    https://www.dol.gov/whd/forstatelocalgovernments.htm

        The Sources of Information were updated 10–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                      Women's Bureau




The United States Government Manual




     WOMEN'S BUREAU
    Department of Labor, Washington, DC 20210


    202-693-6710

    http://www.dol.gov/wb


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Laurie Todd-Smith


      Chief of Staff                                                                        Jillian Rogers
  Deputy Director of Operations                                                        Joan Harrigan-Farrelly


https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/about



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.


https://www.dol.gov/general/contact/contact-phonekeypersonnel
The Women's Bureau develops policies and standards and conducts inquiries to safeguard the interests of working

women, to advocate for their equality and the economic security of their families, and to promote quality work

environments.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 5, 1920, President Woodrow Wilson signed Public Law 66–259, which established "a bureau to be known as

the Women's Bureau" in the Department of Labor. The Director of the Women's Bureau (WB) may not be a man, but

is required by law to be a woman whom the President appoints by the advice and with the consent of the Senate. The

U.S. Congress assigned the following duty to the WB: "to formulate standards and policies which shall promote the

welfare of wage-earning women, improve their working conditions, increase their efficiency, and advance their

opportunities for profitable employment." The WB has "authority to investigate and report" to the Department of

Labor ""upon all matters pertaining to the welfare of women in industry."

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/66th-congress/session-2/c66s2ch248.pdf

ACTIVITIES
The Bureau identifies, researches, and analyzes topics that are relevant for working women; pioneers policies and

programs to address those topics; and enhances public education and outreach efforts to raise awareness on key

issues and developments affecting women in the workforce.

https://www.dol.gov/wb/overview.htm



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that WB records have been

assigned to record group 086.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/086.html

Centennial Anniversary
One of the Department of Labor's longest-serving agencies, the WB celebrates its centennial anniversary throughout

the year 2020.

https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases/wb/wb20200128

Contact Information
The WB has a toll-free phone number: 800-827-5335. Phone, 202-693-6710. Fax, 202-693-6725

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/contact | Email: womens.bureau@dol.gov

Data / Statistics
Current and historical statistics on a broad range of topics and subpopulations of women in the labor force are

available online.

http://www.dol.gov/wb/stats/stats_data.htm

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the WB recently published in the Federal Register are listed under the

Department of Labor.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/labor-department

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives a right to access Federal Government records to any person. The FOIA is designed to make

Government actions and operations more transparent. It applies to existing records and does not require an agency to

create new records for compliance. The FOIA also does not require an agency to collect information that it does not

have or to do research or analyze data to fulfill a request. Certain records, or parts of them, may be exempt from

disclosure by the Act if one of nine exemptions shields their content.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/foia

Grants
The Women in Apprenticeship and Nontraditional Occupations grant expands pathways for women to enter all

industries and assume leadership roles in them.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/grants/wanto-grants
Re-Employment, Support, and Training for the Opioid Related Epidemic grants help women who have been affected

by the opioid crisis to rejoin the workforce.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/grants/restore

History
Before the outbreak of the First World War, 75% of all women who worked in manufacturing made apparel or its

materials, food, or tobacco products. The war changed the U.S. economy and how women participated in it: their

numbers in the industrial workforce increased and the range of occupations open to them expanded, even though

women remained concentrated in clerical occupations, domestic and personal service, and factory work. The Second

World War, accelerated technological advancements, and changes in social attitude have created a different reality

today. To learn more about the ever changing employment situation of women in the U.S. workforce and the role that

the WB has played in shaping it for the better, visit the "History: An Overview 1920–2020" web page.

https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/about/history

Maps
The "Equal Pay and Pay Transparency Protections" map is interactive and displays information on Federal and State
     equal pay and pay transparency protections for workers.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/equal-pay-protections
     The "Employment Protections for Workers Who Are Pregnant or Nursing" map is interactive and displays information

     on Federal and State employment protections against pregnancy discrimination, provisions for pregnancy

     accommodation, and workplace breastfeeding rights.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/pregnant-nursing-employment-protections

     Newsletter
     The "WB Updates Newsletter" is available online.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/news/newsletter

     Press Releases
     The Bureau posts press releases online.

     https://www.dol.gov/newsroom/releases/wb

     Regional Offices
     A complete listing of WB regional offices is available online.

     http://www.dol.gov/wb/info_about_wb/regions/regional_offices.htm

     Resources
     The WB posts Federal resources for women on its website.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/federal-agency-resources
     "Meeting in a Box" is a communication resource that allows the WB to share information about its current activities,

     while also providing messaging tools for the general public. This communications resource includes a presentation

     slide deck with notes, factsheet, and talking points. It offers tools for conducting a meeting, incorporating information

     into speeches, or incorporating messages as part of a meeting presentation. A tool may be used singly as a stand-

     alone piece, or in combination, depending on the audience and setting.

     https://www.dol.gov/agencies/wb/meetinginabox

        The Sources of Information were updated 10–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility
Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                    Department of State




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF STATE
    2201 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20520


    202-647-4000

    http://www.state.gov


      SECRETARY OF STATE                                                                    Marco Rubio




      Counselor of the Department                                                           T. Ulrich Brechbuhl
 Executive Secretary                                          Lisa D. Kenna


https://www.state.gov/biographies/marco-rubio/

 DEPUTY SECRETARY OF STATE                                    Stephen E. Biegun




 Director, Office of U.S. Foreign Assistance                  James L. Richardson


https://www.state.gov/biographies/stephen-biegun

 DEPUTY SECRETARY OF STATE FOR MANAGEMENT AND RESOURCES       (vacancy)




Bureaus Reporting to the Secretary


 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Intelligence and Research                                    Ellen E. McCarthy


 Legislative Affairs                                          Mary Elizabeth Taylor




Offices Reporting to the Secretary


 AMBASSADORS-AT-LARGE


 Coordinating U.S. Government Activities to Combat HIV/AIDS   Deborah L. Birx


 Global Women's Issues                                        Kelley E. Currie




 DIRECTORS


 Civil Rights                                                 Gregory B. Smith


 Policy Planning                                              Peter Berkowitz




 Chief of Protocol                                            Katherine C. Henderson
 Legal Adviser                                                                          Marik A. String, Acting




Special Envoys and Representatives Reporting to the Secretary


 PRESIDENTIAL ENVOYS


 Global Coalition to Defeat ISIS                                                        James F. Jeffrey


 Hostage Affairs                                                                        Roger D. Carstens




 REPRESENTATIVES


 Afghanistan Reconciliation                                                             Zalmay M. Khalilzad


 Global Health Diplomacy                                                                Deborah L. Birx


 Iran                                                                                   Brian H. Hook


 North Korea                                                                            Stephen E. Biegun


 Syria Engagement                                                                       James F. Jeffrey


 Venezuela                                                                              Elliott Abrams

https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/bureaus-and-offices-reporting-directly-to-the-secretary



Arms Control and International Security


 UNDERSECRETARY                                                                         (vacancy)




 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Arms Control, Verification and Compliance                                              Thomas G. DiNanno


 International Security and Nonproliferation                                            Christopher A. Ford


 Political–Military Affairs                                                             R. Clarke Cooper

https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-secretary-for-arms-control-and-international-security-affairs



Civilian Security, Democracy, and Human Rights
 UNDERSECRETARY                                                                      Nathan A. Sales, Acting




 AMBASSADORS–AT–LARGE


 Counterterrorism and Countering Violent Extremism                                   Nathan A. Sales


 Global Criminal Justice                                                             Morse H. Tan


 International Religious Freedom                                                     Samuel D. Brownback


 Monitoring and Combating Trafficking in Persons                                     John C. Richmond




 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Conflict and Stabilization Operations                                               Denise Natali


 Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor                                                  Robert A. Destro


 International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs                                 Kirsten D. Madison


 Population, Refugees, and Migration                                                 Carol O'Connell, Acting

https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-secretary-for-civilian-security-democracy-and-human-rights



Economic Growth, Energy, and the Environment


 UNDERSECRETARY                                                                      Keith J. Krach




 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Economic and Business Affairs                                                       Manisha Singh


 Energy Resources                                                                    Francis R. Fannon


 Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs                       (vacancy)




 Chief Economist                                                                     Sharon Brown-Hruska
 Science and Technology Adviser to the Secretary                                  Mung Chiang

https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-secretary-for-economic-growth-energy-and-the-environment



Management


 UNDERSECRETARY                                                                   Brian J. Bulatao




 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Administration                                                                   Carrie B. Cabelka


 Consular Affairs                                                                 Carl C. Risch


 Diplomatic Security                                                              Michael T. Evanoff


 Information Resource Management                                                  Stuart M. McGuigan




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Information                                                                      Stuart M. McGuigan


 Medical                                                                          Mark J. Cohen




 DIRECTORS


 Budget and Planning                                                              Douglas A. Pitkin


 Foreign Missions                                                                 Stephen J. Akard


 Foreign Service Institute                                                        Daniel B. Smith


 Global Financial Services                                                        Jeffrey C. Mounts, Acting


 Global Talent                                                                    Carol Z. Perez


 Management Strategy and Solutions                                                James S. Schwab


 Medical Services                                                                 Mark J. Cohen


 Overseas Buildings Operations                                                    Addison D. Davis IV
  Comptroller                                                                         Jeffrey C. Mounts, Acting


  Director General of the Foreign Service                                             Carol Z. Perez

https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-secretary-for-management/bureau-of-administration



Political Affairs


  UNDERSECRETARY                                                                      David M. Hale




  ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


  African Affairs                                                                     Tibor P. Nagy, Jr.


  East Asian and Pacific Affairs                                                      David R. Stilwell


  European and Eurasian Affairs                                                       Philip T. Reeker, Acting


  International Organization Affairs                                                  Pamela D. Pryor, Acting


  Near Eastern Affairs                                                                David K. Schenker


  South and Central Asian Affairs                                                     (vacancy)


  Western Hemisphere Affairs                                                          Michael G. Kozak, Acting

https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-secretary-for-political-affairs



Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs


  UNDERSECRETARY                                                                      (vacancy)




  ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


  Global Public Affairs                                                               Nicole A. Chulick, Acting


  Educational and Cultural Affairs                                                    Marie T. Royce

https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-secretary-for-public-diplomacy-and-public-affairs
UNITED STATES MISSION TO THE UNITED NATIONS



799 United Nations Plaza, New York, NY 10017


  AMBASSADORS


  Representative of the U.S.A.                                                          Kelly Knight Craft


                                                                                        Cherith Norman Chalet,
  Deputy Representative of the U.S.A.
                                                                                        Acting


  United Nations Management and Reform                                                  Cherith Norman Chalet

https://usun.usmission.gov/our-leaders

  Inspector General                                                                     (vacancy)


https://www.stateoig.gov/about/IG



The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2020.

The Department of State advises the President on issues of foreign policy; supports democracy, freedom, and prosperity

for all people; and fosters conditions that favor stability and progress worldwide.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The First Congress of the United States held its first session in the City of New York, starting on March 4, 1789, and

ending on September 29, 1789. By act of July 27, 1789 (Statute I, Ch. IV), which President George Washington signed,

the U.S. Congress enacted the establishment of an executive department "to be denominated the Department of

Foreign Affairs."

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/1st-congress/c1.pdf
During the same session, by act of September 15, 1789 (Statute I, Ch. XIV), which President George Washington also

signed, the First Congress renamed the Department of Foreign Affairs as the Department of State, and its principal

officer became known as the Secretary of State.

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/1st-congress/c1.pdf
Subject matter on the establishment and organization of the Department of State is consolidated and codified in Title

22, Chapter 38, of the U.S. Code (Sec. 2651 and 2651a).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title22/chapter38&edition=prelim
By the advice and with the consent of the Senate, the President appoints the Secretary of State, the Deputy Secretary
of State, and the Deputy Secretary of State for Management and Resources. By the Senate's advice and with its

consent, the President also appoints, up to a maximum of six, the Department's Undersecretaries (22 USC 2651a).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title22-section2651a&num=0&edition=prelim
The Department of State's statement of organization is found in 22 CFR 5.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=9fcaa112da47aad8595acce6fd09ca0e&mc=true&node=pt22.1.5&rgn=div5
The Department's organizational chart is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.state.gov/department-of-state-organization-chart



ACTIVITIES
The Secretary of State directs, coordinates, and supervises U.S. foreign relations and the interdepartmental activities of

the U.S. Government abroad. The Secretary ranks first in importance among the President's foreign affairs advisers,

serves as a Cabinet member and on the National Security Council, and oversees State Department operations,

including the Foreign Service.

http://www.state.gov/secretary
The future of the United States depends on the relations that its has with other countries. The U.S. Foreign Service is

the principal cultivator of those relations. Trained representatives stationed worldwide provide the President and the

Secretary of State with many of the building blocks from which foreign policy is constructed. These representatives also

offer recommendations to help guide the process of policy building.


Ambassadors are the personal representatives of the President and report to the President through the Secretary of

State. Ambassadors have full responsibility for implementation of U.S. foreign policy by U.S. Government personnel

within their country of assignment, except those who are under military commands. Responsibilities include

negotiating agreements between the United States and the host country, explaining and disseminating official U.S.

policy, and maintaining cordial relations with that country's government and people.


Administration
The Bureau of Administration provides support programs and services to Department of State operations worldwide,

as well as programs and services to other U.S. Government agencies represented at U.S. Embassies and consulates.

These functions include administrative policy; domestic emergency management; management of owned or leased

facilities in the United States; procurement, supply, travel, and transportation support; classified pouch, unclassified

pouch, and domestic mail distribution; official records, publishing, library, and foreign language interpreting and

translating services; and support to the schools abroad that educate dependents of U.S. Government employees

assigned to diplomatic and consular missions. Direct services to the public include authenticating documents used

abroad for legal and business purposes; responding to requests under the Freedom of Information and Privacy Acts;

providing the electronic reading room for public reference to State Department records; and determining use of the

diplomatic reception rooms of the Harry S. Truman headquarters building in Washington, DC.

https://www.state.gov/about-us-bureau-of-administration

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Administration. Phone, 202-485-7000.
Arms Control, Verification, and Compliance
The Bureau of Arms Control, Verification and Compliance is responsible for ensuring and verifying compliance with

international arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament agreements and commitments. The Bureau also leads

negotiation and implementation efforts with respect to strategic arms control, most recently the new START Treaty and

conventional forces in Europe. The Bureau is the principal policy representative to the intelligence community with

regard to verification and compliance matters and uses this role to promote, preserve, and enhance key collection and

analytic capabilities and to ensure that intelligence verification, compliance, and implementation requirements are met.

The Bureau staffs and manages treaty implementation commissions, creates negotiation and implementation policy for

agreements and commitments, and develops policy for future arms control, nonproliferation, and disarmament

arrangements. It also provides secure government-to-government communication linkages with foreign treaty

partners. The Bureau is also responsible for preparing verifiability assessments on proposals and agreements, and

reporting these to Congress as required. The Bureau also prepares the "President's Annual Report to Congress on

Adherence to and Compliance With Arms Control, Nonproliferation, and Disarmament Agreements and

Commitments," as well as the reports required by the Iran, North Korea, and Syria Nonproliferation Act.

http://www.state.gov/t/avc

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Arms Control, Verification and Compliance. Phone, 202-
  647-6830. Fax, 202-647-1321.



Budget and Planning
The Bureau of Budget and Planning manages budgeting and resource management for operation accounts.

https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-secretary-for-management/bureau-of-budget-and-planning

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Budget and Planning. Phone, 202-647-8517.



Comptroller and Global Financial Services
The Bureau of the Comptroller and Global Financial Services, led by the Chief Financial Officer, integrates strategic

planning, budgeting, and performance to secure departmental resources. The Bureau manages all departmental

strategic and performance planning; global financial services, including accounting, disbursing, and payroll; issuance of

financial statements and oversight of the Department's management control program; coordination of national

security resources and remediation of vulnerabilities within the Department's global critical infrastructure; and

management of the International Cooperative Administrative Support Services Program.

http://www.state.gov/m/cgfs

  For further information, contact the Bureau of the Comptroller and Global Financial Services. Phone, 703-
  875-4364.



Conflict and Stabilization Operations
The Bureau of Conflict and Stabilization Operations advances U.S. national security by driving integrated, civilian-led
efforts to prevent, respond to, and stabilize crises in priority states, setting conditions for long-term peace. The Bureau

emphasizes sustainable solutions guided by local dynamics and actors and promotes unity of effort, strategic use of

scarce resources, and burden sharing with international partners.

http://www.state.gov/j/cso

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Conflict Stabilization Operations. Phone, 202-663-0299.



Consular Affairs
The Bureau of Consular Affairs is responsible for the protection and welfare of American citizens and interests abroad;

the administration and enforcement of the provisions of the immigration and nationality laws insofar as they concern

the Department of State and Foreign Service; the issuance of passports and visas; and related services. Approximately

18 million passports a year are issued by the Bureau's Office of Passport Services at the processing centers in

Portsmouth, NH, and Charleston, SC, and the regional agencies in Boston, MA; Chicago, IL; Aurora, CO; Honolulu, HI;

Houston, TX; Los Angeles, CA; Miami, FL; New Orleans, LA; New York, NY; Philadelphia, PA; San Francisco, CA; Seattle,

WA; Norwalk, CT; Detroit, MI; Minneapolis, MN; and Washington, DC. In addition, the Bureau helps secure America's

borders against entry by terrorists or narcotraffickers, facilitates international adoptions, and supports parents whose

children have been abducted abroad.

http://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en.html

  More information is available online at the Bureau of Consular Affairs.



Counterterrorism
The Bureau of Counterterrorism leads the Department in the U.S. Government's effort to counter terrorism abroad

and secure the United States against foreign terrorist threats. To carry out its mission, the Bureau develops and

implements counterterrorism strategies, promotes international cooperation on counterterrorism issues, serves as the

Department’s key link on counterterrorism to the Department of Homeland Security, focuses efforts to counter violent

extremism, and develops international partner counterterrorism capacity.

http://www.state.gov/j/ct

  For further information, contact CT’s Office of Public Affairs. Phone, 202-647-1845.



Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor
The Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor (DRL) is responsible for developing and implementing U.S. policy

on democracy, human rights, labor, religious freedom, monitoring and combating anti-Semitism, and advocating for

inclusion of people with disabilities. DRL practices diplomatic engagement and advocacy to protect human rights and

strengthen democratic institutions. Working with governments, civil society, and multilateral organizations to support

democratic governance and human rights, the Bureau also participates in multi-stakeholder initiatives to encourage

multinational corporations to adhere to human rights standards of conduct, including the elimination of child labor.

DRL fulfills the USG reporting responsibilities on human rights and democracy, producing the annual "Country Reports
on Human Rights Practices," the annual "International Religious Freedom" report, and the "Advancing Freedom and

Democracy" report. Providing targeted program assistance through the Human Rights and Democracy Fund and

other funding streams, the Bureau works to protect human rights and strengthen democratic institutions around the

world. DRL programs help prosecute war criminals, promote religious freedom, support workers' rights, encourage

accountability in governance, as well as facilitate freedom of expression and freedom to access information on the

Internet. The Bureau also has a Congressionally mandated responsibility to ensure that foreign military assistance and

training is not provided to gross violators of human rights. DRL leads the Secretary of State's Task Force on Global

Internet Freedom.

http://www.state.gov/j/drl

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor. Phone, 202-647-
  2126.



Diplomatic Security
The Bureau of Diplomatic Security provides a secure environment to promote U.S. interests at home and abroad. The

Bureau's mission includes protecting the Secretary of State and other senior Government officials, resident and visiting

foreign dignitaries, and foreign missions in the United States; conducting criminal, counterintelligence, and personnel

security investigations; ensuring the integrity of international travel documents, sensitive information, classified

processing equipment, and management information systems; the physical and technical protection of domestic and

overseas facilities of the Department of State; providing professional law enforcement and security training to U.S. and

foreign personnel; and a comprehensive, multifaceted overseas security program serving the needs of U.S. missions

and resident U.S. citizens and business communities. Through the Office of Foreign Missions, the Bureau regulates the

domestic activities of the foreign diplomatic community in the areas of taxation, real property acquisitions, motor

vehicle operation, domestic travel, and customs processing.

http://www.state.gov/m/ds

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Diplomatic Security Office of Public Affairs. Phone, 571-
  345-2502.



Economic and Business Affairs
The Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs (EB) promotes international trade, investment, economic development,

and financial stability on behalf of the American people. EB works to build prosperity and economic security at home

and abroad by implementing policy related to the promotion of U.S. trade, investment and exports, international

development and reconstruction, intellectual property enforcement, terrorism financing and economic sanctions,

international communications and information policy, and aviation and maritime affairs. EB formulates and carries out

U.S. foreign economic policy and works to sustain a more democratic, secure, and prosperous world.

http://www.state.gov/e/eb

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Economic and Business Affairs. Phone, 202-647-9204.
Educational and Cultural Affairs
The Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs administers the principal provisions of the Mutual Educational and

Cultural Exchange Act (the Fulbright-Hays Act), including U.S. international educational and cultural exchange

programs. These programs include the prestigious Fulbright Program for students, scholars, and teachers; the

International Visitor Leadership Program, which brings leaders and future leaders from other countries to the United

States for consultation with their professional colleagues; and professional, youth, sports, and cultural exchanges.

Programs are implemented through cooperative relationships with U.S. nongovernmental organizations that support

the Bureau's mission.

http://exchanges.state.gov

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs. Phone, 202-632-6445.
  Fax, 202-632-2701.



Energy Resources
The Bureau of Energy Resources (ENR) leads the State Department in the U.S. Government’s promotion of U.S. and

international energy policy. ENR works to ensure that international energy markets are secure and predictable in order

to mitigate potential disruptions, while also working with international partners to diversify U.S. energy supplies. The

Bureau also seeks to encourage the transformation of United States and world production and consumption of energy

to confront the limits of a hydrocarbon-based society and rapid increases in energy demand. ENR works to promote

good governance, transparency, and reform of energy sectors globally, which will help broaden energy access, further

ensure stable energy supplies, and reduce political instability.

http://www.state.gov/e/enr

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Energy Resources. Phone, 202-647-3423.



Foreign Service Institute
The Foreign Service Institute of the Department of State is the Federal Government's primary foreign affairs-related

training institution. In addition to the Department of State, the Institute provides training for more than 47 other

Government agencies. The Institute has more than 700 courses, including some 70 foreign language courses, ranging

in length from 1 day to 2 years. The courses are designed to promote successful performance in each professional

assignment, to ease the adjustment to other countries and cultures, and to enhance the leadership and management

capabilities of the foreign affairs community.

https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-secretary-for-management/foreign-service-institute

  For further information, contact the Foreign Service Institute. Phone, 703-302-7144. Fax, 703-302-7152.



Information Resource Management
The Bureau of Information Resource Management (IRM) provides the Department with the information technology it

needs to carry out U.S. diplomacy in the information age. The IRM Bureau is led by the Department's Chief
Information Officer. IRM establishes effective information resource management planning and policies; ensures

availability of information technology systems and operations, including information technology contingency planning,

to support the Department's diplomatic, consular, and management operations; exercises management responsibility

to ensure the Department's information resources meet the business requirements of the Department and provide an

effective basis for knowledge sharing and collaboration within the Department and with other foreign affairs agencies

and partners; exercises delegated approving authority for the Secretary of State for the development and

administration of the Department's computer and information security programs and policies.

http://www.state.gov/m/irm

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Information Resource Management. Phone, 202-647-2977.



Inspector General
The Office of Inspector General (OIG) conducts independent audits, inspections, and investigations to promote

effective management, accountability, and positive change in the Department of State, the Broadcasting Board of

Governors (BBG), and the foreign affairs community. OIG provides leadership to promote integrity, efficiency,

effectiveness, and economy; prevents and detects waste, fraud, abuse, and mismanagement; identifies vulnerabilities

and recommends constructive solutions; offers expert assistance to improve Department and BBG operations;

communicates timely, useful information that facilitates decision-making and achieves measurable gains; and keeps

the Department, BBG, and Congress informed.

https://oig.state.gov

  For further information, contact the Office of Inspector General. Phone, 202-663-0340.



Intelligence and Research
The primary mission of the Bureau of Intelligence and Research (INR) is to harness intelligence to serve U.S. diplomacy.

Drawing on all-source intelligence, INR provides value-added independent analysis of events to Department

policymakers, ensures that intelligence activities support foreign policy and national security purposes, and serves as

the focal point in the Department for ensuring policy review of sensitive counterintelligence and law enforcement

activities. The Bureau also analyzes geographical and international boundary issues. INR is a member of the U.S.

Intelligence Community and serves as the Community’s Executive Agent for Analytical Outreach.

http://www.state.gov/s/inr

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Intelligence and Research. Phone, 202-647-1080.



International Narcotics and Law Enforcement
The Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs (INL) is responsible for developing policies and

managing programs to combat and counter international narcotics production and trafficking, and for strengthening

law enforcement and other rule of law institutional capabilities outside the United States. The Bureau also directs

narcotics control coordinators at posts abroad and provides guidance on narcotics control, justice sector reform, and
anticrime matters to the chiefs of missions. It supports the development of strong, sustainable criminal justice systems

as well as training for police force and judicial officials. INL works closely with a broad range of other U.S. Government

agencies.

http://www.state.gov/j/inl

  For further information, contact the Bureau of International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs.
  Phone, 202-647-2545. Fax, 202-736-4045.



International Organizations
The Bureau of International Organization Affairs provides guidance and support for U.S. participation in international

organizations and conferences and formulates and implements U.S. policy toward international organizations, with

particular emphasis on those organizations which make up the United Nations system. It provides direction in the

development, coordination, and implementation of U.S. multilateral policy.

http://www.state.gov/p/io

  For further information, contact the Bureau of International Organization Affairs. Phone, 202-647-9600.
  Fax, 202-736-4116.



International Security and Nonproliferation
The Bureau of International Security and Nonproliferation (ISN), is responsible for managing a broad range of

nonproliferation, counterproliferation, and arms control functions. ISN leads U.S. efforts to prevent the spread of

weapons of mass destruction (nuclear, radiological, chemical, and biological weapons) related materials, and their

delivery systems. It is responsible for spearheading efforts to promote international consensus on weapons of mass

destruction proliferation through bilateral and multilateral diplomacy; addressing weapons of mass destruction

proliferation threats posed by nonstate actors and terrorist groups by improving physical security, using interdiction

and sanctions, and actively participating in the Proliferation Security Initiative; coordinating the implementation of key

international treaties and arrangements, working to make them relevant to today's security challenges; working closely

with the U.N., the G–8, NATO, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the International Atomic

Energy Agency, and other international institutions and organizations to reduce and eliminate the threat posed by

weapons of mass destruction; and supporting efforts of foreign partners to prevent, protect against, and respond to

the threat or use of weapons of mass destruction by terrorists.

http://www.state.gov/t/isn

  For further information, contact the Bureau of International Security and Nonproliferation. Phone, 202-
  647-9868. Fax, 202-736-4863.



Legal Adviser
The Office of the Legal Adviser advises the Secretary of State and other Department officials on all domestic and

international legal matters relating to the Department of State, Foreign Service, and diplomatic and consular posts

abroad. The Office's lawyers draft, negotiate, and interpret treaties, international agreements, domestic statutes,

departmental regulations, Executive orders, and other legal documents; provide guidance on international and
domestic law; represent the United States in international organization, negotiation, and treaty commission meetings;

work on domestic and foreign litigation affecting the Department's interests; and represent the United States before

international tribunals, including the International Court of Justice.

http://www.state.gov/s/l

  For further information, contact the Office of the Legal Adviser. Phone, 202-647-9598.



Legislative Affairs
The Bureau of Legislative Affairs coordinates legislative activity for the Department of State and advises the Secretary,

the Deputy, as well as the Under Secretaries and Assistant Secretaries on legislative strategy. The Bureau facilitates

effective communication between State Department officials and the Members of Congress and their staffs. Legislative

Affairs works closely with the authorizing, appropriations, and oversight committees of the House and Senate, as well

as with individual Members that have an interest in State Department or foreign policy issues. The Bureau also

manages Department testimony before House and Senate hearings, organizes Member and staff briefings, facilitates

congressional travel to overseas posts for Members and staff throughout the year, reviews proposed legislation, and

coordinates Statements of Administration Policy on legislation affecting the conduct of U.S. foreign policy. The

Legislative Affairs staff advises individual Bureaus of the Department on legislative and outreach strategies and

coordinates those strategies with the Secretary's priorities.

https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/bureaus-and-offices-reporting-directly-to-the-secretary/bureau-of-legislative-
affairs

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Legislative Affairs. Phone, 202-647-1714.



Medical Services
The Office of Medical Services (MED) develops, manages, and staffs a worldwide primary health care system for U.S.

Government employees and their eligible dependents residing overseas. In support of its overseas operations, MED

approves and monitors the medical evacuation of patients, conducts pre-employment and in-service physical

clearance examinations, and provides clinical referral and advisory services. MED also provides for emergency medical

response in the event of a crisis at an overseas post.

https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-secretary-for-management/bureau-of-medical-services

  For further information, contact the Office of Medical Services. Phone, 202-663-1649. Fax, 202-663-1613.



Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs
The Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs (OES) serves as the foreign policy focal

point for international oceans, as well as environmental and scientific efforts. OES projects, protects, and promotes U.S.

global interests in these areas by articulating U.S. foreign policy, encouraging international cooperation, and

negotiating treaties and other instruments of international law. The Bureau serves as the principal adviser to the

Secretary of State on international environment, science, and technology matters and takes the lead in coordinating
and brokering diverse interests in the interagency process, where the development of international policies or the

negotiation and implementation of relevant international agreements are concerned. The Bureau seeks to promote

the peaceful exploitation of outer space, develop and coordinate policy on international health issues, encourage

government-to-government scientific cooperation, and prevent the destruction and degradation of the planet's

natural resources and the global environment.

http://www.state.gov/e/oes

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific
  Affairs. Phone, 202-647-3004.



Overseas Buildings Operations
The Bureau of Overseas Buildings Operations (OBO) directs the worldwide overseas buildings program for the

Department of State and the U.S. Government community serving abroad under the authority of the chiefs of mission.

Along with the input and support of other State Department bureaus, foreign affairs agencies, and Congress, OBO

sets worldwide priorities for the design, construction, acquisition, maintenance, use, and sale of real properties and the

use of sales proceeds. OBO also serves as the Single Real Property Manager of all overseas facilities under the

authority of the chiefs of mission.

http://overseasbuildings.state.gov

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Overseas Buildings Operations. Phone, 703-875-4131. Fax,
  703-875-5043.



Political-Military Affairs
The Bureau of Political-Military Affairs is the principal link between the Departments of State and Defense and is the

Department of State's lead on operational military matters. The Bureau provides policy direction in the areas of

international security, security assistance, military operations, defense strategy and policy, counterpiracy measures, and

defense trade. Its responsibilities include coordinating the U.S. Government’s response to piracy in the waters off the

Horn of Africa, securing base access to support the deployment of U.S. military forces overseas, negotiating status of

forces agreements, coordinating participation in coalition combat and stabilization forces, regulating arms transfers,

directing military assistance to U.S. allies, combating illegal trafficking in small arms and light weapons, facilitating the

education and training of international peacekeepers and foreign military personnel, managing humanitarian mine

action programs, and assisting other countries in reducing the availability of man-portable air defense systems.

http://www.state.gov/t/pm

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Political-Military Affairs. Phone, 202-647-9022. Fax, 202-
  736-4413.



Population, Refugees, and Migration
The Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration directs the Department's population, refugee, and migration policy

development. It administers U.S. contributions to international organizations and nongovernmental organizations for

humanitarian assistance- and protection-related programs on behalf of refugees, conflict victims, and internally
displaced persons. The Bureau oversees the annual admissions of refugees to the United States for permanent

resettlement, working closely with the Department of Homeland Security, the Department of Health and Human

Services, and various State and private voluntary agencies. It coordinates U.S. international population policy and

promotes its goals through bilateral and multilateral cooperation. It works closely with the U.S. Agency for International

Development, which administers U.S. international population programs. The Bureau also coordinates the

Department's international migration policy through bilateral and multilateral diplomacy. The Bureau oversees efforts

to encourage greater participation in humanitarian assistance and refugee resettlement on the part of foreign

governments and uses humanitarian diplomacy to increase access and assistance to those in need in the absence of

political solutions.

https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-secretary-for-civilian-security-democracy-and-human-rights/bureau-of-
population-refugees-and-migration

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration. Phone, 202-453-
  9339. Fax, 202-453-9394.



Protocol
The Chief of Protocol is the principal adviser to the U.S. Government, the President, the Vice President, and the

Secretary of State on matters of diplomatic procedure governed by law or international custom and practice. The

Office is responsible for arranging visits of foreign chiefs of state, heads of government, and other high officials to the

United States; organizing credential presentations of newly arrived Ambassadors, as presented to the President and to

the Secretary of State; operating the President's guest house, Blair House; organizing delegations representing the

President at official ceremonies abroad; conducting official ceremonial functions and public events; interpreting the

official order of precedence; conducting outreach programs of cultural enrichment and substantive briefings of the

Diplomatic Corps; accrediting of over 118,000 embassy, consular, international organization, and other foreign

government personnel, members of their families, and domestics throughout the United States; determining

entitlement to diplomatic or consular immunity; publishing of diplomatic and consular lists; resolving problems arising

out of diplomatic or consular immunity, such as legal and police matters; and approving the opening of embassy and

consular offices in conjunction with the Office of Foreign Missions.

http://www.state.gov/s/cpr

  For further information, contact the Office of the Chief of Protocol. Phone, 202-647-1735. Fax, 202-647-
  1560.



Public Affairs
The Bureau of Public Affairs (PA) supports U.S. foreign policy goals and objectives, advances national interests, and

enhances National security by informing and influencing domestic and global public opinion about American

interaction with the rest of the world. In addition, PA works to help Americans understand the importance of foreign

affairs by conducting press briefings for the domestic and foreign press, pursuing media outreach by other means,

arranging townhall meetings and community speakers, and preparing historical studies on U.S. diplomacy and foreign

affairs matters.
http://www.state.gov/r/pa

  For further information, contact the Bureau of Public Affairs. Phone, 202-647-6575.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Air Quality Worldwide
AirNow–Department of State collects air quality monitoring data globally from U.S. embassies and consulates.

https://airnow.gov/index.cfm?action=airnow.global_summary

Archived Records
The records of the Department are referenced in the "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United

States." The Guide is accessible online, and its records belong to Record Group 059.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/059.html

Art in Embassies (AIE)
The Department's AIE program stimulates cross-cultural dialogue and mutual understanding through the visual arts

and artist exchanges. The program develops and presents approximately 60 exhibitions per year and has installed over

70 permanent art collections in the Department’s diplomatic facilities in over 200 venues in 189 countries.

https://art.state.gov

Blog
"DipNote," the Department of State's official blog, offers first-person perspectives from U.S. Government employees

who are working to shape and sustain a peaceful, prosperous, just, and democratic world and to foster stability and

progress for people of every nation.

https://blogs.state.gov

Business Opportunities
Direct Line allows U.S. businessmen and women to hear directly from U.S. Ambassadors and economic and

commercial experts at Embassies and consulates in over 190 countries. Direct line can help U.S. businessmen and

women identify promising market sectors and U.S. exporters capitalize on new opportunities.

https://www.state.gov/direct-line-for-american-business
The Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization works with industry partners, the acquisition corps, and

program offices to increase prime and subcontracting opportunities for U.S. small businesses. Phone, 703-875-6822.

http://www.state.gov/s/dmr/sdbu/index.htm

Career Opportunities
To learn about joining the Civil Service, becoming a Foreign Service Specialist, the Consular Fellows Program, and

other opportunities, visit the "Job Seekers" web page. Information of interest to students, recent graduates, veterans,

and persons with disabilities is also accessible online. State Department personnel are available to answer questions on
Federal workdays, 8:30 a.m.–4:30 p.m., eastern standard time. Phone, 202-663-2176.

https://www.state.gov/job-seekers
In 2019, the Department of State ranked 13th among 17 large agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/ST00

Climate Change
The Office of Global Change implements and manages U.S. international policy on climate change. It also represents

the United States in negotiations under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and in other

international fora that focus on the topic, including the International Civil Aviation Organization and the International

Maritime Organization.

https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-secretary-for-economic-growth-energy-and-the-environment/bureau-
of-oceans-and-international-environmental-and-scientific-affairs/office-of-global-change

Contact Information
An online visitor to the website may submit a question, using the electronic form on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://register.state.gov/contactus/contactusform

DIPLOMATS@work
This experience provides insight into the distinct responsibilities of Foreign Service Officers in each of the five career

tracks during a crisis situation in Vendurasaca, a fictitious country designed to represent an overseas location in which

a U.S. embassy or consulate is located

https://careers.state.gov/daw/diplomats-at-work

Embassies
Contact information for U.S. Embassies, consulates, and diplomatic missions worldwide is available online.

https://www.usembassy.gov

Emergencies Abroad
The Bureau of Consular Affairs posts information for emergency travel-related situations abroad.

https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/international-travel/emergencies.html

Federal Register
Significant documents, from 1995 (volume 60) to the present, and recent documents that the Department has

published in the Federal Register are available online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/state-department

Foreign Affairs Manual (FAM) / Foreign Affairs Handbooks (FAHs)
The (FAM) and (FAHs) are a single, comprehensive, and authoritative source for the Department's organization

structures, policies, and procedures that govern the operations of the State Department, the Foreign Service, and,

when applicable, other Federal agencies. The FAM, which centers on policy, and the FAHs, which center on

procedures, convey codified information to Department staff and contractors, enabling them to carry out their
responsibilities in accordance with statutory, executive, and Department mandates.

https://fam.state.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To request records, write to the Director, Office of Information Programs and Services, A/GIS/IPS/RL, Department of

State, SA–2, Washington, DC 20522-8100. For more information, contact the FOIA Requester Service Center. Phone,

202-261-8484.

https://foia.state.gov/Default.aspx
The Department of State maintains an online reading room that contains over 220,000 documents. Before submitting

a FOIA request, search the reading room to see if the desired document is accessible immediately and free of charge.

https://foia.state.gov/Search/Search.aspx

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Department of State posts answers to FAQs.

https://careers.state.gov/faqs
The Office of the Historian posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://history.state.gov/about/faq

Geographic Bureaus
The geographic bureaus, which include the Bureaus of African, East Asian and Pacific, European and Eurasian, Near

Eastern, South and Central Asian, and Western Hemisphere Affairs handle foreign affairs activities worldwide.

https://www.state.gov/bureaus-offices/under-secretary-for-political-affairs

History
The Office of the Historian maintains an online guide to the United States' history of recognition, diplomatic, and

consular relations by country. The database begins with the year 1776.

https://history.state.gov/countries | Email: history@state.gov
The Office of the Historian also maintains an online index to diplomatic archives worldwide.

https://history.state.gov/countries/archives | Email: history@state.gov

International Adoptions
For information on adoption of foreign children by private U.S. citizens, contact the Office of Children's Issues, Bureau

of Consular Affairs, Department of State, SA–29, 2201 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20520-4818. Phone, 888-407-

4747 or 202-501-4444 (international).

http://travel.state.gov/content/adoptionsabroad/en.html

Open Government
The Department of State supports the Open Government initiative by promoting collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

https://www.state.gov/open-government-initiative

Passports
Information on the application process for a new passport and on the renewal process for an expiring passport is

available online. Lost or stolen passports may be reported online. Phone, 877-487-2778. TDD/TTY, 888-874-7793

https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/passports.html | Email: NPIC@state.gov

Press Releases
The Office of the Spokesperson releases factsheets, media notes, notices to the press, and statements on a daily basis.

https://www.state.gov/press-releases

Programs by State
State Department programs affect American communities. The "Department of State by State" web pages describe

some of the effects by offering State-by-State statistics.

https://www.state.gov/department-of-state-by-state

Publications
The Bureau of Human Resources publishes "State Magazine" monthly, except bimonthly in July and August. The

magazine has an informative character and should not be regarded as authority for official action. Views and opinions

expressed in "State Magazine" are not necessarily those of the Department of State.

https://statemag.state.gov | Email: statemagazine@state.gov

Social Media
The "Press" web page presents links to the Department's social media accounts under the "Join Us" section heading.

Using the "Press" web page, a visitor can access easily the official blog "Dipnote," Facebook, Flickr, Instagram, Twitter,

YouTube, and a form for subscribing to email updates.

https://www.state.gov/press

Telephone Directory
The Department's telephone directory can be accessed online.

https://www.state.gov/telephone-directory

Tips for U.S. Travelers
Information for Americans traveling abroad—including a traveler's checklist and tips on destinations, personal safety,

health, and other topics—is available online from the Bureau of Consular Affairs.

http://travel.state.gov/content/passports/english/go.html

Travel Advisories and Alerts
The Bureau of Consular Affairs website posts travel advisories, alerts, and other information to help Americans travel

safely abroad.

http://travel.state.gov/content/passports/en/alertswarnings.html

Visas
For information on visas for foreigners wishing to enter the United States, visit the Bureau of Consular Affairs online or

call 603-334-0700.
     http://nvc.state.gov

        The Sources of Information were updated 6–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                            Department of Transportation
                                           Federal Aviation Administration
                                           Federal Highway Administration
                                     Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
                                           Federal Railroad Administration
                                            Federal Transit Administration
                            Great Lakes Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation
                                               Maritime Administration
                                    National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
                               Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
    1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590
202-366-4000

http://www.dot.gov


 SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION                                            Sean Duffy


 Deputy Secretary                                                       Polly E. Trottenberg




 Chief of Staff                                                         Laura Schiller


 Under Secretary of Transportation for Policy                           Carlos Monje, Jr.


https://www.transportation.gov/office-of-secretary



Assistant Secretaries


 Administration                                                         Philip A. McNamara


 Aviation and International Affairs                                     Carol A. Petsonk*


 Finance and Budget                                                     Victoria B. Wassmer*


 Governmental Affairs                                                   Mohsin Syed*


 Research and Technology                                                Robert C. Hampshire*


 Transportation Policy                                                  Christopher Coes*




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Financial                                                              (vacancy)


 Legal                                                                  John E. Putnam, Acting




 General Counsel                                                        John E. Putnam, Acting


 * Principal Deputy Assistant Secretary or Deputy Assistant Secretary


https://www.transportation.gov/mission/meet-key-officials
Heads of Administrations


  Federal Aviation                                    Steve Dickson


  Federal Highways                                    Stephanie Pollack, Acting


  Federal Motor Carrier Safety                        Meera Joshi*


  Federal Railroads                                   Amit Bose*


  Federal Transit                                     Nuria Fernandez


  Maritime                                            Lucinda Lessley, Acting


  National Highway Traffic Safety                     Steven Cliff, Acting


  Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety             Tristan Brown, Acting




  Great Lakes St. Lawrence Seaway Development         Craig H. Middlebrook*


  * Deputy Administrator


https://www.transportation.gov/administrations



Heads of Offices


  DIRECTORS


  Civil Rights                                        Irene Marion


  Executive Secretariat                               Justine Hong


  Intelligence, Security and Emergency Response       Richard M. Chávez


  Public Affairs                                      Dani Simons


  Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization        Shelby M. Scales




  Chief Information Officer                           Cordell Schachter

https://www.transportation.gov/policy/key-officials
  Inspector General                                                                         Eric J. Soskin


https://www.oig.dot.gov/about-oig/inspector-general



  The above list of key personnel was updated 9–2021.



The Department of Transportation establishes national transportation policy for highway planning and construction,

motor carrier safety, urban mass transit, railroads, aviation, and the safety of waterways, ports, highways, and pipelines.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On October 15, 1966, President Lyndon B. Johnson approved Public Law 89–670, which also is cited as the Department

of Transportation Act, "to establish a Department of Transportation [DOT] and for other purposes." The U.S. Congress

had found that the establishment of a DOT was necessary "to assure the coordinated, effective administration of the

transportation programs of the Federal Government; to facilitate the development and improvement of coordinated

transportation service, to be provided by private enterprise to the maximum extent feasible; to encourage cooperation

of Federal, State, and local governments, carriers, labor, and other interested parties toward the achievement of

national transportation objectives; to stimulate technological advances in transportation; to provide general leadership

in the identification and solution of transportation problems; and to develop and recommend to the President and the

Congress for approval national transportation policies and programs to accomplish these objectives with full and

appropriate consideration of the needs of the public, users, carriers, industry, labor, and the national defense." It also

contained the following declaration of national policy: "Special effort should be made to preserve the natural beauty of

the countryside and public park and recreation lands, wildlife and waterfowl refuges, and historic sites" (80 Stat. 931).

The Nation's DOT had its first official day of operation on April 1, 1967.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-80/pdf/STATUTE-80-Pg931.pdf
The President appoints the Secretary of Transportation by the advice and with the consent of the Senate (80 Stat. 931).

The Secretary, who serves as the principal adviser to the President in all Federal transportation program matters,

administers the DOT. The Under Secretary for Policy serves as a principal policy adviser to the Secretary and provides

leadership in policy development for the Department.


The DOT's statement of organization has been assigned to subpart A of part 1 in 49 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=e53320fbfd2ae88a9b5ab278d4b5c6bd&mc=true&node=pt49.1.1&rgn=div5#sp49.1.1.a
The DOT posts its organization chart online.

https://www.transportation.gov/org-chart

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material affecting the DOT has been codified and assigned to subtitle I of 49 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title49/subtitle1&edition=prelim
Regulatory material on the subject of transportation has been codified and assigned to 49 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
gp=&SID=e53320fbfd2ae88a9b5ab278d4b5c6bd&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title49/49tab_02.tpl

ACTIVITIES

Aviation and International Affairs
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Aviation and International Affairs develops, reviews, and coordinates policy for

international transportation and develops, coordinates, and implements policy on economic regulation of the airline

industry. The Office licenses U.S. and foreign carriers to serve in international air transportation and conducts carrier

fitness determinations for carriers serving the United States. The Office participates in negotiations with foreign

governments to develop multilateral and bilateral aviation and maritime policies on international transportation and

trade and to coordinate cooperative agreements for the exchange of scientific and technical information. The Office

also resolves complaints of unfair competitive practices in domestic and international air transportation, establishes

international and intra-Alaska mail rates, determines the disposition of requests for approval and immunization from

the antitrust laws of international aviation agreements, and administers the essential air service program.

https://www.transportation.gov/policy/assistant-secretary-aviation-international-affairs

Drug and Alcohol Policy and Compliance
The Office of Drug and Alcohol Policy and Compliance ensures that the Secretary's national and international drug

and alcohol policies and goals are developed and implemented in a consistent, efficient, and effective manner within

the transportation industry. Experts from the Office advise, counsel, and give recommendations on drugs and alcohol,

as they pertain to the DOT and testing within the industry, to the Secretary.

https://www.transportation.gov/odapc

Intelligence, Security and Emergency Response
The Office of Intelligence, Security and Emergency Response ensures development, coordination, and execution of

plans and procedures for the DOT to balance transportation security requirements with safety, mobility, and the

Nation's economic needs. The Office monitors the Nation's transportation network on a continuous basis; advises the

Secretary on incidents affecting transportation systems; leads on issues of national preparedness, response, and

transportation security; briefs the Secretary on transportation-related intelligence; performs the DOT's National

Response Framework Emergency Support Function responsibilities; coordinates departmental participation in

emergency preparedness and response exercises under the National Training and Exercise Program; administers the

DOT's Continuity of Government and Continuity of Operations programs; and serves as the DOT representative for

emergency planning for civil aviation support to NATO and other allies.

https://www.transportation.gov/mission/administrations/intelligence-security-emergency-response

Transportation Policy
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Transportation Policy analyzes, develops, articulates, and reviews policies and

plans for all transportation modes. It also develops, coordinates, and evaluates public policy on safety, energy, and

environmental initiatives that affect air, surface, marine, and pipeline transportation. It maintains policy and economic

oversight of DOT regulatory programs and legislative initiatives. The Office also analyzes the economic and

institutional implications of current and emerging transportation policy issues, transportation infrastructure finances,

and new transportation technologies.
https://www.transportation.gov/policy/assistant-secretary-transportation-policy

Research and Technology
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Research and Technology (OST–R) was created by title I, division L, of the

Department of Transportation Appropriations Act, 2014 (49 USC 112 note), which transferred the authorities, functions,

personnel, and powers and duties of the former Research and Innovative Technology Administration to the OST–R.

The Office coordinates, facilitates, and reviews DOT research and development programs and activities; performs

transportation statistics research, analysis, and reporting; and promotes innovative technologies for improving

transportation systems. The OST–R is composed of the staff from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics, the Volpe

National Transportation Systems Center, the Transportation Safety Institute, and the Office of Research, Development,

and Technology.

https://www.transportation.gov/administrations/assistant-secretary-research-and-technology/office-assistant-
secretary-research-0



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Administrations
The "Our Administrations" web page provides convenient access to the home pages of the DOT's Administrations.

https://www.transportation.gov/administrations

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that DOT records have been

assigned to record group 398.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/398.html

Aviation Consumer Protection
For information on air travelers' rights or for assistance in resolving consumer problems with providers of commercial

air transportation services, contact the Consumer Affairs Division. Phone, 202-366-2220.

https://www.transportation.gov/airconsumer
The Office of Aviation Enforcement and Proceedings publishes the "Air Travel Consumer Report" each month. The

report makes information on the quality of airline services accessible to consumers. Issues of the consumer report are

posted on the DOT website in Portable Document Format (PDF). Phone, 202-366-2220. TTY, 202-366-0511.

https://www.transportation.gov/individuals/aviation-consumer-protection/air-travel-consumer-reports

Blog
The DOT's official blog is titled "Destinations."

https://www.transportation.gov/blog/Destinations-by-DOT

Build America Bureau
The "Project Highlights" web page features 20 narratives that summarize the development process of specific new-

build transportation public-private partnerships. Each narrative covers the partnership's conception through to its
financial closing and construction.

https://www.transportation.gov/buildamerica/projects/project-highlights | Email: BuildAmerica@dot.gov

Business Opportunities
Information on small business assistance, small business loans for women, and small business loans for veterans, as

well as additional resources like DOT procurement forecasts, are available on the Office of Small and Disadvantaged

Business Utilization's website.

https://www.transportation.gov/content/office-small-and-disadvantaged-business-utilization

Career Opportunities
The DOT employs administrators and managers, air traffic controllers, aviation safety specialists, clerical staff,

electronics maintenance technicians, and engineers—aeronautical, automotive, civil, electrical, highway, and general.

For further information, contact the Office of the Secretary–Human Resource Operations, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE.,

Room W75–340, Washington, DC 20590. Phone, 202-366-9391 or 800-525-2878.

https://www.transportation.gov/careers
In 2020, the DOT ranked 3d among 17 large agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TD00
In 2020, the Office of the Inspector General ranked 83d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for

Public Service's Best Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TD12

Civil Rights
For information on equal employment opportunity, nondiscrimination in DOT employment and transportation

services, or the Department's disadvantaged business enterprise certification appeals program, contact the Director,

Departmental Office of Civil Rights. Phone, 202-366-4648.

https://www.transportation.gov/civil-rights

Climate Change
On July 14, 2009, former Secretary of Transportation Ray LaHood read a statement before the U.S. Senate's

Committee on Environment and Public Works. As part of his statement, the Secretary said: "Addressing VMT [vehicle-

miles-traveled] growth plays a key role in decreasing transportation related GHG [greenhouse gas] emissions and

should be included in overall efforts to prevent climate change. . . . transportation infrastructure will also face climate

impacts such as rising sea levels, changing precipitation patterns, and temperature fluctuations. The need for

adaptation is unavoidable. To ensure the continued integrity of the nation’s transportation system, transportation

infrastructure decisions must adequately consider forecasted effects and impacts from climate change."

https://www.transportation.gov/testimony/transportations-role-climate-change-and-greenhouse-gases

Conferences / Events
The DOT has placed on one web page a list of links for conference and event pages that are found on the websites of

various DOT Administrations, the Office of Drug and Alcohol Policy and Compliance, the Office of Small and
Disadvantaged Business Utilization, and the Volpe Center.

https://www.transportation.gov/mission/conferences-and-events

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page contains the DOT's postal address and customer service center's hours and phone

number, as well as directions to DOT headquarters and links leading to additional contact information for DOT

Administrations.

https://www.transportation.gov/contact-us

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the DOT recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/transportation-department

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives information seekers the right to access DOT records, unless the Department determines that releasing

the information would harm an interest that one or more of the nine FOIA exemptions shields or that releasing the

information would violate the law. After receiving a properly submitted FOIA request, the DOT must provide the

requester with copies of the relevant documents and records, or portions of them, that he or she is entitled to access

under the law.

https://www.transportation.gov/foia

Improving the U.S. Transportation System
The DOT Secretary has prioritized innovation through engagement with emerging technologies, maintenance of the

Nation's infrastructure, and the safety of Americans when they travel.

https://www.transportation.gov/priorities

Infographics
The Volpe Center's "Our Impact Through Infographics" web page communicates concisely, both textually and

graphically, how the Center has advanced transportation innovation for the public good.

https://www.volpe.dot.gov/our-work/infographics

Motor Vehicle Safety
To report vehicle safety problems, get motor vehicle and highway safety information, or request consumer information

publications, visit the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's SafeCar.gov website or call its vehicle safety

hotline. Phone, 888-327-4236. TTY, 800-424-9153. Reports also may be filed online.

http://www.safercar.gov

Newsroom
The DOT posts press releases on its website.

https://www.transportation.gov/newsroom

Plain Language
The Plain Writing Act of 2010 improves "the effectiveness and accountability of Federal agencies to the public by

promoting clear Government communication that the public can understand and use." The DOT is committed to

helping its employees write clearly.

https://www.transportation.gov/regulations/plain-language

Policy Initiatives
The DOT posts current policy initiatives on its website.

https://www.transportation.gov/policy-initiatives

National Transportation Library
The Library makes transportation-related data, reports, research, and reference services accessible.

https://ntl.bts.gov/ntl

Social Media
The DOT has a YouTube channel and maintains Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, and Twitter accounts.

https://www.transportation.gov/social

  The above Sources of Information were updated 9–2021.




Federal Aviation Administration
800 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20591


202-366-4000

866-835-5322

http://www.faa.gov


  ADMINISTRATOR                                            Steve Dickson


  Deputy Administrator                                     A. Bradley Mims


  Chief of Staff                                           Angela H. Stubblefield


https://www.faa.gov/about/key_officials



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2021.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), formerly the Federal Aviation Agency, was established by the Federal

Aviation Act of 1958 (72 Stat. 731).
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-72/pdf/STATUTE-72-Pg731.pdf
The Administration became a component of the Department of Transportation in 1967, pursuant to the

Department of Transportation Act (49 U.S.C. 106).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-80/pdf/STATUTE-80-Pg931.pdf
The FAA posts an organizational chart on its "Offices" web page in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing

and downloading.

https://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/



ACTIVITIES
The FAA regulates civil aviation and U.S. commercial space transportation, maintains and operates air traffic

control and navigation systems for civil and military aircraft, and develops and administers programs involving

aviation safety and the National Airspace System.

https://www.faa.gov/about/mission/

Air Navigation Facilities
The FAA locates and positions, constructs or installs, maintains, operates, and assures the quality of Federal air

navigation electronic and visual aids. At flight service stations, airport traffic control towers, and air route traffic

control centers, the Administration operates and maintains computer systems, radar facilities, and voice-data

communications and visual display equipment.

http://www.faa.gov/about/safety_efficiency

Airport Programs
The Administration maintains a national plan of airport requirements, administers a grant program for

development of public-use airports to assure and improve safety and to meet current and future airport capacity

needs, evaluates the environmental effects of airport development, and administers an airport noise

compatibility program. It also develops standards for and technical guidance on airport planning, design,

operations, and safety and provides grants to assist public agencies in airport system and master planning and

airport development and improvement.

http://www.faa.gov/airports

Airspace and Air Traffic Management
FAA activities center on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. To achieve this goal, the

Administration operates a network of airport traffic control towers, air route traffic control centers, and flight

service stations. It develops air traffic rules and regulations and allocates airspace use. It also provides air traffic

security control that meets national defense requirements.

http://www.faa.gov/air_traffic

Civil Aviation Abroad
Under the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 and the International Aviation Facilities Act (49 U.S.C. app. 1151), the FAA

promotes aviation safety and supports civil aviation abroad. FAA experts exchange aeronautical information with
foreign counterparts; certify foreign airmen, mechanics, and repair shops; provide technical aid and training;

negotiate bilateral airworthiness agreements with other countries; and participate in international conferences.

http://www.faa.gov/about/safety_efficiency

Commercial Space Transportation
The Administration regulates and supports the U.S. commercial space transportation industry. It licenses

commercial space launch facilities and private sector launches of space payloads on expendable vehicles. It also

sets insurance requirements for the protection of persons and property and ensures that space transportation

activities comply with U.S. domestic and foreign policy.

http://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/ast/about

Registration
The Aircraft Registry establishes and maintains the record of every U.S. civil aircraft. Buyers seeking information

on aircraft they want to acquire, banks that finance aircraft purchases, aviation historians, and law enforcement

and security agencies rely on the registry. An aircraft record contains information on the aircraft's registered

owner, its airworthiness, and on recorded aircraft security interests.

http://www.faa.gov/licenses_certificates/aircraft_certification/aircraft_registry/about_aircraft_records

Research, Engineering, and Development
The research, engineering, and development activities of the FAA provide the systems, procedures, facilities, and

devices needed for a safe and efficient air navigation and air traffic control system for civil aviation and air

defense. The Administration also performs an aeromedical research function: It applies knowledge gained from

its research program and the work of others to improve civil aviation safety and the safety, health, and efficiency

of FAA employees. The Administration also supports the development and testing of aircraft and their parts.

http://www.faa.gov/data_research/research

Safety Regulation
The FAA issues and enforces regulations and minimum standards affecting the manufacture, operation, and

maintenance of aircraft. It also certifies airmen and airports that serve air carriers.

http://www.faa.gov/about/safety_efficiency

Test and Evaluation
The FAA tests and evaluates specified items such as aviation systems, subsystems, equipment, devices, materials,

concepts, or procedures at any phase in the cycle of their development from conception to acceptance, to

implementation. At key decision points, it also carries out assigned independent testing.


Other Programs
The FAA administers the Aviation Insurance Program, which provides insurance products to cover U.S. domestic

air transportation industry needs that are not adequately met by the commercial insurance market. The

Administration develops specifications for the preparation of aeronautical charts. It also publishes current

information on airways and airport service; issues technical publications for the improvement of in-flight safety,

airport planning and design, and other aeronautical activities; and serves as the executive administration for the
operation and maintenance of the DOT automated payroll and personnel systems.

http://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/apl/aviation_insurancehttp://www.faa.gov/air_traffic/fl
ight_info/aeronav



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The FAA website features an alphabetical index to help visitors browse its content or search for information.

https://www.faa.gov/quick_reference

Aircraft Registry
The FAA maintains a registry that allows users to search aircraft registration information online.

https://www.faa.gov/licenses_certificates/aircraft_certification/aircraft_registry

Airlines
The Air Traffic Control System Command Center website features a list of links for the Web sites of airlines.

http://www.fly.faa.gov/FAQ/Airline_Links/airline_links.jsp

Airmen Certification
The FAA posts answers to frequently asked questions dealing with airmen certification on its website.

https://www.faa.gov/licenses_certificates/airmen_certification/airmen_FAQ

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FAA records have

been assigned to record group 237.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/237.html

Business Opportunities
Registration with the System for Award Management is required for doing business with the FAA.

https://sam.gov/content/home
The Small Business Office administers programs that assist small businesses, small businesses that are owned

and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals, women-owned small businesses, and

service-disabled veteran-owned small businesses, with FAA procurement opportunities.

https://sbo.faa.gov/Home.cfm

Career Opportunities
The FAA offers civil aviation career opportunities in air traffic control, acquisition, contracts, engineering,

information technology, safety and security, and other fields.

https://www.faa.gov/jobs/career_fields
In 2020, the FAA ranked 119th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.
http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/TD03

Contact the FAA
Information for finding the appropriate point of contact or reporting an issue to the FAA is available on the

"Contact" web page.

https://www.faa.gov/contact
Contact information for field and regional offices is available on the "National Engagement and Regional

Administration" web page.

https://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/arc/

Data / Research
The FAA conducts research on commercial and general aviation. It posts information on how the research is

carried out, the resulting data and statistics, and grant data and funding information.

https://www.faa.gov/data_research

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the FAA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-aviation-administration

Flight Delays
The FAA's Air Traffic Control System Command Center provides status information, which is not flight specific,

for general airport conditions nationwide.

http://www.fly.faa.gov/flyfaa/usmap.jsp

Flying With Pets
The "Flying With Pets" web page has information and relevant links for flying with a pet or service animal.

https://www.faa.gov/travelers/fly_pets/
Email, personal digital assistants (PDAs), pagers, phones, and wireless devices can be used to monitor the real-

time operating status of the Nation's largest airports and receive delay information from the FAA.

https://www.fly.faa.gov/ais/jsp/ais.jsp

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded

from disclosure by one or more of nine exemptions that are contained within the statute.

https://www.faa.gov/foia
FAA posts a lot of information on its website. Before making a formal FOIA request, search the records that are

immediately available, particularly the contents of the FAA's electronic FOIA library. The desired information

already may be accessible.

https://www.faa.gov/foia/electronic_reading_room
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The FAA posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://faa.custhelp.com

Glossary
The Air Traffic Control System Command Center maintains a glossary of air traffic control management

acronyms and terms.

http://www.fly.faa.gov/FAQ/Acronyms/acronyms.jsp

International Travel
The "International Travel" web page has information and resources for those preparing to fly abroad.

https://www.faa.gov/travelers/international_travel/

History
A timeline of aerospace history is available on the FAA website. The timeline starts on December 17, 1903, with

Orville and Wilbur Wright's first self-propelled airplane flight.

https://www.faa.gov/about/history/timeline

Newsroom
The FAA posts factsheets, news items and updates, press releases, speeches, and testimonies on its website.

https://www.faa.gov/newsroom

NextGen
NextGen is a series of interlinked programs, portfolios, systems, policies, and procedures. It uses advanced

technologies and capabilities for improving the operation of the National Airspace System.

https://www.faa.gov/nextgen

Report a Drone
Please report a drone that is being operated dangerously or used to commit a crime to local law enforcement

first responders. Please report a drone that is being operated in a manner that flouts FAA rules to a local FAA

flight standards district office. An unauthorized drone operator may be penalized or criminally charged.

https://www.faa.gov/uas/contact_us/report_uas_sighting/

Social Media
The FAA has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/FAA
The FAA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/faanews
The FAA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/FAAnews
Wildlife Strikes
Aircraft and wildlife in the United States collide on occasion. Wildlife strikes almost always involve birds; however,

the FAA also has received reports of alligator, bat, coyote, deer, skunk, and turtle strikes. The most frequently

struck birds are gulls, but ducks and geese cause more damage per strike. The FAA's National Wildlife Strike

Database contains the information needed for telling the full story of collisions involving aircraft and animals.

http://wildlife.faa.gov
The wildlife strike reporting system helps the FAA collect the information used to build the National Wildlife

Strike Database. An online form is available for submitting a strike report.

https://wildlife.faa.gov/add

  The Sources of Information were updated 10–2021.




Federal Highway Administration
1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590


202-366-0650

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov


  ADMINISTRATOR                                              (vacancy)




  Deputy Administrator                                       (vacancy)


  Executive Director                                         Gloria M. Shepherd


https://fhwaapps.fhwa.dot.gov/foisp/hqphone.do



  The above list of key personnel was updated 9–2021.



The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) was established as an agency of the Department of Transportation

by the Department of Transportation Act (49 U.S.C. 104). Title 23 of the United States Code and other

supporting legislation authorize the Administration's various activities.


The FHWA improves mobility on our Nation's highways through national leadership, innovation, and program

delivery. The Administration works with Federal, State, and local agencies as well as with other stakeholders and

partners to maintain and improve the National Highway System, which includes the Interstate System and other

roads of importance for national defense and mobility. The FHWA works to increase the National Highway

System's safety and to minimize its traffic congestion. The FHWA ensures that America's roads and highways

remain safe, technologically up-to-date, and environmentally friendly.


Through surface transportation programs, innovative and traditional financing mechanisms, and new types of
pavement and operational technology, the FHWA helps people and goods move more efficiently throughout

the Nation. The Administration also improves the efficiency of highway and road connections to other modes of

transportation. The Federal-aid Highway Program's budget is primarily divided between Federal-aid funding and

the Federal Lands Highway Program.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/about



ACTIVITIES

Federal-aid Highway Program
The Federal-Aid Highway Program supports State highway systems, providing financial assistance for the

construction, maintenance and operations of the Nation's 3.9 million-mile highway network, which includes the

Interstate Highway System, primary highways, and secondary local roads. The FHWA implements the Federal-aid

Highway Program in cooperation with State and local governments.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/federal-aidessentials/federalaid.cfm

Federal Lands Highway Program
The Office of Federal Lands Highway promotes effective, efficient, and reliable administration for a coordinated

program of Federal public roads and bridges; protects and enhances the Nation's natural resources; and gives

transportation access to Native Americans. The Office provides financial resources and engineering assistance

for public roads that meet the transportation needs of Federal and Indian lands. These services are provided in

all 50 States, Puerto Rico, U.S. Territories, and the District of Columbia through the Office's Headquarters and its

eastern, central, and western Federal Lands Highway division offices.

http://flh.fhwa.dot.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

All-American Roads / National Scenic Byways
America's Byways—which include the National Scenic Byways and All-American Roads—is an umbrella term

referring to the collection of 184 roads that the Secretary of Transportation selects for inclusion based on

distinctiveness and diverseness.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/byways

Career Opportunities
FHWA operates offices throughout the country and hires professionals with expertise in a variety of fields to

carry out its mission.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/careers
FHWA consistently ranks high among agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/TD04
Core Topics
The "Core Highway Topics" web page features a topical, alphabetical list. The topics are categorized according

to nine headings: environment, Office of Federal Lands Highway, highway funding, international, research and

technologies, road operations and congestion, roads and bridges, road users, and safety.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/resources/topics

Federal-Aid Essentials
Federal-aid Essentials offers an online library of informational videos and resources for local public agencies.

Each video addresses a single topic and condenses the complex regulations and requirements of the Federal-aid

Highway Program into basic concepts and illustrated examples.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/federal-aidessentials

Field and Division Offices
FHWA's field organization delivers program services to the agency's partners and customers. This organization

consists of the Resource Center, State-level Federal-aid division offices, and the Office of Federal Lands Highway.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/about/field.cfm

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA establishes a presumption that records in the possession of agencies and departments of the Federal

Government's executive branch are available to the public. The statute sets standards for determining when

Government records must be made available and which records may be withheld. It also gives requesters

specific legal rights and provides administrative and judicial remedies when access to records or portions of

records is denied. Most importantly, the statute requires that Federal agencies provide, to the fullest extent

possible, access to and disclosure of information pertaining to the Government's business.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/foia
FHWA maintains an electronic FOIA reading room. It contains records that are often requested under the

statute.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/foia/err.cfm

Glossary
FHWA web site features a glossary of transportation planning terms and acronyms.

https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/planning/glossary

History
FHWA web site features a general highway history.

https://highways.dot.gov/highway-history

Libraries
FHWA's research library is located in the Turner-Fairbank Highway Research Center in McLean, VA. It is open on

weekdays, excluding Federal holidays, 7:30–4 p.m.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/research/library/ | Email: fhwalibrary@dot.gov
Each FHWA office maintains accessibility information that relates to its own program. The accessibility resource

library supports the effort to organize information relating to the Americans with Disabilities Act and other

accessibility resources that may affect FHWA projects.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/accessibility

Newsroom
FHWA posts press releases, as well as photos and videos, speeches and testimony, on its web site, YouTube

channel, and other social media platforms.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/briefingroom

Resource Center / Technical Service Teams
The Resource Center is home to a national staff of subject matter experts across eight teams covering various

specialty areas and is the primary source of training, technical assistance, and technology deployment services to

support FHWA's Federal partners, State and local transportation agencies, and other stakeholders. Contact

information for these teams and information on their activities, products, and services are available online in the

Resource Center.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/resourcecenter/index.cfm

Social Media
FHWA tweets and posts announcements and other newsworthy items on X, Facebook, LinkedIn, and Instagram,

which are maintained by the FHWA Office of Public Affairs. X: https://x.com/USDOTFHWA Facebook:

https://www.facebook.com/FederalHighwayAdmin             LinkedIn:   https://www.linkedin.com/company/federal-

highway-administration/ Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/federalhighwayadmin/ FHWA posts videos on

its YouTube channel. https://www.youtube.com/user/USDOTFHWA


The FHWA maintains a page on Facebook.

https://www.facebook.com/FederalHighwayAdmin
The FHWA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/USDOTFHWA

Staff Directories
The headquarters organizational directory, key field personnel directory, and Washington headquarters fax

numbers are available on FHWA's web site.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/about/staff.cfm

For Further Information
For further information, contact the Federal Highway Administration, Office of Public Affairs, 1200 New Jersey

Avenue, SE, Washington, DC 20590. Phone, 202-366-0660.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/contact
For further information, contact the Federal Highway Administration, Office of Public Affairs, 1200 New Jersey

Avenue, SE., Washington, DC 20590. Phone, 202-366-0650.
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590


202-366-2519

http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov


  ADMINISTRATOR                                              (vacancy)


  Deputy Administrator                                       Meera Joshi


https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/mission/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 9–2021.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) was established within the Department of

Transportation on January 1, 2000, pursuant to the Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act of 1999 (113 Stat.

1750).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-113/pdf/STATUTE-113-Pg1748.pdf
Statutory material that affects the organization of the FMCSA has been codified in the United States Code

(U.S.C.) and assigned to 49 U.S.C. 113.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title49-section113&num=0&edition=prelim



ACTIVITIES
Formerly a part of the Federal Highway Administration, the FMCSA reduces commercial motor vehicle-related

fatalities and injuries. Administration activities increase the safety of motor carrier operations by enforcing safety

regulations—targeting high-risk commercial drivers and carriers; improving safety information systems and

commercial motor vehicle technologies; strengthening equipment and operating standards; and increasing

safety awareness. When carrying out these activities, the Administration works with representatives of the motor

carrier industry, labor safety interest groups, and Federal, State, and local enforcement agencies.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/mission/about-us

Commercial Licensing
The FMCSA develops standards to test and license commercial motor vehicle drivers.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/registration/commercial-drivers-license

Data / Analysis
The FMCSA collects and disseminates data on motor carrier safety and directs resources to improve motor

carrier safety.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/data-and-statistics/motor-carrier-safety-progress-reports

Regulatory Compliance / Enforcement
The FMCSA operates a program to improve safety performance and remove high-risk carriers from the Nation's

highways.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/regulations

Research / Technology
The FMCSA coordinates research and development to improve the safety of motor carrier operations and

commercial motor vehicles and drivers.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/research-and-analysis/active-research-projects

Safety Assistance
The FMCSA provides States with financial assistance for roadside inspections and other commercial motor

vehicle safety programs.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety

Other Activities
The FMCSA supports the development of unified motor carrier safety requirements and procedures throughout

North America. It participates in international technical organizations and committees to help share best-

practices in motor carrier safety worldwide. It enforces regulations ensuring safe highway transportation of

hazardous materials and maintains a task force for identifying and investigating household goods carriers that

exhibit an unmistakable pattern of consumer abuse.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FMCSA records have

been assigned to record group 557. That record group, however, does not have a description that is associated

with it.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/000.html

Bicyclists / Pedestrians
Bicyclists and pedestrians share roads with large trucks and buses. The FMCSA website has resources that

address safety issues affecting riders, walkers, and drivers.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/resources-bicyclists-and-pedestrians

Career Opportunities
The FMCSA posts job announcements on the USAJobs website. Application tips, information for students and
recent graduates, and reasons for pursuing a career at the FMCSA are available on its website. Phone, 800-832-

5660.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/careers
In 2020, the FMCSA ranked 138th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TD17

Certified Medical Examiners
Inclusion in the National Registry of Certified Medical Examiners is limited to medical professionals who complete

training and pass an exam on the FMCSA's physical qualification standards.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/regulations/national-registry/national-registry-certified-medical-examiners

Commercial Carriers
The FMCSA website has resources to help carrier companies with registration and safety and regulatory matters.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/resources-for-carrier-companies
The FMCSA website has resources—regulatory information and safety publications—to make complying with

regulations easier for passenger carriers and to help them operate more safely.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/passenger-safety/passenger-carrier-safety-information

Commercial Drivers
The FMCSA website has resources for drivers who want to increase safety and who may need help them with the

registration and licensing processes.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/resources-for-drivers

Company Safety Records
The FMCSA maintains websites that provide convenient access to safety-related information. To perform a

search, a user must know a company's name, USDOT number, or motor carrier number.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/company-safety-records

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has a table that contains email addresses, phone numbers, and web forms.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/contact-us

Data / Statistics
The annual "Pocket Guide to Large Truck and Bus Statistics" highlights the FMCSA’s role in collecting and

analyzing data on large trucks and buses. The pocket guide is a compilation of statistics from the overall state of

the industry to enforcement activity, details on traffic violations and other incidents, the costs of crashes, and

more.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/data-and-statistics/commercial-motor-vehicle-facts
The Analysis Division compiles the information used for "Large Truck and Bus Crash Facts," an annual report

containing descriptive statistics on fatal, injurious, and property-damage-only crashes involving large trucks and
buses.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/data-and-statistics/large-truck-and-bus-crash-facts

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the FMCSA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-motor-carrier-safety-administration

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FMCSA supports efforts to create a more open and transparent Federal Government. Accordingly, it

conscientiously carries out the requirements of the FOIA. The FMCSA ensures that nonexempt documents or

records are accessible to anyone who properly files a FOIA request. Phone, 202-366-2960. Fax, 202-385-2335.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/foia | Email: foia@fmcsa.dot.gov
The FMCSA's electronic reading room contains frequently requested records, as well as final opinions and

orders, policy statements, and staff manuals.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/foia/foia-electronic-reading-room

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The FMCSA posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/faq

Grants
State and local government agencies in the 50 States and the District of Columbia, as well as in American

Samoa, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Northern Mariana and the U.S. Virgin Islands may apply for safety grant

funding.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/mission/grants

Look Before You Book
The FMCSA website has resources for those making travel plans and for those looking to charter a bus for a

sporting event, field trip, or other group activity. Safety tips and information, software applications (apps) to

research bus operators, and information on reporting safety violations are available on the "Look Before You

Book" web pages.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/passenger-safety/bus-passengers-look-you-book
Bus travel safety kits for seniors, students, and those traveling to faith-based events are available on "Look

Before You Book."

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/look-you-book/consumer-safety-resources

Newsroom
The FMCSA posts events, news releases, speeches, and testimony on its website.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/newsroom

Protect Your Move
The "Protect Your Move" web pages have a trove of information on and resources for planning a move,

selecting a mover, and filing a moving fraud complaint.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/protect-your-move

Safety Violations
Safety, service, or discrimination issues involving a bus or truck or moving company or a cargo tank facility? If so,

file a complaint on the National Consumer Complaint Database website or by phone on weekdays, 8 a.m.–8

p.m., eastern time. Phone, 888-368-7238.

https://nccdb.fmcsa.dot.gov/nccdb/home.aspx

Service Centers / Field Offices
Contact information for service centers and field offices is available on the FMCSA website. Phone, 800-832-

5660.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/mission/field-offices

Social Media
The FMCSA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/fmcsa
The FMCSA has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/FMCSA

USDOT Numbers
The FMCSA website features an interactive tool that can determine whether or not a commercial vehicle requires

a USDOT number.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/registration/do-i-need-usdot-number

Veterans
The FMCSA helps veterans find employment in the motor carrier industry. Several provisions in the Fixing

America's Surface Transportation (FAST) Act support this effort.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/fastact/veteran-drivers

  The above Sources of Information were updated 9–2021.




Federal Railroad Administration
1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., West Building, Washington, DC 20590


202-493-6014

http://www.fra.dot.gov


  ADMINISTRATOR                                             (vacancy)


  Deputy Administrator                                      Amit Bose
https://railroads.dot.gov/about-fra/organization/vacant-administrator



The above list of key personnel was updated 09–2021.



ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) was created pursuant to section 3(e)(1) of the Department of

Transportation Act of 1966 (49 U.S.C. 103).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-80/pdf/STATUTE-80-Pg931.pdf
The FRA posts its organizational chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) on its website for viewing and

downloading.

https://railroads.dot.gov/about-fra/organization/organization-chart



ACTIVITIES
The Administration promulgates and enforces rail safety regulations, administers railroad financial assistance

programs, conducts research and development to improve railroad safety and national rail transportation policy,

provides for the rehabilitation of Northeast Corridor rail passenger service, and consolidates Government

support of rail transportation activities.

https://railroads.dot.gov/about-fra/about-fra

Passenger and Freight Services
The FRA's passenger rail activities include administering Federal grants and loans to Amtrak, Alaska Railroad, and

high-speed rail; supporting the Secretary of Transportation in his or her role as a member of Amtrak's board of

directors; providing guidance and analysis of intercity passenger rail services and high-speed rail.

https://railroads.dot.gov/rail-network-development/passenger-rail/passenger-rail
Its freight rail activities include supporting current freight rail market share and growth and developing strategies

to attract 50 percent of all shipments 500 miles or more to intermodal rail. The Administration's Office of

Railroad Policy and Development implements programs that provide financial support, research and

development, and analysis and guidance for the freight rail industry and its stakeholders.

https://railroads.dot.gov/rail-network-development/freight-rail-overview

Railroad Safety
The Administration administers and enforces the Federal laws and regulations that promote railroad safety, and

it exercises jurisdiction over all areas of rail safety under the Rail Safety Act of 1970—track maintenance,

inspection standards, equipment standards, operating practices. Railroad and related industry equipment,

facilities, and records are inspected and required reports are reviewed. The Administration also educates the
public about safety at highway rail grade crossings and the danger of trespassing on rail property.

https://railroads.dot.gov/railroad-safety

Research / Development
The FRA's research and development program relies on basic and applied research and on the development of

innovations and solutions to ensure the efficient, reliable, and safe movement of people and goods. Safety is the

principal driver of the research and development program.

https://railroads.dot.gov/research-development/research-development-and-technology

Transportation Test Center
The Administration tests and evaluates conventional and advanced railroad systems and components at the

Transportation Test Center, Inc. Private sector companies and the Governments of Canada, Japan, and the

United States use the facility to study the operation of conventional and advanced systems under controlled

conditions. Amtrak tests new high-speed locomotives and trains at the Center, and the Federal Transit

Administration uses it for testing urban rapid transit vehicles.

https://railroads.dot.gov/program-areas/testing-facilities-equipment/testing-facilities-equipment



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FRA records have

been assigned to record group 399.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/399.html

Business Opportunities
The "How To Do Business with the FRA" web page explains the steps of becoming eligible for doing business

with the FRA and of identifying business opportunities that the FRA has to offer. The web page also has a

database of small business vendors.

https://railroads.dot.gov/resource-center/how-do-business-fra/how-do-business-fra

Career Opportunities
The FRA relies heavily on railroad safety inspectors—hazardous materials, motive power and equipment,

operating practices, signals and train control, and track inspectors—to carry out its mission. Safety inspectors

inspect for compliance with Federal laws, regulations, rules, and standards; conduct accident investigations and

report on their findings; and seek correction of unsafe conditions. They also testify as expert witnesses in civil

suits. These jobs require skill in evaluation, factfinding, and report writing; comprehension and application of

technical and regulatory standards; an ability to build rapport with individuals and organizations; and knowledge

of methods used in installation, operation, and maintenance or manufacturing of railroad equipment and

systems.

https://railroads.dot.gov/resource-center/jobs/job-vacancies
In 2020, the FRA ranked 206th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TD05

Contact Information
Email addresses and phone numbers are available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://railroads.dot.gov/about-fra/contact-us

Electronic Library (eLibrary)
An eLibrary offers convenient access to all the documents that are posted on the FRA's public website.

https://railroads.dot.gov/elibrary-search

Environmental Reviews
The FRA posts a list of environmental projects that require the FRA to pursue an environmental assessment or

environmental impact statement or both an assessment and a statement.

https://railroads.dot.gov/rail-network-development/environment/environmental-reviews

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the FRA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-railroad-administration

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Any person—U.S. citizens, foreign nationals, as well as those representing organizations, associations, and

universities—can file a FOIA request. All FOIA requests must be submitted in writing and are processed in the

Office of Chief Counsel at FRA headquarters in Washington, DC.

https://railroads.dot.gov/freedom-information-act-foia | Email: FRAFOIA@dot.gov
To comply with the Electronic Freedom of Information Act (E–FOIA) Amendments of 1996, agencies must make

some categories of records available to the public on an ongoing basis.

https://railroads.dot.gov/resource-center/freedom-information-act/electronic-reading-room

Horn Noise
Noise from transportation systems, including rail operations, often has adverse environmental effects. The FRA

posts answers to frequently asked questions on horn noise.

https://railroads.dot.gov/environment/noise-vibration/horn-noise-faq

Maps
The "Maps—Geographic Information System" web page has interactive safety and trespassers casualty maps.

https://railroads.dot.gov/maps-and-data/maps-geographic-information-system/maps-geographic-information-
system

Media Relations
The Office of Communications handles media relations.

https://railroads.dot.gov/about-fra/communications/communications

News
The FRA posts news items on its website.

https://railroads.dot.gov/newsroom

Railroad Crossings / Trespassing
FRA programs have helped to reduce the number of railroad crossing and trespassing fatalities by 60% over the

last two decades. The Railroad Crossing Safety and Trespasser Prevention Division seeks to continue this trend.

Information on and resources for railroad crossing safety and preventing trespassing along railroad rights-of-

way are available online.

https://railroads.dot.gov/highway-rail-crossing-and-trespasser-programs/railroad-crossing-safety-trespass

Railroad Safety
The Office of Safety Analysis posts railroad safety information—data related to railroad accidents and incidents,

including highway-rail grade crossing accidents, rail equipment accidents, and employee injuries and illnesses—

on its website.

https://safetydata.fra.dot.gov/OfficeofSafety/Default.aspx
The FRA has a new safety data website.

https://railroads.dot.gov/forms-guides-publications/guides/interacting-new-fra-safety-data-website
The FRA monitors the occurrence of train accidents and incidents and investigates serious events to determine

their cause and to assess compliance with safety laws and regulations. Detailed information on these

investigations is available on the FRA's website.

https://railroads.dot.gov/railroad-safety/accident-data-reporting-and-investigations
Operation Lifesaver, Inc., is a nonprofit organization and a rail safety education leader.

https://oli.org/about-us

Research / Development
The Office of Research and Development is organized into four divisions and works in 10 program areas. An

online table shows where the four divisions and 10 program areas intersect with the most frequent causes of

railroad accidents and incidents.

https://railroads.dot.gov/research-development/program-areas/program-areas

Social Media
The FRA posts photographs and tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/USDOTFRA
The FRA has a Facebook page.

https://www.facebook.com/USDOTFRA
The FRA posts videos on its YouTube channel.
https://www.youtube.com/user/usdotfra

  The above Sources of Information were updated 9–2021.




Federal Transit Administration
1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590


202-366-4043

http://www.fta.dot.gov


  ADMINISTRATOR                                              Nuria Fernandez


  Deputy Administrator                                       (vacancy)


  Executive Director                                         Matthew J. Welbes


https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/officials/officials



  The above list of key personnel was updated 9–2021.




  [For the Federal Transit Administration statement of organization, see the Code of Federal
  Regulations, Title 49, Part 601]



The Federal Transit Administration (FTA), formerly the Urban Mass Transportation Administration, was

established as an operating administration of the U.S. Department of Transportation by section 1 of

Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1968 (5 U.S.C. app. 1), effective July 1, 1968. The FTA helps America's communities

by developing improved public transportation and providing financial assistance to State and local governments

to finance public transportation systems and carry out national transit goals and policy.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/about-fta



PROGRAMS

Alternatives Analysis
The Alternatives Analysis program provides grants to help identify public transportation needs and the costs and

benefits of various transportation strategies for a defined travel corridor. The results of these studies may be the

selection of a locally preferred transportation alternative, which is the first step for developing viable projects for

possible future funding under the New Starts and Small Starts program.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/grants/13094_7395.html

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.
Capital Investment
The Capital Investment program helps finance the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, and improvement of

facilities and equipment for public transportation service in urban areas. The Capital Investment program makes

available three types of funds: fixed guideway modernization funds for rolling stock renewal, safety-related

improvements, and signal and power modernization; new and small starts funds for construction of new fixed

guideway systems or extensions to existing fixed guideway systems or corridor based rapid bus systems; and bus

and bus facilities funds for the acquisition of buses and rolling stock, ancillary equipment, and the construction of

bus facilities.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/12304.html

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.



Clean Fuels Grants
The Clean Fuels Grants program helps nonattainment and maintenance areas achieve or maintain the National

Ambient Air Quality Standards for ozone and carbon monoxide, and it supports emerging clean fuel and

advanced propulsion technologies for transit buses and markets for those technologies. The program funds

purchasing or leasing clean fuel buses, including buses that employ a lightweight composite primary structure

and vans for use in revenue service; constructing or leasing clean fuel bus facilities, including electrical

recharging facilities and related equipment; and projects involving clean fuel, biodiesel, hybrid electric, or zero

emissions technology buses.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/cleanfuels

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.



Elderly Persons and Persons With Disabilities
The Transportation for Elderly Persons and Persons With Disabilities program provides financial assistance to

private nonprofit agencies for the transportation needs of elderly persons and persons with disabilities in places

where public services are unavailable, insufficient, or inappropriate; to public bodies approved by the State to

coordinate services for elderly persons or persons with disabilities; and to public bodies that certify to the

Governor that no nonprofit corporation or association is readily available in an area to provide the service. Funds

are allocated by formula to the States. Local organizations apply for funding through a designated State agency.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/grants/13093_3556.html

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.



Job Access and Reverse Commuting
The Job Access and Reverse Commute program addresses the transportation challenges faced by welfare
recipients and low-income persons seeking or maintaining employment. The program provides capital and

planning and operating expenses for projects that transport low income individuals to and from jobs and

employment-related activities and for projects that support reverse commuting. Many new entry level jobs are

located in suburban areas: Low-income individuals have difficulty accessing these jobs from their inner city,

urban, or rural neighborhoods. Many entry level-jobs also require working late or on weekends when

conventional transit services are either reduced or nonexistent. Many employment related-trips also are

complex, involving multiple destinations.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/grants/13093_3550.html

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.



New Freedom
The New Freedom formula grants program supports new public transportation services that surpass the

requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990. The program makes capital and operating

funding available to private nonprofit organizations, State and local governmental authorities, and operators of

public transportation services, including private operators of public transportation services. Eligible projects must

benefit individuals with disabilities: Projects must assist them with transportation—including transportation to

and from jobs and employment services—and remove barriers to transportation.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/grants/13093_3549.html

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.



Nonurban Area Assistance
The Other Than Urbanized Areas formula grants program provides funding to States to support public

transportation in rural areas—with populations under 50,000. The program enhances people's access in

nonurbanized areas to health care, shopping, education, employment, public services, and recreation; assists in

the maintenance, development, improvement, and use of public transportation systems in nonurbanized areas;

encourages and facilitates the most efficient use of all transportation funds used to provide passenger

transportation in nonurbanized areas through the coordination of programs and services; helps develop and

support intercity bus transportation; and promotes the participation of private transportation providers in

nonurbanized transportation.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/grants/13093_3555.html

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.



Planning
The Office of Planning and Environment supports the development of information that Federal, State, and local

officials use to make transportation investment decisions. With FHWA partners, the Office co-administers a

national planning program that provides funding, guidance, oversight, and technical support to State and local
transportation agencies. The FTA's 10 region offices and FHWA's 52 division offices work to convey the program

to State and local governments and other transportation agencies.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/about/12347.html

  For further information, call the Office of Planning and Environment. Phone, 202-366-4033.



Research and Technology
The FTA conducts research, development, demonstration, deployment, and evaluation projects to improve

public transportation services. The FTA administers the Bus Testing, International Public Transportation, National

Research and Technology, and Transit Cooperative Research Programs. Through the Transit Investments for

Greenhouse Gas and Energy Reduction (TIGGER) program, the Administration works with public transportation

agencies to implement new strategies for lowering greenhouse gas emissions and to reduce energy use within

transit operations. The FTA has five priority research areas: bicycles and transit, bus rapid transit, environmental

sustainability, livable and sustainable communities, and state of good repair.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/research-innovation

  For further information, call the Office of Research, Demonstration and Innovation. Phone, 202-
  366-4052.



Rural Transit Assistance
The Rural Transit Assistance Program provides a funding source to help design and implement training and

technical assistance projects and other support services tailored to meet the needs of transit operators in

nonurbanized areas. States, local governments, and providers of rural transit services can receive program funds.

States may use the funds to support nonurbanized transit activities in four areas: training, technical assistance,

research, and related support services.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/grants/13093_3554.html

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.



Safety
The Office of Transit Safety and Oversight administers a national safety program and oversees compliance with

it. Based on FTA legislative, policy, and regulatory requirements, the program helps further the nationwide

provision of transit service that is equitable, reliable, and safe.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/tso.html

  For further information, call the Office of Transit Safety and Oversight. Phone, 202-366-1783.



Training and Technical Assistance
The Administration funds the National Transit Institute at Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey. Working
with the Institute, the FTA develops and offers training courses on transit operations, planning, workforce

performance, and productivity. Institute courses are offered at locations nationwide on a variety of subjects.

Current course offerings are posted online.

http://www.ntionline.com/courses/list.php

  For further information, call the Office of Research, Demonstration and Innovation. Phone, 202-
  366-4052.



Transit in Parks
The Paul S. Sarbanes Transit in Parks Program provides funding for alternative transportation projects in and

around National Parks and other Federal recreation areas. Alternative transportation includes bicycle, ferry,

pedestrian trail, shuttle bus, and other forms of public or nonmotorized transportation. These projects reduce

congestion, protect sensitive natural and cultural treasures, and enhance visitor experience. Funding is awarded

through a competitive process to units of Federal land management agencies and to State, local and tribal

government agencies.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/transitinparks

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
Procurement-related information and resources are available on the FTA Web site.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/funding/procurement/procurement

Career Opportunities
FTA fills vacancies in its Washington, DC, headquarters and regional offices. The FTA relies on attorneys,

congressional relations specialists, engineers, environmental specialists, planners, program management

specialists, research program specialists, and other professionals to carry out its mission.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/jobs/jobs
In 2016, the FTA ranked 228th among 305 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/TD09

Environmental Justice
The FTA posts answers to questions related to environmental justice on its Web site.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/regulations-and-guidance/environmental-programs/environmental-
justice/environmental-justice-faqs

Events
The FTA has a calendar of events on its Web site.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/events

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA grants public access to the content of certain records that are held by the offices, agencies,

corporations, administrations, commissions, boards, and services of the Federal Government's executive branch.

Some records that contain sensitive commercial, governmental, and personal information are protected from

disclosure.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/foia/foia-requests | Email: FTA.FOIA@dot.gov
The FTA maintains an electronic reading room. Before submitting a FOIA request, information seekers should

search for the desired document or record in the reading room to determine whether it is accessible

immediately, without charge.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/foia/foia-electronic-reading-room

Glossary
The FTA maintains a National Transit Database glossary on its Web site.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/ntd/national-transit-database-ntd-glossary

Grants
The FTA provides grants to local public transit systems. It invests billions of dollars each year to support and to

expand public transit services. It provides annual formula grants to transit agencies nationwide, as well as

discretionary funding in competitive processes.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/funding/grants/grant-programs

History
A brief history of mass transit is available on the FTA Web site.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/brief-history-mass-transit

National Transit Database
U.S. transit ridership has grown by more than 20 percent in the last decade. To keep track of the industry and

provide public information and statistics as growth continues, the National Transit Database records the asset,

financial, and operating conditions of transit systems. Phone, 888-252-0936.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/ntd | Email: NTDhelp@dot.gov

News
The FTA posts news releases on its Web site.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/news

Regional Offices
Contact information for the 10 regional offices is available on the FTA's Web site.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/regional-offices/regional-offices
Research / Innovation
Research projects assess new operational processes, expand public-private partnerships, fund demonstration

grants for low or no emissions buses, improve traveler experiences, and test systems that monitor safety.

Research and innovation reports and publications are available on the FTA Web site.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/research-innovation/research-innovation-reports-and-publications

Social Media
The FTA maintains a channel on YouTube, as well as accounts on Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/news/social-media

Updates
A subscription form is available on the FTA Web site to sign up for email updates.

https://public.govdelivery.com/accounts/USDOTFTA/subscriber/new
http://www.fta.dot.gov/newsroom/13006.html
For further information, contact the Federal Transit Administration, Office of Communications and Congressional

Affairs, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590. Phone, 202-366-4043.



Great Lakes Saint Lawrence                                                                  Seaway
Development Corporation
55 M Street SE., Suite 930, Washington, DC 20003.


202-366-0091

202-366-7147

http://www.seaway.dot.gov


Departmental Postal Address: Great Lakes Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 1200 New Jersey

Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590.


Email: slsdc@dot.gov


Postal and Physical Address: Great Lakes Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation–Operations, 180

Andrews Street, Massena, NY 13662


315-764-3200

315-764-3235




POLICY HEADQUARTERS—WASHINGTON, DC


  ADMINISTRATOR                                           (vacancy)


  Deputy Administrator                                    Craig H. Middlebrook
OPERATIONAL HEADQUARTERS—MASSENA, NY


  Associate Administrator, Seaway Operations               Gary Croot

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/about/meet-our-team



The above list of key personnel was updated 03–2021.

The Great Lakes Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation (GLSLSDC) was established by the Saint

Lawrence Seaway Act of May 13, 1954 (33 U.S.C. 981-990) and became an operating administration of the DOT

in 1966.


The GLSLSDC, working jointly with the Saint Lawrence Seaway Management Corporation (SLSMC) of Canada,

operates and maintains a safe, reliable, and efficient deep draft waterway between the Great Lakes and the

Atlantic Ocean. It ensures the safe transit of commercial and noncommercial vessels through the two U.S. locks

and the navigation channels of the Saint Lawrence Seaway System and engages in economic and trade

development activities to stimulate trade and employment in the eight States of the Great Lakes region. The

GLSLSDC and SLSMC work together on all matters related to rules and regulations, overall operations, vessel

inspections, traffic control, navigation aids, safety, operating dates, and trade development programs.


The Great Lakes-Saint Lawrence Seaway System extends from the Atlantic Ocean to the Lake Superior ports of

Duluth and Superior, a distance of 2,342 miles. The Corporation's main customers are vessel owners and

operators, Midwest States and Canadian Provinces, Great Lakes port communities, shippers and receivers of

domestic and international cargo, and the maritime and related service industries of the Great Lakes and Saint

Lawrence Seaway systems.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/about/what-does-slsdc-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
The GLSLSDC relies on professionals with expertise in administration, engineering, information technology,

management, marine operations, public policy, and other fields.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/about/careers-slsdc

Contact Information
Information for contacting the GLSLSDC by email, postal mail, and phone is posted online.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/about/contact-us

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Any person has the right to a copy of certain records possessed by the Government's executive administrations,

agencies, boards, commissions, corporations, offices, and services. Some records, however, are protected from

disclosure.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/electronic-reading-room

Grants
The GLSLSDC has an easy-to-use Federal grants toolkit that offers a snapshot of the essential information,

resources, and tools needed to identify Federal agencies and processes offering financial assistance to maritime

stakeholders seeking to carry out environmental, infrastructural, intermodal, and other development projects.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/slsdc-federal-grants-toolkit

Map
An interactive map of vessels transiting the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Seaway System is available online.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/explore/interactive-shipping-map-and-shipping-schedule

News
The SLSDC's quarterly newsletter "Seaway Compass" is available online. It features current information and

recent news on the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Seaway System.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/seaway-compass

Publications
The "Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Seaway System Directory" is a comprehensive publication on the ports and

shipping-related businesses that are critical throughout the region and beyond. It features extensive

photography and serves as an excellent resource for readers who are interested in the Great Lakes Seaway

maritime industry.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/seaway-system-directory
The GLSLSDC's marketing brochure offers comprehensive information on the waterway and its significance to

the Great Lakes region. It is available online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/slsdc-marketing-brochure

Reports
The GLSLSDC posts annual reports on its website.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/annual-reports
The GLSLSDC posts Asset Renewal Program reports on its website.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/asset-renewal-program-reports

Social Media
The GLSLSDC maintains a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/USDOTSLSDC

Studies
The "Environmental and Social Impacts of Marine Transport in the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Seaway Region"
study provides marine stakeholders, transportation planners, and government policymakers with an assessment

of the potential environmental and social consequences that could occur if cargo carried by marine vessels on

the Seaway navigation system shifted to rail and road modes of transport.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/social-impact-study

Visitors' Center
The Seaway Visitors' Center at the Eisenhower Lock provides tourists and ship watchers with an observation deck

where they can view commercial vessels and cruise ships transiting the lock. Each year, hundreds of ships from

all over the globe make thousands of transits through the St. Lawrence Seaway. They carry a wide variety of

cargoes: coal, grains, iron ore, steel, steel slabs, stone, and more.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/explore/visitors-center
The Sources of Information were updated 3–2021.



Maritime Administration
1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590


202-366-5807

800-996-2723

http://www.marad.dot.gov


  ADMINISTRATOR                                               Lucinda Lessley, Acting


  Deputy Administrator                                        Lucinda Lessley


https://www.maritime.dot.gov/about-us/office-administrator/key-personnel



  The above list of key personnel was updated 11–2021.



MARAD develops and promotes the U.S. merchant marine and its operations and oversees emergency merchant

ship operations.


ESTABLISHMENT
The Maritime Administration (MARAD) was established by Reorganization Plan No. 21 of 1950 (5 U.S.C. app.).

The Maritime Act of 1981 (46 U.S.C. 1601) transferred the Maritime Administration to the DOT.


MARAD manages programs that help develop and promote the U.S. merchant marine and its operations. It also

organizes and directs emergency merchant ship operations.


ACTIVITIES
MARAD serves as the DOT's waterborne transportation agency. Its programs promote waterborne

transportation use, the seamless integration of waterborne transportation with other parts of the transportation
system, and U.S. merchant marine viability. The Administration's activities involve ships and shipping,

shipbuilding, port operations, vessel operations, national security, safety, and the environment. It also maintains

the health of the merchant marine—commercial mariners, vessels, and intermodal facilities contribute

significantly to national security. The Administration, therefore, supports current mariners, helps educate future

mariners, and informs Americans about the maritime industry and how it benefits them. Recently, the

Administration realigned its functions to be more effective as an industry promoter and to focus more attention

on the environment and safety.


MARAD administers the Maritime Security Program, which maintains a core fleet of U.S.-flag, privately-owned

ships that operate in international commerce. Under agreement, these ships are available to provide needed

capacity, during war and national emergencies, to meet Department of Defense requirements.


It also administers the Ready Reserve Force program to facilitate deployment of U.S. military forces—rapidly and

worldwide. The Force primarily supports transport of Army and Marine Corps unit equipment and combat

support equipment. The Force also supports initial resupply during the critical surge period before commercial

ships become available. The program provides nearly one-half of the Government-owned surge sealift

capability.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/about-us



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that MARAD records have

been assigned to record group 357.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/357.html

Business Opportunities
To learn about doing business with MARAD, visit its "Business Services and Products" web page.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/about-us/marad-business-services-products

Career Opportunities
The "Mariners" web page has information on becoming a mariner and mariner opportunities.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/outreach/mariners
The six maritime academies and U.S. Merchant Marine Academy educate students for service as officers in the

U.S. Merchant Marine, U.S. Armed Forces, and Nation’s intermodal transportation system.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/education/maritime-academies/maritime-academies                    |           Email:
careersafloat@dot.gov
In 2020, MARAD ranked 228th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TD13
Contact Information
MARAD posts contact information on its "Maritime Contact Information" web page.

https://cms.marad.dot.gov/about-us/maritime-contact-information

Data / Statistics
The "Data and Reports" web pages contain data that are organized into four broad categories: historical

datasets, U.S.–international trade, U.S. vessel movements and port calls, and vessel fleet lists. The Office of Policy

and Plans publishes statistical and economic analyses and reports on a variety of maritime transportation topics.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/data-reports | Email: data.marad@dot.gov

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that MARAD recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/maritime-administration

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Enacted in 1966, the FOIA took effect on July 4, 1967. The Act gives a right for accessing Federal agency records

to any person, except a fugitive from the law. Some records, or portions of them, are shielded from disclosure

by one or more of nine statutory exemptions or by specific harm that disclosure could cause. The Electronic

Freedom of Information Act Amendments of 1996 require Federal agencies to use electronic information

technology to expand access to and availability of FOIA documents. MARAD posts contact information for its

FOIA officer and FOIA public liaison on its "Freedom of Information Act Contacts" web page.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/about-us/foia/freedom-information-act-contacts | Email: FOIA.Marad@dot.gov
The agency maintains an online document library. Before submitting a FOIA request, browse its electronic

reading room or search for the desired information to determine if it is accessible, immediately and free of

charge, without submitting a formal FOIA request.

https://www.marad.dot.gov/about-us/foia/electronic-reading-room

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
MARAD posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.marad.dot.gov/about-us/frequently-asked-questions

Glossary
The "Glossary of Shipping Terms—2008" contains abbreviations, acronyms, initialisms, and words that its

compilers selected from the rich vocabulary of the shipping business.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/sites/marad.dot.gov/files/docs/resources/3686/glossaryfinal.pdf

History
The MARAD vessel history database has information on vessels that have been or remain part of the National

Defense Reserve Fleet and other vessels that were at one time owned, operated, or in the custody of MARAD or

one of its predecessor agencies. Each database entry includes one or more images of vessel status cards—paper
index cards that tell the story of a ship's career in Government service—and additional information when it is

available.

https://vesselhistory.marad.dot.gov/ShipHistory/ShipList?pageNumber=1&matchFromStart=True           |     Email:
marad.history@dot.gov

Maps
A map of MARAD gateway offices is available on the "Gateway Offices" web page.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/about-us/gateway-offices/gateway-offices
MARAD maintains a deepwater port location and status map online. The "Deepwater Ports Map" web page has

links to information on applications that are under review, that have been approved or disapproved, and that

have been withdrawn.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/ports/deepwater-ports-and-licensing/deepwater-ports-map

Marine Environment
In a three-page special report "Marine Environment—Protecting the World's Waters," Carolyn E. Junemann and

Koichi Yoshida discuss the following topics: anti-fouling systems, cooperation with the International Maritime

Organization, oil booms, port waste, and underwater sound.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/sites/marad.dot.gov/files/docs/environment-security-safety/office-
environment/606/isofocus12-04-ensr-marineenvironment.pdf

Marine Highway Routes
The Marine Highway system comprises 25 marine highway routes serving as extensions of the surface

transportation system.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/sites/marad.dot.gov/files/docs/grants-finances/marine-highways/3061/marine-
highway-route-descriptions-8-14-2019.pdf

Maritime Advisory System
U.S. maritime alerts provide basic information—date and time, incident type, location—on reported maritime

security threats to U.S. maritime industry interests. In some situations, an alert may be issued to refute

unsubstantiated claims. To be added to the electronic distribution list for U.S. maritime alerts and advisories,

email the request to MARAD security.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/office-security/msci-portal/maritime-security-communications-industry-msci-
web-portal | Email: MaradSecurity@dot.gov

Newsroom
Congressional testimonies, news items, and speeches are available online.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/newsroom

Ship Disposal
MARAD's website has information on four methods for disposing of a ship: artificial reefing, domestic recycling,

ship donations, and naval sink at sea live-fire training exercises (SINKEX).

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/national-defense-reserve-fleet/ship-disposal-program/ship-disposal-program
Social Media
MARAD has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/DOTMARAD
MARAD tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/DOTMARAD

Video Archives
A video archives is available on MARAD's website.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/outreach/maritime-administration-video-archives

Virtual Ship Tours
Virtual tours inside cargo and crew spaces and engine rooms are part of MARAD's website.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/history/artifact-program/exhibits
A virtual tour of the NS Savannah, the world's first nuclear-powered merchant ship, which was launched in 1959

as part of the Atoms for Peace Program, is available online.

https://maritime.org/tour/savannah

  The Sources of Information were updated 11–2021.




National     Highway                                                   Traffic                 Safety
Administration
1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590


202-366-9550

888-327-4236

http://www.nhtsa.gov


  ADMINISTRATOR                                            Steven Cliff, Acting


  Deputy Administrator                                     (vacancy)


  Executive Director                                       Jack Danielson


https://www.nhtsa.gov/about-nhtsa/nhtsa-leadership



The above list of key personnel was updated 9–2021.


  [For the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration statement of organization, see the Code of
  Federal Regulations, Title 49, Part 501]
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) was established by the Highway Safety Act of 1970

(23 U.S.C. 401 note) to reduce the number of deaths, injuries, and economic losses resulting from motor vehicle

crashes on the Nation's highways.


The Administration administers motor vehicle and related equipment safety performance programs; co-

administers the State and community highway safety program; regulates the Corporate Average Fuel Economy

program; issues Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS) that prescribe safety features and levels of

safety-related performance for vehicles and vehicular equipment; rates the safety of passenger vehicles in the

New Car Assessment Program; monitors and participates in international vehicle safety forums to harmonize the

FMVSS where appropriate; investigates and prosecutes odometer fraud; administers the National Driver Register

Program; conducts studies and operates programs to reduce economic losses in motor vehicle crashes and

repairs; performs studies, conducts demonstration projects, and issues regulations requiring manufacturers to

provide motor vehicle consumer information; promotes programs to reduce impaired driving, to reduce risky

driver behaviors, and to increase seat belt use; and issues theft prevention standards for passenger motor

vehicles.




ACTIVITIES

Research and Program Development
The Administration helps develop motor vehicle and highway safety program standards. It analyzes data and

researches, develops, tests, and evaluates motor vehicles, motor vehicle equipment, and advanced technologies,

and it collects and analyzes crash data. NHTSA activities are broad in scope with respect to safety: The

Administration encourages industry to adopt advanced motor vehicle safety designs, increases public awareness

of safety issues, and provides a base for vehicle safety information.

http://www.nhtsa.gov/Research

Regional Operations and Program Delivery
The NHTSA administers State highway safety grant programs that the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient

Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users authorized. The Highway Safety formula grant program provides

funds to States, Indian nations, and the territories each year to support safety programs, particularly in the

following priority areas: data and traffic records, emergency medical services, impaired driving, motorcycle

safety, occupant protection, pedestrian and bicycle safety, police traffic services, roadway safety, and speed

control. Incentive grants are also used to encourage States to implement effective data improvement, impaired

driving, motorcycle safety, and occupant protection programs.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/highway-safety-grants-program

Rulemaking
The Administration issues FMVSS that prescribe safety features and levels of safety-related performance for

vehicles and vehicular equipment. The Administration participates in the United Nations World Forum for the

Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations (WP.29). It also oversees the New Car Assessment Program and the
Government's Five Star Safety Rating Program, which evaluates the safety performance of light trucks, passenger

cars, vans, and child seats (https://www.nhtsa.gov/ratings). These evaluations are highly publicized—star ratings

must be visible on the price labels of new vehicles. The Administration also educates consumers on topics such

as driving while distracted, as well as the proper use of vehicle safety features and child restraint seats. To

promote fuel economy, it manages a program establishing and revising fleet average fuel economy standards

for passenger car and light truck manufacturers (https://www.nhtsa.gov/laws-regulations/corporate-average-

fuel-economy). The Administration also runs an antitheft program. Under this program the NHTSA issues rules

requiring that certain passenger motor vehicles meet parts-marking requirements, and it calculates and

publishes annual motor vehicle theft rates.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/laws-regulations

Enforcement
The Administration's Office of Enforcement assures that all new vehicles sold in the U.S. meet applicable FMVSS.

Under its compliance program, the Office conducts random tests and collects consumer complaints to identify

and investigate problems with motor vehicles and vehicular equipment. If a vehicle or equipment suffers from a

safety-related defect or does not meet all applicable FMVSS, the Office seeks a recall, which requires

manufacturers to notify owners and to remedy the defect free of charge. The Office monitors recalls to ensure

that owners are notified in a timely manner and that the scope of the recall and the remedy are adequate. The

Office also assures that all motor vehicles subject to the Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) regulations

meet their respective targets, and it enforces violations of Federal odometer fraud regulations by criminally

prosecuting offenders.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/recalls

National Center for Statistics and Analysis
The NHTSA maintains a collection of scientific and technical information on motor vehicle safety. It also operates

the National Center for Statistics and Analysis, whose activities include the development and maintenance of

national highway-crash data collection systems and related statistical and economic analyses. The public and the

private sector and universities and Federal, State, and local agencies rely on these motor vehicle safety

information resources for documentation.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/research-data/national-center-statistics-and-analysis-ncsa

Communications and Consumer Information
The Office of Communications and Consumer Information develops, directs, and implements communication

strategies based on NHTSA policy and programs, including campaigns to support high visibility enforcement

efforts. It promotes safety messages for NHTSA vehicle-related issues. The Office also manages NHTSA Web

sites and the toll-free Vehicle Safety Hotline. Information received from calls to the hotline forms the basis of

investigations, which can lead to recalls if safety-related defects are identified.

http://www.trafficsafetymarketing.gov/ciot



SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Car Seats
A car seat glossary is available on the Parents Central Web site.

http://www.safercar.gov/parents/CarSeats/Car-Seat-Glossary-of-Terms.htm?view=full
The car seat finder is an online tool that uses date of birth, height, and weight to find a car seat type that

properly fits a child.

http://www.safercar.gov/cpsApp/crs/index.htm

Career Opportunities
Information on job openings is available on the "Jobs at NHTSA" Web page.

http://www.nhtsa.gov/Jobs
In 2016, the NHTSA ranked 290th among 305 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/TD10

Data
The NHTSA posts factsheets, reports, research notes, statistics, and studies on its Web site.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/research-data

Driving Safety
The NHTSA Web site features a trove of safety information and resources. Disabled, older, and teen drivers, as

well as motorcyclists and others can find Web pages dedicated to improving their driving habits and addressing

their safety needs.

http://www.nhtsa.gov/Driving-Safety

Events
The NHTSA hosts meetings and forums to explore new approaches to highway safety. Information and materials

from these event are available online.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/events

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The NHTSA is required to disclose records that are properly requested in writing by any person. A Government

agency may withhold information pursuant to one or more of nine exemptions and three exclusions contained

in the FOIA. The act applies only to Federal agencies and does not give a right of access to records held by

Congress, the courts, State or local government agencies, and private entities.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/about-nhtsa/foia
The NHTSA maintains an electronic reading room. Before submitting a FOIA request, an information seeker

should search for the desired document or record in the reading room to determine whether it may be available

immediately, without charge. The NHTSA also operates a service center for answering FOIA-related questions.

Phone, 202-366-2870.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/about-nhtsa/electronic-reading-room
News
The NHTSA posts press releases on its Web site.

http://www.nhtsa.gov/About-NHTSA/Press-Releases
The NHTSA posts speeches, press events, and testimonies on its Web site.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/speeches-presentations

Publications
The NHTSA disseminates information on traffic safety programs in "Traffic Techs." The publication, starting with

the year 1995, is available online. Staring with the years 2005 and 2006, "Traffic Techs" becomes available in

Portable Document Format (PDF).

http://www.nhtsa.gov/About-NHTSA/Traffic-Techs | Email: TrafficTech@dot.gov

Recalls
The Recalls Spotlight monitors high-profile recalls and provides resources finding and addressing vehicle recalls.

http://www.safercar.gov/rs/index.html
The NHTSA's Web site features a search tool that allows the user to enter a vehicle's identification number (VIN)

to learn whether it has been repaired as part of a safety recall in the last 15 years.

http://www-odi.nhtsa.dot.gov/owners/SearchSafetyIssues

Regional Offices
Contact information for the NHTSA's 10 regional offices is available on the "Regional Offices" Web page.

http://www.nhtsa.gov/nhtsa/whatis/regions

Research
The Office of Vehicle Safety Research strategizes, plans, and implements research programs to reduce crashes,

fatalities, and injuries. The NHTSA's Web site contains a trove of information related to these programs.

http://www.nhtsa.gov/Research

Resources for Parents
The Parents Central Web site features resources to help parents protect their children and educate them on car

and road safety and becoming responsible drivers.

http://www.safercar.gov/parents/index.htm

Vehicle Safety
The NHTSA Web site features a trove of information on and resources for vehicle safety. Topics include defects

and recalls, odometer fraud, theft protection, and tires.

http://www.nhtsa.gov/Vehicle-Safety
To report suspected safety defects in vehicles, vehicle equipment, and child restraint seats, call the Vehicle Safety

Hotline. English- and Spanish-speaking representatives are available on weekdays, excluding Federal holidays.

Phone, 888-327-4236. TTY, 800-424-9153.

https://www-odi.nhtsa.dot.gov/VehicleComplaint
https://www.nhtsa.gov/about-nhtsa/contact-us
For further information, contact the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Office of Communications

and Consumer Information, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590. Phone, 202-366-9550.



Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration
1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590


202-366-4433

http://www.phmsa.dot.gov


  ADMINISTRATOR                                           (vacancy)


  Deputy Administrator                                    Tristan Brown


  Executive Director                                      Howard W. McMillan


https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/about/key-officials



  The above list of key personnel was updated 11–2021.



The Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA) was established on February 20, 2005. It is

responsible for hazardous materials transportation and pipeline safety.




HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
The Office of Hazardous Materials Safety develops and issues regulations for the safe and secure transportation

of hazardous materials by all modes, except bulk transportation by water. The regulations cover shipper and

carrier operations, packaging and container specifications, and hazardous materials definitions. The Office

provides training and outreach to help shippers and carriers meet hazardous material regulatory requirements.

The Office enforces regulations other than those applicable to a single mode of transportation. It manages a

fee-funded grant program to help States plan for hazardous materials emergencies and to assist them and

Indian tribes with training for hazardous materials emergencies. The Office also maintains a national safety

program to safeguard food and other products from contamination during motor or rail transportation.

http://www.phmsa.dot.gov/hazmat/info-center | Email: phmsa.hm-infocenter@dot.gov

  For further information, call the Hazardous Materials Information Center. Phone, 800-467-4922.




PIPELINES
The Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS) ensures the safety, security, and environmental protection of the Nation's

pipeline transportation system. The Office establishes and enforces safety and environmental standards for

pipeline transportation of gas and hazardous liquids. The Office analyzes data, educates and trains, promotes

damage prevention, and conducts research and development for pipeline safety. Through OPS administered

grants, States that voluntarily assume regulatory jurisdiction of pipelines can receive funding for up to 50 percent

of the costs for their intrastate pipeline safety programs. OPS engineers inspect most interstate pipelines and

other facilities not covered by State programs. In accordance with the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, the Office also

approves and tests oil pipeline spill response plans.

http://phmsa.dot.gov/pipeline

  For further information, call the Pipeline Safety Information Center. Phone, 202-366-4595. Fax, 202-
  493-2311.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
Information on the acquisition vehicles that the PHMSA uses to fulfill the requirements for goods and services of

its program offices is available online.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/about-phmsa/working-phmsa/phmsa-business-opportunities

Career Opportunities
The PHMSA relies on accident investigators, accountants, attorneys, auditors, budget analysts, economists,

engineers, finance analysts, geographic information systems specialists, grant specialists, human resource

specialists, information technology specialists, and other professionals to carry out its mission.

http://www.phmsa.dot.gov/careers
In 2020, the PHMSA ranked 322d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TD16

Data / Statistics
The Office of Pipeline Safety makes available data on federally regulated and State regulated natural gas

pipelines, hazardous liquid pipelines, and liquefied natural gas plants. The operators of these pipeline facilities

report this data in accordance with PHMSA pipeline safety regulations. The PHMSA provides downloads of the

raw data, yearly summaries, multiyear trends of safety performance metrics, and inventories tracking the removal

of aging and other higher-risk infrastructure.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/data-and-statistics/pipeline/data-and-statistics-overview

Environmental Justice
The PHMSA website provides information for promoting environmental justice and ensuring nondiscrimination

in communities.
https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/about-phmsa/civil-rights/environmental-justice

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA establishes the public's right to obtain information from Federal Government agencies. Any person

may file a FOIA request, including citizens and foreign nationals, as well as associations, organizations, and

universities.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The PHMSA posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/about-phmsa/phmsa-faqs

Glossaries
The PHMSA website has an inspection activity glossary.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/pipeline/inspections/inspection-activity-glossary
The PHMSA has posted a list of definitions that are associated with safe travel.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/safe-travel/definitions

Hazardous Materials
The Hazardous Materials Information Center can provide assistance with applying the hazardous materials

regulations (49 CFR Parts 100–185), can provide information on hazardous materials transportation and

rulemakings, receives reports of violations of the hazardous materials regulations, can provide copies of recent

Federal Register publications or Department of Transportation special permits, can provide copies of training

materials, and receives requests for formal letters of interpretation.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/standards-rulemaking/hazmat/hazardous-materials-information-center            |   Email:
phmsa.hm-infocenter@dot.gov

History
Millions of miles of transportation pipelines deliver the energy products that the American public uses to keep

homes and businesses running. While rare, pipeline incidents can be fatal and cost millions of dollars in property

damage. The Office of Pipeline Safety participated in the investigations of major pipeline incidents in San Bruno,

CA; Allentown, PA; and Marshall, MI. In its commitment to safety awareness and outreach, the Office offers a

historical look at high-profile pipeline incidents.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/safety-awareness/pipeline/historical-pipeline-incidents

Library
The resources library contains an accessible collection of public documents related to the safe transport of

hazardous materials.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/resources

Mapping System
The National Pipeline Mapping System public map viewer is a Web-based application designed to assist the
     general public with displaying and querying data related to gas transmission and hazardous liquid pipelines,

     liquefied natural gas plants, and breakout tanks under the jurisdiction of the PHMSA.

     https://www.npms.phmsa.dot.gov/Default.aspx

     Newsroom
     The PHMSA posts news items online.

     https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/newsroom

        The Sources of Information were updated 11–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                              Federal Aviation Administration




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION
    800 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20591


    202-366-4000

    866-835-5322

    http://www.faa.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         Steve Dickson


      Deputy Administrator                                                                  A. Bradley Mims
  Chief of Staff                                                                               Angela H. Stubblefield


https://www.faa.gov/about/key_officials



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2021.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), formerly the Federal Aviation Agency, was established by the Federal

Aviation Act of 1958 (72 Stat. 731).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-72/pdf/STATUTE-72-Pg731.pdf
The Administration became a component of the Department of Transportation in 1967, pursuant to the Department of

Transportation Act (49 U.S.C. 106).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-80/pdf/STATUTE-80-Pg931.pdf
The FAA posts an organizational chart on its "Offices" web page in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and

downloading.

https://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/



ACTIVITIES
The FAA regulates civil aviation and U.S. commercial space transportation, maintains and operates air traffic control

and navigation systems for civil and military aircraft, and develops and administers programs involving aviation safety

and the National Airspace System.

https://www.faa.gov/about/mission/

Air Navigation Facilities
The FAA locates and positions, constructs or installs, maintains, operates, and assures the quality of Federal air

navigation electronic and visual aids. At flight service stations, airport traffic control towers, and air route traffic control

centers, the Administration operates and maintains computer systems, radar facilities, and voice-data communications

and visual display equipment.

http://www.faa.gov/about/safety_efficiency

Airport Programs
The Administration maintains a national plan of airport requirements, administers a grant program for development of

public-use airports to assure and improve safety and to meet current and future airport capacity needs, evaluates the

environmental effects of airport development, and administers an airport noise compatibility program. It also develops

standards for and technical guidance on airport planning, design, operations, and safety and provides grants to assist

public agencies in airport system and master planning and airport development and improvement.
http://www.faa.gov/airports

Airspace and Air Traffic Management
FAA activities center on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. To achieve this goal, the

Administration operates a network of airport traffic control towers, air route traffic control centers, and flight service

stations. It develops air traffic rules and regulations and allocates airspace use. It also provides air traffic security

control that meets national defense requirements.

http://www.faa.gov/air_traffic

Civil Aviation Abroad
Under the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 and the International Aviation Facilities Act (49 U.S.C. app. 1151), the FAA

promotes aviation safety and supports civil aviation abroad. FAA experts exchange aeronautical information with

foreign counterparts; certify foreign airmen, mechanics, and repair shops; provide technical aid and training; negotiate

bilateral airworthiness agreements with other countries; and participate in international conferences.

http://www.faa.gov/about/safety_efficiency

Commercial Space Transportation
The Administration regulates and supports the U.S. commercial space transportation industry. It licenses commercial

space launch facilities and private sector launches of space payloads on expendable vehicles. It also sets insurance

requirements for the protection of persons and property and ensures that space transportation activities comply with

U.S. domestic and foreign policy.

http://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/ast/about

Registration
The Aircraft Registry establishes and maintains the record of every U.S. civil aircraft. Buyers seeking information on

aircraft they want to acquire, banks that finance aircraft purchases, aviation historians, and law enforcement and

security agencies rely on the registry. An aircraft record contains information on the aircraft's registered owner, its

airworthiness, and on recorded aircraft security interests.

http://www.faa.gov/licenses_certificates/aircraft_certification/aircraft_registry/about_aircraft_records

Research, Engineering, and Development
The research, engineering, and development activities of the FAA provide the systems, procedures, facilities, and

devices needed for a safe and efficient air navigation and air traffic control system for civil aviation and air defense.

The Administration also performs an aeromedical research function: It applies knowledge gained from its research

program and the work of others to improve civil aviation safety and the safety, health, and efficiency of FAA

employees. The Administration also supports the development and testing of aircraft and their parts.

http://www.faa.gov/data_research/research

Safety Regulation
The FAA issues and enforces regulations and minimum standards affecting the manufacture, operation, and

maintenance of aircraft. It also certifies airmen and airports that serve air carriers.

http://www.faa.gov/about/safety_efficiency
Test and Evaluation
The FAA tests and evaluates specified items such as aviation systems, subsystems, equipment, devices, materials,

concepts, or procedures at any phase in the cycle of their development from conception to acceptance, to

implementation. At key decision points, it also carries out assigned independent testing.


Other Programs
The FAA administers the Aviation Insurance Program, which provides insurance products to cover U.S. domestic air

transportation industry needs that are not adequately met by the commercial insurance market. The Administration

develops specifications for the preparation of aeronautical charts. It also publishes current information on airways and

airport service; issues technical publications for the improvement of in-flight safety, airport planning and design, and

other aeronautical activities; and serves as the executive administration for the operation and maintenance of the DOT

automated payroll and personnel systems.

http://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/apl/aviation_insurancehttp://www.faa.gov/air_traffic/flight_i
nfo/aeronav



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The FAA website features an alphabetical index to help visitors browse its content or search for information.

https://www.faa.gov/quick_reference

Aircraft Registry
The FAA maintains a registry that allows users to search aircraft registration information online.

https://www.faa.gov/licenses_certificates/aircraft_certification/aircraft_registry

Airlines
The Air Traffic Control System Command Center website features a list of links for the Web sites of airlines.

http://www.fly.faa.gov/FAQ/Airline_Links/airline_links.jsp

Airmen Certification
The FAA posts answers to frequently asked questions dealing with airmen certification on its website.

https://www.faa.gov/licenses_certificates/airmen_certification/airmen_FAQ

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FAA records have been

assigned to record group 237.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/237.html

Business Opportunities
Registration with the System for Award Management is required for doing business with the FAA.

https://sam.gov/content/home
The Small Business Office administers programs that assist small businesses, small businesses that are owned and

controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals, women-owned small businesses, and service-

disabled veteran-owned small businesses, with FAA procurement opportunities.

https://sbo.faa.gov/Home.cfm

Career Opportunities
The FAA offers civil aviation career opportunities in air traffic control, acquisition, contracts, engineering, information

technology, safety and security, and other fields.

https://www.faa.gov/jobs/career_fields
In 2020, the FAA ranked 119th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/TD03

Contact the FAA
Information for finding the appropriate point of contact or reporting an issue to the FAA is available on the "Contact"

web page.

https://www.faa.gov/contact
Contact information for field and regional offices is available on the "National Engagement and Regional

Administration" web page.

https://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/arc/

Data / Research
The FAA conducts research on commercial and general aviation. It posts information on how the research is carried

out, the resulting data and statistics, and grant data and funding information.

https://www.faa.gov/data_research

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the FAA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-aviation-administration

Flight Delays
The FAA's Air Traffic Control System Command Center provides status information, which is not flight specific, for

general airport conditions nationwide.

http://www.fly.faa.gov/flyfaa/usmap.jsp

Flying With Pets
The "Flying With Pets" web page has information and relevant links for flying with a pet or service animal.

https://www.faa.gov/travelers/fly_pets/
Email, personal digital assistants (PDAs), pagers, phones, and wireless devices can be used to monitor the real-time

operating status of the Nation's largest airports and receive delay information from the FAA.

https://www.fly.faa.gov/ais/jsp/ais.jsp
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded from

disclosure by one or more of nine exemptions that are contained within the statute.

https://www.faa.gov/foia
FAA posts a lot of information on its website. Before making a formal FOIA request, search the records that are

immediately available, particularly the contents of the FAA's electronic FOIA library. The desired information already

may be accessible.

https://www.faa.gov/foia/electronic_reading_room

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The FAA posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://faa.custhelp.com

Glossary
The Air Traffic Control System Command Center maintains a glossary of air traffic control management acronyms and

terms.

http://www.fly.faa.gov/FAQ/Acronyms/acronyms.jsp

International Travel
The "International Travel" web page has information and resources for those preparing to fly abroad.

https://www.faa.gov/travelers/international_travel/

History
A timeline of aerospace history is available on the FAA website. The timeline starts on December 17, 1903, with Orville

and Wilbur Wright's first self-propelled airplane flight.

https://www.faa.gov/about/history/timeline

Newsroom
The FAA posts factsheets, news items and updates, press releases, speeches, and testimonies on its website.

https://www.faa.gov/newsroom

NextGen
NextGen is a series of interlinked programs, portfolios, systems, policies, and procedures. It uses advanced

technologies and capabilities for improving the operation of the National Airspace System.

https://www.faa.gov/nextgen

Report a Drone
Please report a drone that is being operated dangerously or used to commit a crime to local law enforcement first

responders. Please report a drone that is being operated in a manner that flouts FAA rules to a local FAA flight

standards district office. An unauthorized drone operator may be penalized or criminally charged.
     https://www.faa.gov/uas/contact_us/report_uas_sighting/

     Social Media
     The FAA has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/FAA
     The FAA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/faanews
     The FAA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/FAAnews

     Wildlife Strikes
     Aircraft and wildlife in the United States collide on occasion. Wildlife strikes almost always involve birds; however, the

     FAA also has received reports of alligator, bat, coyote, deer, skunk, and turtle strikes. The most frequently struck birds

     are gulls, but ducks and geese cause more damage per strike. The FAA's National Wildlife Strike Database contains the

     information needed for telling the full story of collisions involving aircraft and animals.

     http://wildlife.faa.gov
     The wildlife strike reporting system helps the FAA collect the information used to build the National Wildlife Strike

     Database. An online form is available for submitting a strike report.

     https://wildlife.faa.gov/add

        The Sources of Information were updated 10–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                              Federal Highway Administration




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL HIGHWAY ADMINISTRATION
    1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590


    202-366-0650

    http://www.fhwa.dot.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         (vacancy)




      Deputy Administrator                                                                  (vacancy)
  Executive Director                                                                    Gloria M. Shepherd


https://fhwaapps.fhwa.dot.gov/foisp/hqphone.do



  The above list of key personnel was updated 9–2021.



The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) was established as an agency of the Department of Transportation by the

Department of Transportation Act (49 U.S.C. 104). Title 23 of the United States Code and other supporting legislation

authorize the Administration's various activities.


The FHWA improves mobility on our Nation's highways through national leadership, innovation, and program delivery.

The Administration works with Federal, State, and local agencies as well as with other stakeholders and partners to

maintain and improve the National Highway System, which includes the Interstate System and other roads of

importance for national defense and mobility. The FHWA works to increase the National Highway System's safety and

to minimize its traffic congestion. The FHWA ensures that America's roads and highways remain safe, technologically

up-to-date, and environmentally friendly.


Through surface transportation programs, innovative and traditional financing mechanisms, and new types of

pavement and operational technology, the FHWA helps people and goods move more efficiently throughout the

Nation. The Administration also improves the efficiency of highway and road connections to other modes of

transportation. The Federal-aid Highway Program's budget is primarily divided between Federal-aid funding and the

Federal Lands Highway Program.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/about



ACTIVITIES

Federal-aid Highway Program
The Federal-Aid Highway Program supports State highway systems, providing financial assistance for the construction,

maintenance and operations of the Nation's 3.9 million-mile highway network, which includes the Interstate Highway

System, primary highways, and secondary local roads. The FHWA implements the Federal-aid Highway Program in

cooperation with State and local governments.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/federal-aidessentials/federalaid.cfm

Federal Lands Highway Program
The Office of Federal Lands Highway promotes effective, efficient, and reliable administration for a coordinated

program of Federal public roads and bridges; protects and enhances the Nation's natural resources; and gives

transportation access to Native Americans. The Office provides financial resources and engineering assistance for

public roads that meet the transportation needs of Federal and Indian lands. These services are provided in all 50

States, Puerto Rico, U.S. Territories, and the District of Columbia through the Office's Headquarters and its eastern,

central, and western Federal Lands Highway division offices.
http://flh.fhwa.dot.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

All-American Roads / National Scenic Byways
America's Byways—which include the National Scenic Byways and All-American Roads—is an umbrella term referring

to the collection of 184 roads that the Secretary of Transportation selects for inclusion based on distinctiveness and

diverseness.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/byways

Career Opportunities
FHWA operates offices throughout the country and hires professionals with expertise in a variety of fields to carry out

its mission.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/careers
FHWA consistently ranks high among agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/TD04

Core Topics
The "Core Highway Topics" web page features a topical, alphabetical list. The topics are categorized according to nine

headings: environment, Office of Federal Lands Highway, highway funding, international, research and technologies,

road operations and congestion, roads and bridges, road users, and safety.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/resources/topics

Federal-Aid Essentials
Federal-aid Essentials offers an online library of informational videos and resources for local public agencies. Each

video addresses a single topic and condenses the complex regulations and requirements of the Federal-aid Highway

Program into basic concepts and illustrated examples.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/federal-aidessentials

Field and Division Offices
FHWA's field organization delivers program services to the agency's partners and customers. This organization

consists of the Resource Center, State-level Federal-aid division offices, and the Office of Federal Lands Highway.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/about/field.cfm

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA establishes a presumption that records in the possession of agencies and departments of the Federal

Government's executive branch are available to the public. The statute sets standards for determining when

Government records must be made available and which records may be withheld. It also gives requesters specific legal

rights and provides administrative and judicial remedies when access to records or portions of records is denied. Most

importantly, the statute requires that Federal agencies provide, to the fullest extent possible, access to and disclosure
of information pertaining to the Government's business.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/foia
FHWA maintains an electronic FOIA reading room. It contains records that are often requested under the statute.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/foia/err.cfm

Glossary
FHWA web site features a glossary of transportation planning terms and acronyms.

https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/planning/glossary

History
FHWA web site features a general highway history.

https://highways.dot.gov/highway-history

Libraries
FHWA's research library is located in the Turner-Fairbank Highway Research Center in McLean, VA. It is open on

weekdays, excluding Federal holidays, 7:30–4 p.m.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/research/library/ | Email: fhwalibrary@dot.gov
Each FHWA office maintains accessibility information that relates to its own program. The accessibility resource library

supports the effort to organize information relating to the Americans with Disabilities Act and other accessibility

resources that may affect FHWA projects.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/accessibility

Newsroom
FHWA posts press releases, as well as photos and videos, speeches and testimony, on its web site, YouTube channel,

and other social media platforms.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/briefingroom

Resource Center / Technical Service Teams
The Resource Center is home to a national staff of subject matter experts across eight teams covering various specialty

areas and is the primary source of training, technical assistance, and technology deployment services to support

FHWA's Federal partners, State and local transportation agencies, and other stakeholders. Contact information for

these teams and information on their activities, products, and services are available online in the Resource Center.

http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/resourcecenter/index.cfm

Social Media
FHWA tweets and posts announcements and other newsworthy items on X, Facebook, LinkedIn, and Instagram, which

are   maintained    by   the    FHWA     Office   of    Public     Affairs.   X:   https://x.com/USDOTFHWA    Facebook:

https://www.facebook.com/FederalHighwayAdmin           LinkedIn:     https://www.linkedin.com/company/federal-highway-

administration/ Instagram: https://www.instagram.com/federalhighwayadmin/ FHWA posts videos on its YouTube

channel. https://www.youtube.com/user/USDOTFHWA


The FHWA maintains a page on Facebook.
     https://www.facebook.com/FederalHighwayAdmin
     The FHWA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/USDOTFHWA

     Staff Directories
     The headquarters organizational directory, key field personnel directory, and Washington headquarters fax numbers

     are available on FHWA's web site.

     http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/about/staff.cfm

     For Further Information
     For further information, contact the Federal Highway Administration, Office of Public Affairs, 1200 New Jersey Avenue,

     SE, Washington, DC 20590. Phone, 202-366-0660.

     http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/contact

        For further information, contact the Federal Highway Administration, Office of Public Affairs, 1200 New
        Jersey Avenue, SE., Washington, DC 20590. Phone, 202-366-0650.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                         Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ADMINISTRATION
    1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590


    202-366-2519

    http://www.fmcsa.dot.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         (vacancy)


      Deputy Administrator                                                                  Meera Joshi
https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/mission/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 9–2021.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) was established within the Department of Transportation on

January 1, 2000, pursuant to the Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act of 1999 (113 Stat. 1750).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-113/pdf/STATUTE-113-Pg1748.pdf
Statutory material that affects the organization of the FMCSA has been codified in the United States Code (U.S.C.) and

assigned to 49 U.S.C. 113.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title49-section113&num=0&edition=prelim



ACTIVITIES
Formerly a part of the Federal Highway Administration, the FMCSA reduces commercial motor vehicle-related fatalities

and injuries. Administration activities increase the safety of motor carrier operations by enforcing safety regulations—

targeting high-risk commercial drivers and carriers; improving safety information systems and commercial motor

vehicle technologies; strengthening equipment and operating standards; and increasing safety awareness. When

carrying out these activities, the Administration works with representatives of the motor carrier industry, labor safety

interest groups, and Federal, State, and local enforcement agencies.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/mission/about-us

Commercial Licensing
The FMCSA develops standards to test and license commercial motor vehicle drivers.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/registration/commercial-drivers-license

Data / Analysis
The FMCSA collects and disseminates data on motor carrier safety and directs resources to improve motor carrier

safety.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/data-and-statistics/motor-carrier-safety-progress-reports

Regulatory Compliance / Enforcement
The FMCSA operates a program to improve safety performance and remove high-risk carriers from the Nation's

highways.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/regulations

Research / Technology
The FMCSA coordinates research and development to improve the safety of motor carrier operations and commercial

motor vehicles and drivers.
https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/research-and-analysis/active-research-projects

Safety Assistance
The FMCSA provides States with financial assistance for roadside inspections and other commercial motor vehicle

safety programs.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety

Other Activities
The FMCSA supports the development of unified motor carrier safety requirements and procedures throughout North

America. It participates in international technical organizations and committees to help share best-practices in motor

carrier safety worldwide. It enforces regulations ensuring safe highway transportation of hazardous materials and

maintains a task force for identifying and investigating household goods carriers that exhibit an unmistakable pattern

of consumer abuse.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FMCSA records have been

assigned to record group 557. That record group, however, does not have a description that is associated with it.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/000.html

Bicyclists / Pedestrians
Bicyclists and pedestrians share roads with large trucks and buses. The FMCSA website has resources that address

safety issues affecting riders, walkers, and drivers.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/resources-bicyclists-and-pedestrians

Career Opportunities
The FMCSA posts job announcements on the USAJobs website. Application tips, information for students and recent

graduates, and reasons for pursuing a career at the FMCSA are available on its website. Phone, 800-832-5660.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/careers
In 2020, the FMCSA ranked 138th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TD17

Certified Medical Examiners
Inclusion in the National Registry of Certified Medical Examiners is limited to medical professionals who complete

training and pass an exam on the FMCSA's physical qualification standards.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/regulations/national-registry/national-registry-certified-medical-examiners

Commercial Carriers
The FMCSA website has resources to help carrier companies with registration and safety and regulatory matters.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/resources-for-carrier-companies
The FMCSA website has resources—regulatory information and safety publications—to make complying with

regulations easier for passenger carriers and to help them operate more safely.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/passenger-safety/passenger-carrier-safety-information

Commercial Drivers
The FMCSA website has resources for drivers who want to increase safety and who may need help them with the

registration and licensing processes.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/resources-for-drivers

Company Safety Records
The FMCSA maintains websites that provide convenient access to safety-related information. To perform a search, a

user must know a company's name, USDOT number, or motor carrier number.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/company-safety-records

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has a table that contains email addresses, phone numbers, and web forms.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/contact-us

Data / Statistics
The annual "Pocket Guide to Large Truck and Bus Statistics" highlights the FMCSA’s role in collecting and analyzing

data on large trucks and buses. The pocket guide is a compilation of statistics from the overall state of the industry to

enforcement activity, details on traffic violations and other incidents, the costs of crashes, and more.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/data-and-statistics/commercial-motor-vehicle-facts
The Analysis Division compiles the information used for "Large Truck and Bus Crash Facts," an annual report

containing descriptive statistics on fatal, injurious, and property-damage-only crashes involving large trucks and buses.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/data-and-statistics/large-truck-and-bus-crash-facts

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the FMCSA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-motor-carrier-safety-administration

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FMCSA supports efforts to create a more open and transparent Federal Government. Accordingly, it

conscientiously carries out the requirements of the FOIA. The FMCSA ensures that nonexempt documents or records

are accessible to anyone who properly files a FOIA request. Phone, 202-366-2960. Fax, 202-385-2335.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/foia | Email: foia@fmcsa.dot.gov
The FMCSA's electronic reading room contains frequently requested records, as well as final opinions and orders,

policy statements, and staff manuals.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/foia/foia-electronic-reading-room
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The FMCSA posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/faq

Grants
State and local government agencies in the 50 States and the District of Columbia, as well as in American Samoa,

Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Northern Mariana and the U.S. Virgin Islands may apply for safety grant funding.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/mission/grants

Look Before You Book
The FMCSA website has resources for those making travel plans and for those looking to charter a bus for a sporting

event, field trip, or other group activity. Safety tips and information, software applications (apps) to research bus

operators, and information on reporting safety violations are available on the "Look Before You Book" web pages.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/passenger-safety/bus-passengers-look-you-book
Bus travel safety kits for seniors, students, and those traveling to faith-based events are available on "Look Before You

Book."

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/safety/look-you-book/consumer-safety-resources

Newsroom
The FMCSA posts events, news releases, speeches, and testimony on its website.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/newsroom

Protect Your Move
The "Protect Your Move" web pages have a trove of information on and resources for planning a move, selecting a

mover, and filing a moving fraud complaint.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/protect-your-move

Safety Violations
Safety, service, or discrimination issues involving a bus or truck or moving company or a cargo tank facility? If so, file a

complaint on the National Consumer Complaint Database website or by phone on weekdays, 8 a.m.–8 p.m., eastern

time. Phone, 888-368-7238.

https://nccdb.fmcsa.dot.gov/nccdb/home.aspx

Service Centers / Field Offices
Contact information for service centers and field offices is available on the FMCSA website. Phone, 800-832-5660.

https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/mission/field-offices

Social Media
The FMCSA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/fmcsa
The FMCSA has a Facebook account.
     https://www.facebook.com/FMCSA

     USDOT Numbers
     The FMCSA website features an interactive tool that can determine whether or not a commercial vehicle requires a

     USDOT number.

     https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/registration/do-i-need-usdot-number

     Veterans
     The FMCSA helps veterans find employment in the motor carrier industry. Several provisions in the Fixing America's

     Surface Transportation (FAST) Act support this effort.

     https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/fastact/veteran-drivers

        The above Sources of Information were updated 9–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                              Federal Railroad Administration




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL RAILROAD ADMINISTRATION
    1200 New Jersey Avenue, SE., West Building, Washington, DC 20590


    202-493-6014

    http://www.fra.dot.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         (vacancy)


      Deputy Administrator                                                                  Amit Bose
https://railroads.dot.gov/about-fra/organization/vacant-administrator



The above list of key personnel was updated 09–2021.



ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) was created pursuant to section 3(e)(1) of the Department of Transportation

Act of 1966 (49 U.S.C. 103).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-80/pdf/STATUTE-80-Pg931.pdf
The FRA posts its organizational chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) on its website for viewing and

downloading.

https://railroads.dot.gov/about-fra/organization/organization-chart



ACTIVITIES
The Administration promulgates and enforces rail safety regulations, administers railroad financial assistance programs,

conducts research and development to improve railroad safety and national rail transportation policy, provides for the

rehabilitation of Northeast Corridor rail passenger service, and consolidates Government support of rail transportation

activities.

https://railroads.dot.gov/about-fra/about-fra

Passenger and Freight Services
The FRA's passenger rail activities include administering Federal grants and loans to Amtrak, Alaska Railroad, and high-

speed rail; supporting the Secretary of Transportation in his or her role as a member of Amtrak's board of directors;

providing guidance and analysis of intercity passenger rail services and high-speed rail.

https://railroads.dot.gov/rail-network-development/passenger-rail/passenger-rail
Its freight rail activities include supporting current freight rail market share and growth and developing strategies to

attract 50 percent of all shipments 500 miles or more to intermodal rail. The Administration's Office of Railroad Policy

and Development implements programs that provide financial support, research and development, and analysis and

guidance for the freight rail industry and its stakeholders.

https://railroads.dot.gov/rail-network-development/freight-rail-overview

Railroad Safety
The Administration administers and enforces the Federal laws and regulations that promote railroad safety, and it

exercises jurisdiction over all areas of rail safety under the Rail Safety Act of 1970—track maintenance, inspection

standards, equipment standards, operating practices. Railroad and related industry equipment, facilities, and records

are inspected and required reports are reviewed. The Administration also educates the public about safety at highway

rail grade crossings and the danger of trespassing on rail property.
https://railroads.dot.gov/railroad-safety

Research / Development
The FRA's research and development program relies on basic and applied research and on the development of

innovations and solutions to ensure the efficient, reliable, and safe movement of people and goods. Safety is the

principal driver of the research and development program.

https://railroads.dot.gov/research-development/research-development-and-technology

Transportation Test Center
The Administration tests and evaluates conventional and advanced railroad systems and components at the

Transportation Test Center, Inc. Private sector companies and the Governments of Canada, Japan, and the United

States use the facility to study the operation of conventional and advanced systems under controlled conditions.

Amtrak tests new high-speed locomotives and trains at the Center, and the Federal Transit Administration uses it for

testing urban rapid transit vehicles.

https://railroads.dot.gov/program-areas/testing-facilities-equipment/testing-facilities-equipment



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FRA records have been

assigned to record group 399.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/399.html

Business Opportunities
The "How To Do Business with the FRA" web page explains the steps of becoming eligible for doing business with the

FRA and of identifying business opportunities that the FRA has to offer. The web page also has a database of small

business vendors.

https://railroads.dot.gov/resource-center/how-do-business-fra/how-do-business-fra

Career Opportunities
The FRA relies heavily on railroad safety inspectors—hazardous materials, motive power and equipment, operating

practices, signals and train control, and track inspectors—to carry out its mission. Safety inspectors inspect for

compliance with Federal laws, regulations, rules, and standards; conduct accident investigations and report on their

findings; and seek correction of unsafe conditions. They also testify as expert witnesses in civil suits. These jobs require

skill in evaluation, factfinding, and report writing; comprehension and application of technical and regulatory

standards; an ability to build rapport with individuals and organizations; and knowledge of methods used in

installation, operation, and maintenance or manufacturing of railroad equipment and systems.

https://railroads.dot.gov/resource-center/jobs/job-vacancies
In 2020, the FRA ranked 206th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.
https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TD05

Contact Information
Email addresses and phone numbers are available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://railroads.dot.gov/about-fra/contact-us

Electronic Library (eLibrary)
An eLibrary offers convenient access to all the documents that are posted on the FRA's public website.

https://railroads.dot.gov/elibrary-search

Environmental Reviews
The FRA posts a list of environmental projects that require the FRA to pursue an environmental assessment or

environmental impact statement or both an assessment and a statement.

https://railroads.dot.gov/rail-network-development/environment/environmental-reviews

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the FRA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-railroad-administration

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Any person—U.S. citizens, foreign nationals, as well as those representing organizations, associations, and universities

—can file a FOIA request. All FOIA requests must be submitted in writing and are processed in the Office of Chief

Counsel at FRA headquarters in Washington, DC.

https://railroads.dot.gov/freedom-information-act-foia | Email: FRAFOIA@dot.gov
To comply with the Electronic Freedom of Information Act (E–FOIA) Amendments of 1996, agencies must make some

categories of records available to the public on an ongoing basis.

https://railroads.dot.gov/resource-center/freedom-information-act/electronic-reading-room

Horn Noise
Noise from transportation systems, including rail operations, often has adverse environmental effects. The FRA posts

answers to frequently asked questions on horn noise.

https://railroads.dot.gov/environment/noise-vibration/horn-noise-faq

Maps
The "Maps—Geographic Information System" web page has interactive safety and trespassers casualty maps.

https://railroads.dot.gov/maps-and-data/maps-geographic-information-system/maps-geographic-information-system

Media Relations
The Office of Communications handles media relations.

https://railroads.dot.gov/about-fra/communications/communications

News
The FRA posts news items on its website.
https://railroads.dot.gov/newsroom

Railroad Crossings / Trespassing
FRA programs have helped to reduce the number of railroad crossing and trespassing fatalities by 60% over the last

two decades. The Railroad Crossing Safety and Trespasser Prevention Division seeks to continue this trend. Information

on and resources for railroad crossing safety and preventing trespassing along railroad rights-of-way are available

online.

https://railroads.dot.gov/highway-rail-crossing-and-trespasser-programs/railroad-crossing-safety-trespass

Railroad Safety
The Office of Safety Analysis posts railroad safety information—data related to railroad accidents and incidents,

including highway-rail grade crossing accidents, rail equipment accidents, and employee injuries and illnesses—on its

website.

https://safetydata.fra.dot.gov/OfficeofSafety/Default.aspx
The FRA has a new safety data website.

https://railroads.dot.gov/forms-guides-publications/guides/interacting-new-fra-safety-data-website
The FRA monitors the occurrence of train accidents and incidents and investigates serious events to determine their

cause and to assess compliance with safety laws and regulations. Detailed information on these investigations is

available on the FRA's website.

https://railroads.dot.gov/railroad-safety/accident-data-reporting-and-investigations
Operation Lifesaver, Inc., is a nonprofit organization and a rail safety education leader.

https://oli.org/about-us

Research / Development
The Office of Research and Development is organized into four divisions and works in 10 program areas. An online

table shows where the four divisions and 10 program areas intersect with the most frequent causes of railroad

accidents and incidents.

https://railroads.dot.gov/research-development/program-areas/program-areas

Social Media
The FRA posts photographs and tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/USDOTFRA
The FRA has a Facebook page.

https://www.facebook.com/USDOTFRA
The FRA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/usdotfra

  The above Sources of Information were updated 9–2021.
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Federal Transit Administration




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL TRANSIT ADMINISTRATION
    1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590


    202-366-4043

    http://www.fta.dot.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         Nuria Fernandez


      Deputy Administrator                                                                  (vacancy)


      Executive Director                                                                    Matthew J. Welbes
https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/officials/officials



  The above list of key personnel was updated 9–2021.




  [For the Federal Transit Administration statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations,
  Title 49, Part 601]



The Federal Transit Administration (FTA), formerly the Urban Mass Transportation Administration, was established as

an operating administration of the U.S. Department of Transportation by section 1 of Reorganization Plan No. 2 of

1968 (5 U.S.C. app. 1), effective July 1, 1968. The FTA helps America's communities by developing improved public

transportation and providing financial assistance to State and local governments to finance public transportation

systems and carry out national transit goals and policy.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/about-fta



PROGRAMS

Alternatives Analysis
The Alternatives Analysis program provides grants to help identify public transportation needs and the costs and

benefits of various transportation strategies for a defined travel corridor. The results of these studies may be the

selection of a locally preferred transportation alternative, which is the first step for developing viable projects for

possible future funding under the New Starts and Small Starts program.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/grants/13094_7395.html

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.



Capital Investment
The Capital Investment program helps finance the acquisition, construction, reconstruction, and improvement of

facilities and equipment for public transportation service in urban areas. The Capital Investment program makes

available three types of funds: fixed guideway modernization funds for rolling stock renewal, safety-related

improvements, and signal and power modernization; new and small starts funds for construction of new fixed

guideway systems or extensions to existing fixed guideway systems or corridor based rapid bus systems; and bus and

bus facilities funds for the acquisition of buses and rolling stock, ancillary equipment, and the construction of bus

facilities.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/12304.html

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.
Clean Fuels Grants
The Clean Fuels Grants program helps nonattainment and maintenance areas achieve or maintain the National

Ambient Air Quality Standards for ozone and carbon monoxide, and it supports emerging clean fuel and advanced

propulsion technologies for transit buses and markets for those technologies. The program funds purchasing or

leasing clean fuel buses, including buses that employ a lightweight composite primary structure and vans for use in

revenue service; constructing or leasing clean fuel bus facilities, including electrical recharging facilities and related

equipment; and projects involving clean fuel, biodiesel, hybrid electric, or zero emissions technology buses.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/cleanfuels

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.



Elderly Persons and Persons With Disabilities
The Transportation for Elderly Persons and Persons With Disabilities program provides financial assistance to private

nonprofit agencies for the transportation needs of elderly persons and persons with disabilities in places where public

services are unavailable, insufficient, or inappropriate; to public bodies approved by the State to coordinate services

for elderly persons or persons with disabilities; and to public bodies that certify to the Governor that no nonprofit

corporation or association is readily available in an area to provide the service. Funds are allocated by formula to the

States. Local organizations apply for funding through a designated State agency.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/grants/13093_3556.html

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.



Job Access and Reverse Commuting
The Job Access and Reverse Commute program addresses the transportation challenges faced by welfare recipients

and low-income persons seeking or maintaining employment. The program provides capital and planning and

operating expenses for projects that transport low income individuals to and from jobs and employment-related

activities and for projects that support reverse commuting. Many new entry level jobs are located in suburban areas:

Low-income individuals have difficulty accessing these jobs from their inner city, urban, or rural neighborhoods. Many

entry level-jobs also require working late or on weekends when conventional transit services are either reduced or

nonexistent. Many employment related-trips also are complex, involving multiple destinations.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/grants/13093_3550.html

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.



New Freedom
The New Freedom formula grants program supports new public transportation services that surpass the requirements

of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990. The program makes capital and operating funding available to

private nonprofit organizations, State and local governmental authorities, and operators of public transportation

services, including private operators of public transportation services. Eligible projects must benefit individuals with
disabilities: Projects must assist them with transportation—including transportation to and from jobs and employment

services—and remove barriers to transportation.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/grants/13093_3549.html

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.



Nonurban Area Assistance
The Other Than Urbanized Areas formula grants program provides funding to States to support public transportation

in rural areas—with populations under 50,000. The program enhances people's access in nonurbanized areas to

health care, shopping, education, employment, public services, and recreation; assists in the maintenance,

development, improvement, and use of public transportation systems in nonurbanized areas; encourages and

facilitates the most efficient use of all transportation funds used to provide passenger transportation in nonurbanized

areas through the coordination of programs and services; helps develop and support intercity bus transportation; and

promotes the participation of private transportation providers in nonurbanized transportation.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/grants/13093_3555.html

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.



Planning
The Office of Planning and Environment supports the development of information that Federal, State, and local

officials use to make transportation investment decisions. With FHWA partners, the Office co-administers a national

planning program that provides funding, guidance, oversight, and technical support to State and local transportation

agencies. The FTA's 10 region offices and FHWA's 52 division offices work to convey the program to State and local

governments and other transportation agencies.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/about/12347.html

  For further information, call the Office of Planning and Environment. Phone, 202-366-4033.



Research and Technology
The FTA conducts research, development, demonstration, deployment, and evaluation projects to improve public

transportation services. The FTA administers the Bus Testing, International Public Transportation, National Research

and Technology, and Transit Cooperative Research Programs. Through the Transit Investments for Greenhouse Gas

and Energy Reduction (TIGGER) program, the Administration works with public transportation agencies to implement

new strategies for lowering greenhouse gas emissions and to reduce energy use within transit operations. The FTA has

five priority research areas: bicycles and transit, bus rapid transit, environmental sustainability, livable and sustainable

communities, and state of good repair.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/research-innovation

  For further information, call the Office of Research, Demonstration and Innovation. Phone, 202-366-
  4052.
Rural Transit Assistance
The Rural Transit Assistance Program provides a funding source to help design and implement training and technical

assistance projects and other support services tailored to meet the needs of transit operators in nonurbanized areas.

States, local governments, and providers of rural transit services can receive program funds. States may use the funds

to support nonurbanized transit activities in four areas: training, technical assistance, research, and related support

services.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/grants/13093_3554.html

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.



Safety
The Office of Transit Safety and Oversight administers a national safety program and oversees compliance with it.

Based on FTA legislative, policy, and regulatory requirements, the program helps further the nationwide provision of

transit service that is equitable, reliable, and safe.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/tso.html

  For further information, call the Office of Transit Safety and Oversight. Phone, 202-366-1783.



Training and Technical Assistance
The Administration funds the National Transit Institute at Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey. Working with the

Institute, the FTA develops and offers training courses on transit operations, planning, workforce performance, and

productivity. Institute courses are offered at locations nationwide on a variety of subjects. Current course offerings are

posted online.

http://www.ntionline.com/courses/list.php

  For further information, call the Office of Research, Demonstration and Innovation. Phone, 202-366-
  4052.



Transit in Parks
The Paul S. Sarbanes Transit in Parks Program provides funding for alternative transportation projects in and around

National Parks and other Federal recreation areas. Alternative transportation includes bicycle, ferry, pedestrian trail,

shuttle bus, and other forms of public or nonmotorized transportation. These projects reduce congestion, protect

sensitive natural and cultural treasures, and enhance visitor experience. Funding is awarded through a competitive

process to units of Federal land management agencies and to State, local and tribal government agencies.

http://www.fta.dot.gov/transitinparks

  For further information, call the Office of Program Management. Phone, 202-366-2053.
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
Procurement-related information and resources are available on the FTA Web site.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/funding/procurement/procurement

Career Opportunities
FTA fills vacancies in its Washington, DC, headquarters and regional offices. The FTA relies on attorneys, congressional

relations specialists, engineers, environmental specialists, planners, program management specialists, research

program specialists, and other professionals to carry out its mission.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/jobs/jobs
In 2016, the FTA ranked 228th among 305 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/TD09

Environmental Justice
The FTA posts answers to questions related to environmental justice on its Web site.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/regulations-and-guidance/environmental-programs/environmental-justice/environmental-
justice-faqs

Events
The FTA has a calendar of events on its Web site.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/events

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA grants public access to the content of certain records that are held by the offices, agencies, corporations,

administrations, commissions, boards, and services of the Federal Government's executive branch. Some records that

contain sensitive commercial, governmental, and personal information are protected from disclosure.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/foia/foia-requests | Email: FTA.FOIA@dot.gov
The FTA maintains an electronic reading room. Before submitting a FOIA request, information seekers should search

for the desired document or record in the reading room to determine whether it is accessible immediately, without

charge.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/foia/foia-electronic-reading-room

Glossary
The FTA maintains a National Transit Database glossary on its Web site.

https://www.transit.dot.gov/ntd/national-transit-database-ntd-glossary

Grants
The FTA provides grants to local public transit systems. It invests billions of dollars each year to support and to expand
   public transit services. It provides annual formula grants to transit agencies nationwide, as well as discretionary funding

   in competitive processes.

   https://www.transit.dot.gov/funding/grants/grant-programs

   History
   A brief history of mass transit is available on the FTA Web site.

   https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/brief-history-mass-transit

   National Transit Database
   U.S. transit ridership has grown by more than 20 percent in the last decade. To keep track of the industry and provide

   public information and statistics as growth continues, the National Transit Database records the asset, financial, and

   operating conditions of transit systems. Phone, 888-252-0936.

   https://www.transit.dot.gov/ntd | Email: NTDhelp@dot.gov

   News
   The FTA posts news releases on its Web site.

   https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/news

   Regional Offices
   Contact information for the 10 regional offices is available on the FTA's Web site.

   https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/regional-offices/regional-offices

   Research / Innovation
   Research projects assess new operational processes, expand public-private partnerships, fund demonstration grants

   for low or no emissions buses, improve traveler experiences, and test systems that monitor safety. Research and

   innovation reports and publications are available on the FTA Web site.

   https://www.transit.dot.gov/research-innovation/research-innovation-reports-and-publications

   Social Media
   The FTA maintains a channel on YouTube, as well as accounts on Facebook, LinkedIn, and Twitter.

   https://www.transit.dot.gov/about/news/social-media

   Updates
   A subscription form is available on the FTA Web site to sign up for email updates.

   https://public.govdelivery.com/accounts/USDOTFTA/subscriber/new
   http://www.fta.dot.gov/newsroom/13006.html

       For further information, contact the Federal Transit Administration, Office of Communications and
       Congressional Affairs, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590. Phone, 202-366-4043.




Home
The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                            Great Lakes Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation




The United States Government Manual




     GREAT LAKES SAINT LAWRENCE SEAWAY DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
    55 M Street SE., Suite 930, Washington, DC 20003.


    202-366-0091

    202-366-7147

    http://www.seaway.dot.gov


    Departmental Postal Address: Great Lakes Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation, 1200 New Jersey Avenue

    SE., Washington, DC 20590.


    Email: slsdc@dot.gov
Postal and Physical Address: Great Lakes Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation–Operations, 180 Andrews

Street, Massena, NY 13662


315-764-3200

315-764-3235




POLICY HEADQUARTERS—WASHINGTON, DC


  ADMINISTRATOR                                                                              (vacancy)


  Deputy Administrator                                                                       Craig H. Middlebrook




OPERATIONAL HEADQUARTERS—MASSENA, NY


  Associate Administrator, Seaway Operations                                                 Gary Croot

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/about/meet-our-team



The above list of key personnel was updated 03–2021.

The Great Lakes Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation (GLSLSDC) was established by the Saint Lawrence

Seaway Act of May 13, 1954 (33 U.S.C. 981-990) and became an operating administration of the DOT in 1966.


The GLSLSDC, working jointly with the Saint Lawrence Seaway Management Corporation (SLSMC) of Canada, operates

and maintains a safe, reliable, and efficient deep draft waterway between the Great Lakes and the Atlantic Ocean. It

ensures the safe transit of commercial and noncommercial vessels through the two U.S. locks and the navigation

channels of the Saint Lawrence Seaway System and engages in economic and trade development activities to

stimulate trade and employment in the eight States of the Great Lakes region. The GLSLSDC and SLSMC work

together on all matters related to rules and regulations, overall operations, vessel inspections, traffic control, navigation

aids, safety, operating dates, and trade development programs.


The Great Lakes-Saint Lawrence Seaway System extends from the Atlantic Ocean to the Lake Superior ports of Duluth

and Superior, a distance of 2,342 miles. The Corporation's main customers are vessel owners and operators, Midwest

States and Canadian Provinces, Great Lakes port communities, shippers and receivers of domestic and international

cargo, and the maritime and related service industries of the Great Lakes and Saint Lawrence Seaway systems.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/about/what-does-slsdc-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Career Opportunities
The GLSLSDC relies on professionals with expertise in administration, engineering, information technology,

management, marine operations, public policy, and other fields.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/about/careers-slsdc

Contact Information
Information for contacting the GLSLSDC by email, postal mail, and phone is posted online.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/about/contact-us

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Any person has the right to a copy of certain records possessed by the Government's executive administrations,

agencies, boards, commissions, corporations, offices, and services. Some records, however, are protected from

disclosure.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/electronic-reading-room

Grants
The GLSLSDC has an easy-to-use Federal grants toolkit that offers a snapshot of the essential information, resources,

and tools needed to identify Federal agencies and processes offering financial assistance to maritime stakeholders

seeking to carry out environmental, infrastructural, intermodal, and other development projects.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/slsdc-federal-grants-toolkit

Map
An interactive map of vessels transiting the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Seaway System is available online.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/explore/interactive-shipping-map-and-shipping-schedule

News
The SLSDC's quarterly newsletter "Seaway Compass" is available online. It features current information and recent

news on the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Seaway System.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/seaway-compass

Publications
The "Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Seaway System Directory" is a comprehensive publication on the ports and shipping-

related businesses that are critical throughout the region and beyond. It features extensive photography and serves as

an excellent resource for readers who are interested in the Great Lakes Seaway maritime industry.

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/seaway-system-directory
The GLSLSDC's marketing brochure offers comprehensive information on the waterway and its significance to the

Great Lakes region. It is available online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/slsdc-marketing-brochure

Reports
The GLSLSDC posts annual reports on its website.
     https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/annual-reports
     The GLSLSDC posts Asset Renewal Program reports on its website.

     https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/asset-renewal-program-reports

     Social Media
     The GLSLSDC maintains a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/USDOTSLSDC

     Studies
     The "Environmental and Social Impacts of Marine Transport in the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Seaway Region" study

     provides marine stakeholders, transportation planners, and government policymakers with an assessment of the

     potential environmental and social consequences that could occur if cargo carried by marine vessels on the Seaway

     navigation system shifted to rail and road modes of transport.

     https://www.seaway.dot.gov/publications/social-impact-study

     Visitors' Center
     The Seaway Visitors' Center at the Eisenhower Lock provides tourists and ship watchers with an observation deck

     where they can view commercial vessels and cruise ships transiting the lock. Each year, hundreds of ships from all over

     the globe make thousands of transits through the St. Lawrence Seaway. They carry a wide variety of cargoes: coal,

     grains, iron ore, steel, steel slabs, stone, and more.

     https://www.seaway.dot.gov/explore/visitors-center

        The Sources of Information were updated 3–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                  Maritime Administration




The United States Government Manual




     MARITIME ADMINISTRATION
    1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590


    202-366-5807

    800-996-2723

    http://www.marad.dot.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         Lucinda Lessley, Acting


      Deputy Administrator                                                                  Lucinda Lessley
https://www.maritime.dot.gov/about-us/office-administrator/key-personnel



  The above list of key personnel was updated 11–2021.



MARAD develops and promotes the U.S. merchant marine and its operations and oversees emergency merchant ship

operations.


ESTABLISHMENT
The Maritime Administration (MARAD) was established by Reorganization Plan No. 21 of 1950 (5 U.S.C. app.). The

Maritime Act of 1981 (46 U.S.C. 1601) transferred the Maritime Administration to the DOT.


MARAD manages programs that help develop and promote the U.S. merchant marine and its operations. It also

organizes and directs emergency merchant ship operations.


ACTIVITIES
MARAD serves as the DOT's waterborne transportation agency. Its programs promote waterborne transportation use,

the seamless integration of waterborne transportation with other parts of the transportation system, and U.S. merchant

marine viability. The Administration's activities involve ships and shipping, shipbuilding, port operations, vessel

operations, national security, safety, and the environment. It also maintains the health of the merchant marine—

commercial mariners, vessels, and intermodal facilities contribute significantly to national security. The Administration,

therefore, supports current mariners, helps educate future mariners, and informs Americans about the maritime

industry and how it benefits them. Recently, the Administration realigned its functions to be more effective as an

industry promoter and to focus more attention on the environment and safety.


MARAD administers the Maritime Security Program, which maintains a core fleet of U.S.-flag, privately-owned ships

that operate in international commerce. Under agreement, these ships are available to provide needed capacity,

during war and national emergencies, to meet Department of Defense requirements.


It also administers the Ready Reserve Force program to facilitate deployment of U.S. military forces—rapidly and

worldwide. The Force primarily supports transport of Army and Marine Corps unit equipment and combat support

equipment. The Force also supports initial resupply during the critical surge period before commercial ships become

available. The program provides nearly one-half of the Government-owned surge sealift capability.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/about-us



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that MARAD records have been

assigned to record group 357.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/357.html
Business Opportunities
To learn about doing business with MARAD, visit its "Business Services and Products" web page.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/about-us/marad-business-services-products

Career Opportunities
The "Mariners" web page has information on becoming a mariner and mariner opportunities.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/outreach/mariners
The six maritime academies and U.S. Merchant Marine Academy educate students for service as officers in the U.S.

Merchant Marine, U.S. Armed Forces, and Nation’s intermodal transportation system.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/education/maritime-academies/maritime-academies | Email: careersafloat@dot.gov
In 2020, MARAD ranked 228th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TD13

Contact Information
MARAD posts contact information on its "Maritime Contact Information" web page.

https://cms.marad.dot.gov/about-us/maritime-contact-information

Data / Statistics
The "Data and Reports" web pages contain data that are organized into four broad categories: historical datasets,

U.S.–international trade, U.S. vessel movements and port calls, and vessel fleet lists. The Office of Policy and Plans

publishes statistical and economic analyses and reports on a variety of maritime transportation topics.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/data-reports | Email: data.marad@dot.gov

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that MARAD recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/maritime-administration

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Enacted in 1966, the FOIA took effect on July 4, 1967. The Act gives a right for accessing Federal agency records to any

person, except a fugitive from the law. Some records, or portions of them, are shielded from disclosure by one or

more of nine statutory exemptions or by specific harm that disclosure could cause. The Electronic Freedom of

Information Act Amendments of 1996 require Federal agencies to use electronic information technology to expand

access to and availability of FOIA documents. MARAD posts contact information for its FOIA officer and FOIA public

liaison on its "Freedom of Information Act Contacts" web page.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/about-us/foia/freedom-information-act-contacts | Email: FOIA.Marad@dot.gov
The agency maintains an online document library. Before submitting a FOIA request, browse its electronic reading

room or search for the desired information to determine if it is accessible, immediately and free of charge, without

submitting a formal FOIA request.

https://www.marad.dot.gov/about-us/foia/electronic-reading-room
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
MARAD posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.marad.dot.gov/about-us/frequently-asked-questions

Glossary
The "Glossary of Shipping Terms—2008" contains abbreviations, acronyms, initialisms, and words that its compilers

selected from the rich vocabulary of the shipping business.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/sites/marad.dot.gov/files/docs/resources/3686/glossaryfinal.pdf

History
The MARAD vessel history database has information on vessels that have been or remain part of the National Defense

Reserve Fleet and other vessels that were at one time owned, operated, or in the custody of MARAD or one of its

predecessor agencies. Each database entry includes one or more images of vessel status cards—paper index cards

that tell the story of a ship's career in Government service—and additional information when it is available.

https://vesselhistory.marad.dot.gov/ShipHistory/ShipList?pageNumber=1&matchFromStart=True                 |        Email:
marad.history@dot.gov

Maps
A map of MARAD gateway offices is available on the "Gateway Offices" web page.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/about-us/gateway-offices/gateway-offices
MARAD maintains a deepwater port location and status map online. The "Deepwater Ports Map" web page has links

to information on applications that are under review, that have been approved or disapproved, and that have been

withdrawn.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/ports/deepwater-ports-and-licensing/deepwater-ports-map

Marine Environment
In a three-page special report "Marine Environment—Protecting the World's Waters," Carolyn E. Junemann and Koichi

Yoshida discuss the following topics: anti-fouling systems, cooperation with the International Maritime Organization, oil

booms, port waste, and underwater sound.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/sites/marad.dot.gov/files/docs/environment-security-safety/office-
environment/606/isofocus12-04-ensr-marineenvironment.pdf

Marine Highway Routes
The Marine Highway system comprises 25 marine highway routes serving as extensions of the surface transportation

system.

https://www.maritime.dot.gov/sites/marad.dot.gov/files/docs/grants-finances/marine-highways/3061/marine-highway-
route-descriptions-8-14-2019.pdf

Maritime Advisory System
U.S. maritime alerts provide basic information—date and time, incident type, location—on reported maritime security

threats to U.S. maritime industry interests. In some situations, an alert may be issued to refute unsubstantiated claims.

To be added to the electronic distribution list for U.S. maritime alerts and advisories, email the request to MARAD
    security.

    https://www.maritime.dot.gov/office-security/msci-portal/maritime-security-communications-industry-msci-web-portal
    | Email: MaradSecurity@dot.gov

    Newsroom
    Congressional testimonies, news items, and speeches are available online.

    https://www.maritime.dot.gov/newsroom

    Ship Disposal
    MARAD's website has information on four methods for disposing of a ship: artificial reefing, domestic recycling, ship

    donations, and naval sink at sea live-fire training exercises (SINKEX).

    https://www.maritime.dot.gov/national-defense-reserve-fleet/ship-disposal-program/ship-disposal-program

    Social Media
    MARAD has a Facebook account.

    https://www.facebook.com/DOTMARAD
    MARAD tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/DOTMARAD

    Video Archives
    A video archives is available on MARAD's website.

    https://www.maritime.dot.gov/outreach/maritime-administration-video-archives

    Virtual Ship Tours
    Virtual tours inside cargo and crew spaces and engine rooms are part of MARAD's website.

    https://www.maritime.dot.gov/history/artifact-program/exhibits
    A virtual tour of the NS Savannah, the world's first nuclear-powered merchant ship, which was launched in 1959 as part

    of the Atoms for Peace Program, is available online.

    https://maritime.org/tour/savannah

        The Sources of Information were updated 11–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy
Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                    National Highway Traffic Safety Administration




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION
    1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590


    202-366-9550

    888-327-4236

    http://www.nhtsa.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         Steven Cliff, Acting


      Deputy Administrator                                                                  (vacancy)
  Executive Director                                                                        Jack Danielson


https://www.nhtsa.gov/about-nhtsa/nhtsa-leadership



The above list of key personnel was updated 9–2021.


  [For the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration statement of organization, see the Code of
  Federal Regulations, Title 49, Part 501]



The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) was established by the Highway Safety Act of 1970 (23
U.S.C. 401 note) to reduce the number of deaths, injuries, and economic losses resulting from motor vehicle crashes

on the Nation's highways.


The Administration administers motor vehicle and related equipment safety performance programs; co-administers

the State and community highway safety program; regulates the Corporate Average Fuel Economy program; issues

Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards (FMVSS) that prescribe safety features and levels of safety-related

performance for vehicles and vehicular equipment; rates the safety of passenger vehicles in the New Car Assessment

Program; monitors and participates in international vehicle safety forums to harmonize the FMVSS where appropriate;

investigates and prosecutes odometer fraud; administers the National Driver Register Program; conducts studies and

operates programs to reduce economic losses in motor vehicle crashes and repairs; performs studies, conducts

demonstration projects, and issues regulations requiring manufacturers to provide motor vehicle consumer

information; promotes programs to reduce impaired driving, to reduce risky driver behaviors, and to increase seat belt

use; and issues theft prevention standards for passenger motor vehicles.




ACTIVITIES

Research and Program Development
The Administration helps develop motor vehicle and highway safety program standards. It analyzes data and

researches, develops, tests, and evaluates motor vehicles, motor vehicle equipment, and advanced technologies, and it

collects and analyzes crash data. NHTSA activities are broad in scope with respect to safety: The Administration

encourages industry to adopt advanced motor vehicle safety designs, increases public awareness of safety issues, and

provides a base for vehicle safety information.

http://www.nhtsa.gov/Research

Regional Operations and Program Delivery
The NHTSA administers State highway safety grant programs that the Safe, Accountable, Flexible, Efficient

Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy for Users authorized. The Highway Safety formula grant program provides funds

to States, Indian nations, and the territories each year to support safety programs, particularly in the following priority

areas: data and traffic records, emergency medical services, impaired driving, motorcycle safety, occupant protection,
pedestrian and bicycle safety, police traffic services, roadway safety, and speed control. Incentive grants are also used

to encourage States to implement effective data improvement, impaired driving, motorcycle safety, and occupant

protection programs.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/highway-safety-grants-program

Rulemaking
The Administration issues FMVSS that prescribe safety features and levels of safety-related performance for vehicles

and vehicular equipment. The Administration participates in the United Nations World Forum for the Harmonization of

Vehicle Regulations (WP.29). It also oversees the New Car Assessment Program and the Government's Five Star Safety

Rating Program, which evaluates the safety performance of light trucks, passenger cars, vans, and child seats

(https://www.nhtsa.gov/ratings). These evaluations are highly publicized—star ratings must be visible on the price

labels of new vehicles. The Administration also educates consumers on topics such as driving while distracted, as well

as the proper use of vehicle safety features and child restraint seats. To promote fuel economy, it manages a program

establishing and revising fleet average fuel economy standards for passenger car and light truck manufacturers

(https://www.nhtsa.gov/laws-regulations/corporate-average-fuel-economy). The Administration also runs an antitheft

program. Under this program the NHTSA issues rules requiring that certain passenger motor vehicles meet parts-

marking requirements, and it calculates and publishes annual motor vehicle theft rates.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/laws-regulations

Enforcement
The Administration's Office of Enforcement assures that all new vehicles sold in the U.S. meet applicable FMVSS. Under

its compliance program, the Office conducts random tests and collects consumer complaints to identify and

investigate problems with motor vehicles and vehicular equipment. If a vehicle or equipment suffers from a safety-

related defect or does not meet all applicable FMVSS, the Office seeks a recall, which requires manufacturers to notify

owners and to remedy the defect free of charge. The Office monitors recalls to ensure that owners are notified in a

timely manner and that the scope of the recall and the remedy are adequate. The Office also assures that all motor

vehicles subject to the Corporate Average Fuel Economy (CAFE) regulations meet their respective targets, and it

enforces violations of Federal odometer fraud regulations by criminally prosecuting offenders.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/recalls

National Center for Statistics and Analysis
The NHTSA maintains a collection of scientific and technical information on motor vehicle safety. It also operates the

National Center for Statistics and Analysis, whose activities include the development and maintenance of national

highway-crash data collection systems and related statistical and economic analyses. The public and the private sector

and universities and Federal, State, and local agencies rely on these motor vehicle safety information resources for

documentation.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/research-data/national-center-statistics-and-analysis-ncsa

Communications and Consumer Information
The Office of Communications and Consumer Information develops, directs, and implements communication

strategies based on NHTSA policy and programs, including campaigns to support high visibility enforcement efforts. It
promotes safety messages for NHTSA vehicle-related issues. The Office also manages NHTSA Web sites and the toll-

free Vehicle Safety Hotline. Information received from calls to the hotline forms the basis of investigations, which can

lead to recalls if safety-related defects are identified.

http://www.trafficsafetymarketing.gov/ciot



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Car Seats
A car seat glossary is available on the Parents Central Web site.

http://www.safercar.gov/parents/CarSeats/Car-Seat-Glossary-of-Terms.htm?view=full
The car seat finder is an online tool that uses date of birth, height, and weight to find a car seat type that properly fits

a child.

http://www.safercar.gov/cpsApp/crs/index.htm

Career Opportunities
Information on job openings is available on the "Jobs at NHTSA" Web page.

http://www.nhtsa.gov/Jobs
In 2016, the NHTSA ranked 290th among 305 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/TD10

Data
The NHTSA posts factsheets, reports, research notes, statistics, and studies on its Web site.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/research-data

Driving Safety
The NHTSA Web site features a trove of safety information and resources. Disabled, older, and teen drivers, as well as

motorcyclists and others can find Web pages dedicated to improving their driving habits and addressing their safety

needs.

http://www.nhtsa.gov/Driving-Safety

Events
The NHTSA hosts meetings and forums to explore new approaches to highway safety. Information and materials from

these event are available online.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/events

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The NHTSA is required to disclose records that are properly requested in writing by any person. A Government agency

may withhold information pursuant to one or more of nine exemptions and three exclusions contained in the FOIA.

The act applies only to Federal agencies and does not give a right of access to records held by Congress, the courts,
State or local government agencies, and private entities.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/about-nhtsa/foia
The NHTSA maintains an electronic reading room. Before submitting a FOIA request, an information seeker should

search for the desired document or record in the reading room to determine whether it may be available immediately,

without charge. The NHTSA also operates a service center for answering FOIA-related questions. Phone, 202-366-

2870.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/about-nhtsa/electronic-reading-room

News
The NHTSA posts press releases on its Web site.

http://www.nhtsa.gov/About-NHTSA/Press-Releases
The NHTSA posts speeches, press events, and testimonies on its Web site.

https://www.nhtsa.gov/speeches-presentations

Publications
The NHTSA disseminates information on traffic safety programs in "Traffic Techs." The publication, starting with the

year 1995, is available online. Staring with the years 2005 and 2006, "Traffic Techs" becomes available in Portable

Document Format (PDF).

http://www.nhtsa.gov/About-NHTSA/Traffic-Techs | Email: TrafficTech@dot.gov

Recalls
The Recalls Spotlight monitors high-profile recalls and provides resources finding and addressing vehicle recalls.

http://www.safercar.gov/rs/index.html
The NHTSA's Web site features a search tool that allows the user to enter a vehicle's identification number (VIN) to

learn whether it has been repaired as part of a safety recall in the last 15 years.

http://www-odi.nhtsa.dot.gov/owners/SearchSafetyIssues

Regional Offices
Contact information for the NHTSA's 10 regional offices is available on the "Regional Offices" Web page.

http://www.nhtsa.gov/nhtsa/whatis/regions

Research
The Office of Vehicle Safety Research strategizes, plans, and implements research programs to reduce crashes,

fatalities, and injuries. The NHTSA's Web site contains a trove of information related to these programs.

http://www.nhtsa.gov/Research

Resources for Parents
The Parents Central Web site features resources to help parents protect their children and educate them on car and

road safety and becoming responsible drivers.

http://www.safercar.gov/parents/index.htm

Vehicle Safety
     The NHTSA Web site features a trove of information on and resources for vehicle safety. Topics include defects and

     recalls, odometer fraud, theft protection, and tires.

     http://www.nhtsa.gov/Vehicle-Safety
     To report suspected safety defects in vehicles, vehicle equipment, and child restraint seats, call the Vehicle Safety

     Hotline. English- and Spanish-speaking representatives are available on weekdays, excluding Federal holidays. Phone,

     888-327-4236. TTY, 800-424-9153.

     https://www-odi.nhtsa.dot.gov/VehicleComplaint
     https://www.nhtsa.gov/about-nhtsa/contact-us

        For further information, contact the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Office of
        Communications and Consumer Information, 1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590.
        Phone, 202-366-9550.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration




The United States Government Manual




     PIPELINE AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS SAFETY ADMINISTRATION
    1200 New Jersey Avenue SE., Washington, DC 20590


    202-366-4433

    http://www.phmsa.dot.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         (vacancy)


      Deputy Administrator                                                                  Tristan Brown


      Executive Director                                                                    Howard W. McMillan
https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/about/key-officials



  The above list of key personnel was updated 11–2021.



The Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA) was established on February 20, 2005. It is

responsible for hazardous materials transportation and pipeline safety.




HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
The Office of Hazardous Materials Safety develops and issues regulations for the safe and secure transportation of

hazardous materials by all modes, except bulk transportation by water. The regulations cover shipper and carrier

operations, packaging and container specifications, and hazardous materials definitions. The Office provides training

and outreach to help shippers and carriers meet hazardous material regulatory requirements. The Office enforces

regulations other than those applicable to a single mode of transportation. It manages a fee-funded grant program to

help States plan for hazardous materials emergencies and to assist them and Indian tribes with training for hazardous

materials emergencies. The Office also maintains a national safety program to safeguard food and other products

from contamination during motor or rail transportation.

http://www.phmsa.dot.gov/hazmat/info-center | Email: phmsa.hm-infocenter@dot.gov

  For further information, call the Hazardous Materials Information Center. Phone, 800-467-4922.




PIPELINES
The Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS) ensures the safety, security, and environmental protection of the Nation's pipeline

transportation system. The Office establishes and enforces safety and environmental standards for pipeline

transportation of gas and hazardous liquids. The Office analyzes data, educates and trains, promotes damage

prevention, and conducts research and development for pipeline safety. Through OPS administered grants, States that

voluntarily assume regulatory jurisdiction of pipelines can receive funding for up to 50 percent of the costs for their

intrastate pipeline safety programs. OPS engineers inspect most interstate pipelines and other facilities not covered by

State programs. In accordance with the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, the Office also approves and tests oil pipeline spill

response plans.

http://phmsa.dot.gov/pipeline

  For further information, call the Pipeline Safety Information Center. Phone, 202-366-4595. Fax, 202-493-
  2311.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Business Opportunities
Information on the acquisition vehicles that the PHMSA uses to fulfill the requirements for goods and services of its

program offices is available online.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/about-phmsa/working-phmsa/phmsa-business-opportunities

Career Opportunities
The PHMSA relies on accident investigators, accountants, attorneys, auditors, budget analysts, economists, engineers,

finance analysts, geographic information systems specialists, grant specialists, human resource specialists, information

technology specialists, and other professionals to carry out its mission.

http://www.phmsa.dot.gov/careers
In 2020, the PHMSA ranked 322d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TD16

Data / Statistics
The Office of Pipeline Safety makes available data on federally regulated and State regulated natural gas pipelines,

hazardous liquid pipelines, and liquefied natural gas plants. The operators of these pipeline facilities report this data in

accordance with PHMSA pipeline safety regulations. The PHMSA provides downloads of the raw data, yearly

summaries, multiyear trends of safety performance metrics, and inventories tracking the removal of aging and other

higher-risk infrastructure.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/data-and-statistics/pipeline/data-and-statistics-overview

Environmental Justice
The PHMSA website provides information for promoting environmental justice and ensuring nondiscrimination in

communities.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/about-phmsa/civil-rights/environmental-justice

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA establishes the public's right to obtain information from Federal Government agencies. Any person may file

a FOIA request, including citizens and foreign nationals, as well as associations, organizations, and universities.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The PHMSA posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/about-phmsa/phmsa-faqs

Glossaries
The PHMSA website has an inspection activity glossary.

https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/pipeline/inspections/inspection-activity-glossary
The PHMSA has posted a list of definitions that are associated with safe travel.
    https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/safe-travel/definitions

    Hazardous Materials
    The Hazardous Materials Information Center can provide assistance with applying the hazardous materials regulations

    (49 CFR Parts 100–185), can provide information on hazardous materials transportation and rulemakings, receives

    reports of violations of the hazardous materials regulations, can provide copies of recent Federal Register publications

    or Department of Transportation special permits, can provide copies of training materials, and receives requests for

    formal letters of interpretation.

    https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/standards-rulemaking/hazmat/hazardous-materials-information-center                |      Email:
    phmsa.hm-infocenter@dot.gov

    History
    Millions of miles of transportation pipelines deliver the energy products that the American public uses to keep homes

    and businesses running. While rare, pipeline incidents can be fatal and cost millions of dollars in property damage. The

    Office of Pipeline Safety participated in the investigations of major pipeline incidents in San Bruno, CA; Allentown, PA;

    and Marshall, MI. In its commitment to safety awareness and outreach, the Office offers a historical look at high-profile

    pipeline incidents.

    https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/safety-awareness/pipeline/historical-pipeline-incidents

    Library
    The resources library contains an accessible collection of public documents related to the safe transport of hazardous

    materials.

    https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/resources

    Mapping System
    The National Pipeline Mapping System public map viewer is a Web-based application designed to assist the general

    public with displaying and querying data related to gas transmission and hazardous liquid pipelines, liquefied natural

    gas plants, and breakout tanks under the jurisdiction of the PHMSA.

    https://www.npms.phmsa.dot.gov/Default.aspx

    Newsroom
    The PHMSA posts news items online.

    https://www.phmsa.dot.gov/newsroom

        The Sources of Information were updated 11–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Department of Veterans Affairs




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS
    810 Vermont Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20420


    202-461-4800

    http://www.va.gov




    Office of the Secretary
 SECRETARY OF VETERANS AFFAIRS                            Doug Collins


 Deputy Secretary                                         James Byrne, Acting




 Chief of Staff                                           Pamela Powers

https://www.va.gov/opa/bios/secva.asp



Administrations


 EXECUTIVE IN CHARGE


 Health                                                   Richard A. Stone




 UNDER SECRETARIES


 Benefits                                                 Paul Lawrence


 Memorial Affairs                                         Randy C. Reeves

https://www.va.gov/opa/bios/index.asp



Staff Offices


 ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Congressional and Legislative Affairs                    Brooks D. Tucker


 Enterprise Integration                                   Melissa S. Glynn


 Human Resources and Administration                       Jacquelyn Hayes-Byrd, Acting


 Information and Technology / Chief Information Officer   Camilo Sandoval


 Management / Chief Financial Officer                     Jon J. Rychalski


 Public and Intergovernmental Affairs                     John Ullyot




 EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
  Accountability and Whistleblower Protection                                               Kirk M. Nicholas


  Acquisition, Logistics, and Construction                                                  Karen L. Brazell




  Chair, Board of Veterans' Appeals                                                         Cheryl L. Mason


  Chief Veterans Experience Officer                                                         Lynda C. Davis


  General Counsel                                                                           Catherine Mitrano, Acting

https://www.va.gov/landing_organizations.htm



Office of Inspector General


  Inspector General                                                                         Michael J. Missal

https://www.va.gov/oig/about/inspector-general.asp



  The above list of key personnel was updated 11–2018.



The Department of Veterans Affairs operates programs benefiting Veterans and members of their families: It offers

education opportunities and rehabilitation services and provides compensation payments for disabilities or death related

to military service, home loan guaranties, pensions, burials, and health care that includes the services in clinics, medical

centers, community living centers (which replace nursing home)s, and home- and community-based settings.


The Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) was established as an executive department by the Department of Veterans
Affairs Act (38 U.S.C. 201 note). It is comprised of three organizations that administer Veterans programs: the Veterans

Health Administration, the Veterans Benefits Administration, and the National Cemetery Administration. Each

organization has field facilities and a central office component. Staff offices support the overall function of the

Department and its Administrations.

http://www.va.gov/landing2_about.htm



ACTIVITIES

Acquisition, Logistics, and Construction
The Office of Acquisition, Logistics, and Construction (OALC) is a multifunctional organization responsible for directing

the acquisition, logistics, construction, and leasing functions within the VA. The Executive Director, OALC, is also the

Chief Acquisition Officer for the VA.
http://www.va.gov/OALC

Cemeteries
The National Cemetery Administration (NCA) is responsible for the management and oversight of 135 national

cemeteries in the United States and Puerto Rico, as well as 33 soldiers' lots, Confederate cemeteries, and monument

sites. Burial in a national cemetery is available to eligible veterans, certain members of reserve components, and their

spouses and dependent children. At no cost to the family, a national cemetery burial includes the gravesite, graveliner,

opening and closing of the grave, headstone or marker, and perpetual care as part of a national shrine. If an eligible

veteran is buried in an unmarked grave in a private cemetery anywhere in the world, NCA will provide a headstone or

marker. A Government-furnished headstone or marker may be provided for eligible Veterans who died on or after

Nov. 1, 1990 and whose grave is marked with a privately purchased headstone. A Government-furnished medallion

may be provided for eligible Veterans who served on or after Apr. 6, 1917 and whose grave is marked with a privately

purchased headstone or marker. NCA's Veterans Cemetery Grants Program provides funds to State and tribal

governments to establish, expand, or improve veterans' cemeteries. NCA issues Presidential Memorial Certificates to

honor the memory of deceased veterans who are eligible for burial in a national cemetery.

http://www.cem.va.gov

Congressional and Legislative Affairs
The mission of the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Congressional and Legislative Affairs (OCLA) is to improve the

lives of Veterans and their families by advancing pro-Veteran legislation and maintaining responsive and effective

communications with Congress. OCLA coordinates the Department’s activities with Congress. It is the Department’s

focal point for interactions and engagements with Members of Congress, authorization committees, and personal

staff. Additionally, the Office is the Department’s liaison with the Government Accountability Office (GAO).

https://www.va.gov/oca/

Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships
The mission of the Center for Faith-Based and Neighborhood Partnerships (CFBNP) is to develop partnerships with,

provide relevant information to, and expand participation of faith-based, nonprofit, and community/neighborhood

organizations in VA programs in order to better serve the needs of Veterans, their families, survivors, caregivers, and

other beneficiaries.

https://www.va.gov/cfbnpartnerships/

Field Facilities
The Department's operations are handled through the following field facilities: cemeteries, medical centers, outpatient

clinics, community living centers, domiciliaries, and regional offices. Cemeteries provide burial services to Veterans,

their spouses, and dependent children. Medical centers provide eligible beneficiaries with medical and other health

care services equivalent to those provided by private sector institutions, augmented in many instances by services to

meet the special requirements of Veterans. Outpatient clinics provide the most common outpatient services, including

health and wellness visits, without the hassle of visiting a larger medical center. Community Living Centers (CLC) are

skilled nursing facilities, often referred to as nursing homes. Veterans with chronic stable conditions such as dementia,

those requiring rehabilitation or those who need comfort and care at the end of life are served within one of our 135

Community Living Centers. Domiciliaries provide a variety of care to Veterans who suffer from a wide range of
medical, psychiatric, vocational, educational, or social problems and illnesses in a safe, secure, homelike environment.

VHA continues to expand the network of outpatient clinics to include more rural locations, putting access to care

closer to home.


Regional offices grant benefits and services provided by law for Veterans, their dependents, and beneficiaries within an

assigned territory; furnish information regarding VA benefits and services; adjudicate claims and make awards for

disability compensation and pension; conduct outreach and information dissemination; provide support and assistance

to various segments of the Veteran population to include former prisoners of war, minorities, the homeless, women,

and elderly Veterans; supervise payment of VA benefits to incompetent beneficiaries; provide vocational rehabilitation

and employment training; administer educational benefits; guarantee loans for purchase, construction, or alteration of

homes; process grants for specially adapted housing; process death claims; and assist Veterans in exercising rights to

benefits and services.

https://www.va.gov/directory/guide/home.asp

Health Services
The Veterans Health Administration (VHA) is the largest integrated health care system in the United States. It provides

hospital, long-term services and support in community living centers (which replace nursing homes)- and home- and

community- based settings, domiciliary, and outpatient medical and dental care and community care to eligible

Veterans of the Armed Forces. In addition to providing health care, VHA performs research, and assists in the

education and training of physicians, dentists, and many other health care professionals through its affiliations with

educational institutions and organizations. As of March 2017, VHA treated over 8.76 million patients in over 1,700 sites

of care. VHA has 1,247 health care facilities, including 170 VA Medical Centers and 1,067 outpatient sites of care of

varying complexity (VHA outpatient clinics). In addition, VA purchases medical care when needed from community

providers including long-term services and supports in community nursing homes, State Veterans Homes, and in

home and community based settings. In 2016, VA hospitals had about 621,520 inpatient admissions and provided

nearly 84 million outpatient visits. In addition to care delivered in the VA system, VA also delivers care to millions of

Veterans in the community. The number of women Veterans receiving health care from VA more than tripled between

2000 and 2016, growing from 160,000 in 2000 to 475,000. VA hospitals provide more public data about quality and

safety than any health care system in the world and held academic affiliations with more than 1,800 educational

institutions. More than 123,552 health care students receive clinical training at a VA facility each year.


Historically, VHA has been at the forefront of medical research. The first electronic health record, cardiac pacemaker,

bionic ankle, and successful liver transplant were all developed at VA. VA has also developed new drugs and

treatments for acquired immune deficiency syndrome/human immunodeficiency virus, diabetes, Alzheimer's disease,

and osteoporosis. Currently, VHA medical centers provide a wide range of services including traditional services such

as primary care, surgery, critical care, mental health, orthopedics, pharmacy, radiology and physical therapy. Additional

medical and surgical specialty services, including audiology & speech pathology, dermatology, dental, geriatrics,

neurology, palliative medicine, oncology, podiatry, prosthetics, urology, vision care and extended care services; such as

facility and community based long-term services and supports and hospice care are available. Some medical centers

also offer advanced services such as organ transplants and plastic surgery. VA is also using Telehealth and

Telemedicine to improve access to care, especially in remote areas.
http://www.va.gov/HEALTH

Management
The Advisory Committee Management Office (ACMO) provides administrative and management support to the

Department’s 29 Federal Advisory Committees (as of July 2017). VA’s advisory committees solicit advice and

recommendations from outside experts and the public concerning programs for which the Department is responsible

for by law.

http://www.va.gov/ADVISORY

Minority Veterans
The Center for Minority Veterans (CMV), established by the Veterans' Benefits Improvement Act of 1994, identifies

barriers to benefits and health care access, promotes awareness of minority Veteran-related issues, develops strategies

for improving minority Veterans’ participation in existing VA programs, The CMV focuses on the unique and special

needs of African Americans, Hispanics, Asian Americans, Pacific Islanders, and Native Americans, which include

American Indians, Native Hawaiians, and Alaska Natives.

http://www.va.gov/centerforminorityveterans

Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization
The Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization (OSDBU) is the Department’s principal liaison to the Small

Business Administration (SBA), the Department of Commerce, the General Services Administration (GSA), and the

Office of Federal Procurement Policy for matters dealing with small and disadvantaged business activities. OSDBU’s

mission is to enable Veterans to gain access to economic opportunity by leveraging the federal procurement system

and expanding participation of procurement-ready small businesses.

http://www.va.gov/osdbu

Survivors Assistance
Office of Survivors Assistance (OSA) provides support to survivors of Veterans by identifying and informing them of

the benefits and services offered by VA.

https://www.va.gov/survivors/

Veterans' Appeals
The Board of Veterans' Appeals (BVA) renders final decisions on behalf of the Secretary on appeals from decisions of

local VA offices. The Board reviews all appeals for entitlement to Veterans' benefits, including claims for service

connection, increased disability ratings, total disability ratings, pension, insurance benefits, educational benefits, home

loan guaranties, vocational rehabilitation, dependency and indemnity compensation, health care delivery, and fiduciary

matters. The Board has jurisdiction over appeals arising from the VA regional offices, VA medical centers, the National

Cemetery Administration, and the Office of General Counsel. The Board's mission is to conduct hearings and issue

timely, understandable, and quality decisions for Veterans and other appellants in compliance with the requirements of

law. Final BVA decisions are appealable to the U.S. Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims.

http://www.bva.va.gov

Veterans Benefits
VBA provides information, advice, and assistance to Veterans, their dependents, beneficiaries, representatives, and

others applying for VA benefits. It also cooperates with the Department of Labor and other Federal, State, and local

agencies in developing employment opportunities for Veterans and referrals for assistance in resolving socioeconomic,

housing, and other related problems.


VBA’s Compensation and Pension and Fiduciary Services are responsible for adjudicating claims for disability

compensation and pension, specially adapted housing, accrued benefits, adjusted compensation in death cases,

reimbursement for headstones or markers, allowances for automobiles and special adaptive equipment, special

clothing allowances, emergency officers' retirement pay, Survivors' claims for death compensation, dependency and

indemnity compensation, death pension, burial and plot allowances, forfeiture determinations, and a benefits

protection program for minors and incompetent adult beneficiaries.


VBA’s Education Service administers VA education benefits to Veterans, Servicemembers, National Guard members,

Selected Reserve members, and eligible dependents. These benefits provide financial assistance for attending

institutions of higher learning, non-college degree programs, on-the-job and apprenticeship training, flight training,

distance learning, correspondence training, national testing programs, licensing and certifications, entrepreneurship

training, work-study programs, and co-op training. Education Service also performs compliance surveys to ensure that

approved programs are compliant with pertinent laws. Additional information is available at www.benefits.va.gov/gibill.


VBA’s Insurance Service operates for the benefit of Servicemembers, Veterans, and their beneficiaries. Customers can

reach Insurance Service through the VA Insurance Center (phone, 800-669-8477). The Insurance Center performs a

complete range of activities necessary to operate national life insurance programs. Activities include maintenance of

individual accounts, underwriting functions, life and death insurance claims awards, and other insurance-related

transactions for multiple insurance programs. The Insurance Center administers the Veterans Mortgage Life Insurance

Program for those disabled Veterans who receive a VA grant for specially adapted housing, and the Service-Disabled

Veterans Insurance program for Veterans who receive a service-connected disability rating. In addition, Insurance

Service oversees the Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance (SGLI) and Veterans' Group Life Insurance Programs, as

well as the Family Servicemembers’ Group Life Insurance and SGLI Traumatic Injury Protection programs.


VBA’s Loan Guaranty Service is responsible for administering operations that include establishing the eligibility of

Veterans for the program; ensuring VA credit, income, and appraisal requirements are met; managing a panel of

appraisers and establishing a property value; approving grants for specially adapted housing; supervising the

construction of new residential properties; making direct loans to Native American Veterans to acquire a home on

trust land; servicing and liquidating defaulted loans; and disposing of real estate acquired as the consequence of

defaulted loans.


VBA’s Vocational Rehabilitation and Employment Service (VR&E) program provides assistance to Veterans and

Servicemembers with service-connected disabilities and an employment handicap, to prepare for, obtain, and maintain

suitable employment. For those persons who are severely disabled and suitable employment is not an option,

assistance may be provided to allow each person to live more independently. Through VA’s VR&E program,

individuals may benefit from individual support, vocational counseling, evaluation of interest, aptitudes and abilities,

training, employment assistance, and other rehabilitation services. In some cases, rehabilitation services are available to

spouses and children of totally and permanently disabled Veterans as well as Survivors of certain deceased Veterans.
Under 38 U.S.C. Chapter 18, VR&E provides vocational training and rehabilitation services to children with spina bifida

having a parent who served in the Republic of Vietnam during the Vietnam era or who served in certain military units

in or near the demilitarized zone in Korea between September 1, 1967 and August 31, 1971.


The Appeals Management Office assumes responsibility for and authority over all VBA appeals-related program policy,

planning, budgeting, staffing, and other operational control as a separate entity under the VBA Principal Deputy Under

Secretary for Benefits (PDUSB). This office works closely with the Board of Veterans Appeals to better service Veterans

and their families.

http://www.benefits.va.gov/benefits

Women Veterans
The Center for Women Veterans (CWV), established by the Veterans' Benefits Improvement Act of 1994, monitors and

coordinates VA’s health care, benefits, services, and programs for women Veterans. CWV advocates a cultural

transformation within VA and the general public to recognize the service and contributions of women Veterans and

women in the military, and raises awareness of the responsibility to treat women Veterans with dignity and respect.

The CWV Director serves as the primary advisor to the SECVA on all matters related to policy, legislation, programs,

issues, and initiatives affecting women Veterans.

http://www.va.gov/WOMENVET



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The "Veterans Health A–Z Index" includes frequent inquiries, popular subjects, and topics of critical importance to

veterans and their caregivers.

https://www.va.gov/health/topics

Blog
"VAntage Point" is the VA's official blog.

http://www.blogs.va.gov/VAntage | Email: blog.dalcbdt@va.gov

Business Opportunities
The VA purchases goods and services on the national, regional, and local level from large and small businesses. Each

VA facility has a local acquisition office that handles its procurement process.

http://www.va.gov/oal/business/dbwva.asp | Email: dalcbdt@va.gov
The VA has the authority to award set-aside and sole source contracts to service-disabled veteran-owned small

businesses and to veteran-owned small businesses. This procurement authority extends the reach of the agency's

mission of caring for the Nation’s veterans. Phone, 866-584-2344.

https://www.va.gov/osdbu/verification/ | Email: osdbu@va.gov

Career Opportunities
The VA employs over 300,000 people in hundreds of professions. To fulfill its mission, the VA relies on claims
examiners, dentists, management analysts, nurses, occupational therapists, optometrists, pharmacists, physical

therapists, physician assistants, physicians, secretaries, and many additional types of professionals.

www.vacareers.gov
In 2017, the VA ranked 17th among 18 large agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/VA00

Data / Statistics
The National Center for Veterans Analysis and Statistics posts reports, statistics, surveys, and other information on its

website.

https://www.va.gov/vetdata | Email: vancvas@va.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires that Federal agencies disclose records that information seekers request; however, some records or

parts of them may be shielded from disclosure by one or more of nine statutory exemptions. A FOIA request should

be sent by email, fax, or postal mail to the appropriate VA component where the desired document or record is kept.

http://www.va.gov/oig/foia
If the information requester does not know which office or component maintains the desired document or record, he

or she should contact the Director, FOIA Service, (005R1C), 810 Vermont Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20420. Phone,

877-750-3642. Fax 202-273-0487.

https://www.oprm.va.gov/docs/foia/VACO_FOIA_Offices_Contact_List.pdf

Glossaries
The VA website has a health benefits glossary.

https://www.va.gov/HEALTHBENEFITS/resources/glossary.asp
The VA National Center for Patient Safety has a glossary of patient safety terms on its website.

http://www.patientsafety.va.gov/professionals/publications/glossary.asp

Gravesite Locator
The "National Cemetery Administration" website has a burial information database that is updated each day. The

online locator allows users to search for the burial locations of veterans and their family members in VA National

Cemeteries, State veterans cemeteries, and various other military and Department of Interior cemeteries, as well as for

the interment sites of veterans who were buried in private cemeteries and whose graves are marked with Government

grave markers.

http://gravelocator.cem.va.gov/index.html

History
The Continental Congress of 1776 encouraged enlistments during the Revolutionary War by providing pensions to

disabled soldiers. More than 210 years later, the 40th President of the United States elevated the Veterans

Administration to a cabinet-level executive department. The promotion brought with it a new name: the Department

of Veterans Affairs. To learn more about the history of the most comprehensive veterans assistance system in world,
visit the "VA History" web page.

https://www.va.gov/about_va/vahistory.asp?

Homeless Veterans
Information and resources to help a homeless veteran find a home are available on the VA website.

https://www.va.gov/homeless

Locations
This page provides a facility locator that allows users to search for VHA facilities by state or territory, street address,

type of facility, and distance.

https://www.va.gov/directory/guide/division.asp?dnum=1

Media Room
The VA posts news releases online.

http://www.va.gov/opa/pressrel
The VA posts speeches online.

http://www.va.gov/opa/speeches

My Health
The "My HealtheVet" website provides information and tools for veterans to partner with their health care team and

improve health care management. The website allows veterans to refill VA prescriptions, track their delivery, and view

medication lists; to monitor approaching VA appointments and receive reminders; to communicate online with health

care teams; and to access medical records and add information to them. Phone, 877-327-0022. TTY, 800-877-8339.

https://www.myhealth.va.gov/mhv-portal-web/home

Office of Inspector General (OIG)
Public documents and information are available on the OIG's website. Complaints may be sent to the VA Inspector

General (53E), P.O. Box 50410, Washington, DC 20091-0410. Hotline phone, 800-488-8244.

http://www.va.gov/oig/default.asp | Email: page.vaoighotline@va.gov

Organizational Chart
The VA's "2017 Functional Organizational Manual—version 4.0" is available online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

The Department's organizational chart may be seen on page 2.

https://www.va.gov/landing_organizations.htm

Our Doctors
The "Federation of State Medical Boards" website has an online directory that allows users to search for information

about physicians.

http://www.docinfo.org/#/search/query

Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD)
The National Center for PTSD is the world's leading PTSD and traumatic stress research and educational center. The
website's home page has a helpful short video titled "What Is PTSD?" to explain the disorder. Information voice mail,

802-296-6300.

https://www.ptsd.va.gov/

Public Affairs / News Media
Contact the nearest regional Office of Public Affairs: Atlanta (404-929-5880); Chicago (312-980-4235); Dallas (817-385-

3720); Denver (303-914-5855); Los Angeles (310-268-4207); New York (212-807-3429); or Washington, DC (202-530-

9360). Representatives of the national media may prefer contacting the Office of Public Affairs in the VA Central Office,

810 Vermont Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20420. Phone, 202-461-7400.

http://www.va.gov/opa

Publications
Information on books, factsheets, and other publications is available on the "Office of Public and Intergovernmental

Affairs" website.

http://www.va.gov/opa/publications

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

http://www.va.gov/site_map.htm

Social Media
To see all of the VA's social media accounts, visit the "Social Media Directory" web page.

https://www.va.gov/opa/socialmedia.asp

Sports Programs / Special Events
Having fun together by participating in adaptive sports improves health, creates new friends, and elevates the quality

of life. Many sports opportunities are available to veterans of all ages and abilities. To get started, visit the "National

Veterans Sports Programs and Special Events" website and speak with your VA clinical team about getting involved.

https://www.blogs.va.gov/nvspse/ | Email: sports4vets@va.gov

Veterans Service Organizations
The VA maintains an online directory of veterans services organizations in Portable Document Format (PDF). For

further information, contact the Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs, Department of Veterans Affairs, 810

Vermont Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20420. Phone, 202-273-6000.

http://www.va.gov/vso

Women Veterans Call Center
Women veterans, as a demographic, underutilize VA benefits and services. The main reason seems to be a lack of

awareness that they are eligible recipients.

https://www.womenshealth.va.gov/WOMENSHEALTH/ProgramOverview/wvcc.asp
http://www.va.gov/opa

  For further information, contact the Office of Public and Intergovernmental Affairs, Department of
        Veterans Affairs, 810 Vermont Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20420. Phone, 202-273-6000.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Department of the Interior
                                                Bureau of Indian Affairs
                                               Bureau of Indian Education
                                             Bureau of Land Management
                                        Bureau of Ocean Energy Management
                                                 Bureau of Reclamation
                                   Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement
                                                  National Park Service
                                Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement
                                         United States Fish and Wildlife Service
                                            United States Geological Survey




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240


202-208-3100

http://www.doi.gov


 SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR                            Doug Burgum


 Deputy Secretary                                     Thomas P. Beaudreau


https://www.doi.gov/office-of-the-secretary



ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Fish and Wildlife and Parks                          Shannon A. Estenoz


 Indian Affairs                                       Bryan T. Newland


 Insular and International Affairs                    Keone J. Nakoa *


 Land and Mineral Management                          Laura Daniel-Davis **


 Policy, Management and Budget                        (vacancy)


 Water and Science                                    Tanya M. Trujillo


 * Deputy Assistant / ** Principal Deputy Assistant


https://www.doi.gov/interior-leadership



OTHER OFFICERS


 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Financial                                            (vacancy)


 Information                                          June Hartley


 DIRECTORS



 Solicitor                                            Robert T. Anderson


https://www.doi.gov/robert-anderson
Office of the Inspector General


  Inspector General                                                                       Mark L. Greenblatt

https://www.doioig.gov/about-us/inspector-general



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Department of the Interior protects America's heritage and natural resources, honors its cultures and tribal

communities, and supplies energy for powering its future.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On March 3, 1849, President James K. Polk approved an act that created the Department of the Interior (DOI) by

transferring the Office of Indian Affairs and the General Land, the Patent, and the Pension Offices to a new

department. The head of that new department was, and still is, called the Secretary of the Interior. The President

appoints the Secretary by the advice of the Senate and with its consent (9 Stat. 395).

https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/llsl//llsl-c30/llsl-c30.pdf
The Secretary of the Interior supervises the public business of the following agencies and subjects: Alaska Railroad,

Alaska Road Commission, bounty-lands, Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Bureau of Mines, Bureau of Reclamation,

division of Territories and Island Possessions, Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Geological Survey, Indians, National Park

Service, petroleum conservation, and public lands and the mines that are on those lands (43 U.S.C. 1457). The

Secretary reports directly to the President.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title43-section1457&num=0&edition=prelim
The DOI was reorganized by Reorganization Plan No. 3 of 1950, as amended (5 U.S.C. app.).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title5a-node84-leaf107&num=0&edition=prelim
A more recent reorganization created 12 unified administrative regions to improve coordination among bureaus,

effectiveness of relationships with partners, and customer service. The reorganization delegated authority and

accountability closer to field operations and placed a greater emphasis on local decision making. Completed on

August 22, 2018, the reorganization established unified interior region boundaries that are based on watersheds and

generally follow State lines to simplify coordination with external partners.

https://www.doi.gov/employees/reorg/unified-regional-boundaries
The "Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2018–2022" includes the DOI's organization chart on page 6.

https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/uploads/fy2018-2022-strategic-plan.pdf



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material on the establishment of the DOI, the duties of its Secretary and Deputy Secretary, and other topics
that affect departmental operations and activities are codified in chapter 31, sections 1451–1476a, of 43 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title43/chapter31&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations associated with the Office of the Secretary of the Interior are codified in subtitle A, parts 1–199,

of 43 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=2dff2e4675b2891abcf7c9eb0078703c&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title43/43cfrv1_02.tpl#0



MISSION AREAS
A set of six mission areas offers a window on DOI activities that are top priorities through the year 2022. They are

discussed in detail in the "Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2018–2022" on pages 15–47.


Conserving Land and Water
The DOI conserves America’s lands and waters for the benefit, enjoyment, and use of current and future generations.

The DOI’s nine technical bureaus rely on the best science that is available, efficient decision-making processes,

improved land use planning, modern natural resource management techniques, partnerships, and technology and

engineering to balance stewardship with public lands use and the development of natural resources that are part of

those lands, including fish species and wildlife.

https://www.doi.gov/stewardship

Expanding Outdoor Recreation and Access
Every year, more than 330 million people from across the country and around the world visit the national parks.

Millions more visit other public lands that the DOI also manages. The DOI works to make outdoor recreation

opportunities on public lands more accessible. The DOI's multiple-use policy of land management allows Americans to

fish and hunt on public lands, as well as boat, camp, climb, hike, view wildlife, and engage in other outdoor activities.

https://www.doi.gov/recreation

Fulfilling Trust and Insular Responsibilities
The DOI upholds the U.S. Government’s unique trust responsibilities by fostering government-to-government

relationships that exist between the Federal Government and federally recognized Tribes. It also upholds those

responsibilities by providing services to individual American Indians and Alaskan Natives.

https://www.doi.gov/ost/whatwedo/
The U.S. Government also has important relationships with the affiliated insular areas, which include the Territories of

American Samoa, Guam, the U.S. Virgin Islands, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands. The DOI

administers and oversees Federal assistance to the three Freely Associated States, which comprise the two Republics of

Palau and the Marshall Islands and the Federated States of Micronesia.

https://edit.doi.gov/oia/what-we-do

Generating Revenue From Utilization of Natural Resources
The DOI provides access to and manages energy resources like coal, gas, oil, and woody biomass on public lands, as
well as Outer Continental Shelf energy resources like gas and oil. It also provides access to and manages other public

land resources like nonenergy minerals, rangelands suitable for grazing, and timber from forests. By responsibly using

public lands for extracting resources to achieve multiple use and economic benefits for the Nation, the DOI supports

American energy dominance.

https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/uploads/fy2019_bib_dh005.pdf

Modernizing Organization and Infrastructure
The DOI seeks to ensure more effective operations and service delivery through coordinated organizational

alignments in the field, across bureaus, and with other Federal and non-Federal partners, and by putting a larger

fraction of DOI employees in the field to serve the public. Expediting environmental analysis and compliance, reducing

the cost of space, collocating offices for convenient public service and improved interagency coordination, and

common regional boundaries are potential ways to modernize the DOI’s infrastructure and improve its effectiveness.

https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/site-page/many-bureaus-one-mission.pdf

Protecting People and the Border
Inherent in the DOI’s management responsibilities of public lands is protecting employees and visitors. Ensuring

employee and public safety requires the resources of multiple bureaus and offices covering four disciplines:

emergency management, law enforcement, natural hazards science, and wildland fire. Depending on the season,

approximately 3,500–4,000 law enforcement officers, rangers, and other employees patrol vast areas of public lands,

national parks, wildlife refuges, and Indian communities. They protect people and natural, cultural, and heritage

resources from illegal activities.


The U.S. Geological Survey protects lives by monitoring natural hazards like earthquakes, environmental health

hazards, landslides, and volcanoes, and by issuing warnings of their potential threat levels. Wildland fires endanger

lives and damage property. The Office of Wildland Fire coordinates with the DOI’s land management bureaus and the

U.S. Forest Service to prevent, respond to, and manage the damage and loss that wildfires cause. The Office of

Wildland Fire also shares wildfire management responsibilities with Mexico along the southern border.


The DOI manages land on the Canadian border and the Mexican border, and the Department has a presence in the

Pacific, where Americans are exposed to risk from Asia. A considerable amount of DOI land abuts Mexico. Accordingly,

DOI law enforcement officers work in partnership with the U.S. Customs and Border Patrol, Immigration and Customs

Enforcement, Drug Enforcement Agency, and Tribal, State, and local governments, to address illegal immigration,

trafficking in drugs and in guns, and to mitigate these activities' consequences, which adversely affect DOI lands and

community partners.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Abandoned Mines
Abandoned mine lands are lands, waters, and surrounding watersheds that extraction or beneficiation has

contaminated, scarred, or done both. Beneficiation refers to the treatment (i.e., processing) of raw materials (e.g. coal,

ores, and minerals) to change their chemical or physical properties. Abandoned mine lands include areas where
mining or processing activity has ceased. The Abandoned Mine Lands (AML) Portal is a partnership that comprises

Federal, State, and local efforts to reduce the environmental and health risks of abandoned mines through awareness,

education, and action. The DOI participates in the AML Portal.

https://www.abandonedmines.gov/federal-partners

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Office of the Secretary of

the Interior records have been assigned to record group 048.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/048.html

Blog
"People, Land, and Water" is the DOI's official blog.

https://www.doi.gov/blog

Boarding Schools
On May 11, 2022, Secretary Debra A. Haaland and Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs Bryan T. Newland released the

first volume of the investigative report that is part of the Federal Indian Boarding School Initiative, a comprehensive

effort to address the troubled legacy of Federal Indian boarding school policies. The report lays the groundwork for

addressing the intergenerational trauma that former Federal Indian boarding school policies created.

https://www.doi.gov/pressreleases/department-interior-releases-investigative-report-outlines-next-steps-federal-
indian

Bureaus / Offices
The DOI employs resource-management professionals, scientists, and other experts in its nine technical bureaus.

https://www.doi.gov/bureaus
In addition to the nine technical bureaus, a number of offices fall under the Offices of the Secretary and Assistant

Secretary; Office of Policy, Management, and Budget; Office of the Solicitor; and Office of the Inspector General.

https://www.doi.gov/bureaus/offices

Business Opportunities
The DOI supports the transition to a clean energy economy and stimulates local economic growth through

stewardship. The DOI also procures goods and services from American businesses. The DOI relies on them for bridge,

irrigation system, office building, reservoir, road, school, and other types of maintenance. More information is available

from the Office of Acquisition and Property Management. Phone, 202­-513-­7554.

https://www.doi.gov/pam

Career Opportunities
Information to assist persons with disabilities, students and recent graduates, veterans, and others who are interested

in career opportunities is available on the DOI's website.

https://www.doi.gov/joinus
In 2020, the DOI ranked 12th among 17 large agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.
https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=IN00

Climate Change
Changes in climate are creating new challenges for communities and resource managers nationwide. The U.S.

Geological Survey's Climate Adaptation Science Centers help managers of ecosystems, fish, and wildlife better

understand the effects of these changes and strategically plan for and adapt to them.

https://www.usgs.gov/programs/climate-adaptation-science-centers

Contact Information
The DOI has included an electronic feedback form on its "Contact Interior" web page. The DOI also may be contacted

by email, phone, or postal correspondence. The contact information is available online.

https://www.doi.gov/contact-us

Deepwater Horizon
The DOI continues to play a major role in restoration efforts associated with the Deepwater Horizon oil spill that

occurred in the Gulf of Mexico in 2010.

https://www.doi.gov/deepwaterhorizon

Departmental Policies
Online visitors can browse a library of DOI policies by using the search tool on the "Electronic Library of the Interior

Policies" web page.

https://www.doi.gov/elips/browse

Federal Register
Significant documents, from 1995 (volume 60) to the present, and recent documents that the DOI and its subagencies

have published in the Federal Register are available online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/interior-department

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Thirteen bureaus and offices support the DOI's FOIA operations. Its website features a single web page that allows

convenient access to those bureaus and offices and to their electronic FOIA libraries. From the same web page, an

information seeker may file a request, track the status of a request, learn about the FOIA program's structure, and

review FOIA-related guidance and resources. Please note: the Department and its bureaus and offices post a great

deal of information online; therefore, an information seeker should visit the appropriate electronic libraries and search

for the desired information before submitting a FOIA request. That information already may be accessible,

immediately and without charge.

https://www.doi.gov/foia

History
On March 3, 1849, the last day of the 30th Congress, a bill was passed to create a department to manage the Nation's

internal development and the welfare of its people. The responsibilities of the new Department were diverse and came

to include the colonization of freed slaves in Haiti, exploration of western wilderness, oversight of the District of
Columbia jail, regulation of territorial governments, management of hospitals and universities, and more. To explore

the rich history of the "Department of Everything Else"—just about everything else that fell outside the purview of the

Departments of Foreign Affairs, War, and the Treasury—visit the "History of the Department of the Interior" web page.

https://www.doi.gov/whoweare/history
"There are no words that can tell the hidden spirit of the wilderness that can reveal its mystery, its melancholy and its

charm. The Nation behaves well if it treats the natural resources as assets which it must turn over to the next

generation increased and not impaired in value. These words belong to President Theodore Roosevelt, a man who

loved the outdoors. To learn about the important role this President played in the history of American conservation,

visit the "Theodore Roosevelt's Legacy" web page.

https://www.doi.gov/blog/theodore-roosevelts-legacy

Library
The Interior Library's holdings and its reference and research services support the mission of the Department and its

agencies and bureaus. Its holdings cover American history, geology, law, national parks, Native American culture and

history, nature, and public lands and wildlife management. The library offers subscription databases and other online

data sources that give Interior employees and external researchers nationwide access. A holdings catalog and

descriptions of educational programs and training opportunities are available on the library's website. Phone, 202-

208-5815.

https://www.doi.gov/library | Email: library@ios.doi.gov

Museum
The Interior Museum offers exhibits on the history and mission of the Department. Programs highlight bureau

management of cultural and natural resources. Museum guides conduct tours of the Interior Building's New Deal era

art and architecture. Phone, 202-208-4743.

https://www.doi.gov/interiormuseum

News
The Department posts press releases online.

https://www.doi.gov/news
The DOI posts news and headlines of the week in video format on its "Multimedia" web page.

https://www.doi.gov/news/multimedia

Open Government
The Department of the Interior supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration,

participation, and transparency. Beyond meeting Open Government requirements, the agency intends to create better

relationships between citizens and their Government; to become better at understanding citizens' demands for

services and more responsive to their needs; to accelerate the rate of innovation by leveraging public knowledge; to

increase the Department's ability to carry out its mission more effectively and efficiently by transparently engaging the

public in decisionmaking; and to encourage the development of Open Government programs.

https://www.doi.gov/open | Email: open@ios.doi.gov
Priorities
The "Our Priorities" web page lists the DOI's top priorities.

https://www.doi.gov/ourpriorities

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.doi.gov/sitemap

Social Media
The DOI maintains a facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/USInterior
The DOI tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/interior
The DOI posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/USInterior

Water Conservation
The WaterSMART program improves water conservation and helps water-resource managers make sound decisions

about water use. It identifies strategies to ensure that this and future generations will have sufficient supplies of clean

water for drinking, economic activities, ecosystem health, and recreation. The program also identifies adaptive

measures to address climate change and its effect on future water demands.

https://www.doi.gov/watersmart

  The Sources of Information were updated 5–2022.




Bureau of Indian Affairs
Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240


202-208-3710

http://www.bia.gov/bia


  DIRECTOR *                                                    Darryl LaCounte




  * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs.


https://www.bia.gov/person/darryl-lacounte



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs enhances the quality of life, promotes economic opportunity, and protects and

improves the trust assets of American Indians, Indian tribes, and Alaska Natives.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
Secretary of War John C. Calhoun established the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) on March 11, 1824, to oversee

and carry out the Federal Government’s trade and treaty relations with tribes. The BIA remains the oldest

Department of the Interior (DOI) component in continuous existence and one of the oldest agencies in the

Federal Government. The DOI formally adopted Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) as the agency’s official name on

September 17, 1947. Prior to that time, it was referred to as the Indian office, Indian bureau, Indian department,

and Indian service.

https://www.bia.gov/about-us
On March 3, 1849, President James K. Polk approved an act that transferred the "supervisory and appellate

powers now exercised by the Secretary of the War Department, in relation to all the acts of the Commissioner of

Indian Affairs," to the Secretary of the Interior, who now headed the newly created DOI (9 Stat. 395).

https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/llsl//llsl-c30/llsl-c30.pdf

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material affecting the BIA is codified in 25 U.S.C. 1–17 (chapter 1).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title25/chapter1&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that affect Indians are codified in 25 CFR. Parts 1–299 contain rules and regulations that

are associated with the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Parts 900–999 contain rules and regulations that are associated

with the Bureau of Indian Affairs and with the Department of Health and Human Service's Indian Health Service.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=2dff2e4675b2891abcf7c9eb0078703c&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title25/25tab_02.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The BIA's mission centers on fulfilling its trust responsibilities and promoting self-determination on behalf of

federally recognized tribal governments, American Indians, and Alaska Natives. The BIA provides services to

members of 574 federally recognized Indian Tribes in the 48 contiguous United States and Alaska—nearly two

million American Indians and Alaska Natives.

https://www.bia.gov/bia
The BIA serves the federally recognized Tribes through four Offices:


The Office of Indian Services operates the BIA's general assistance, disaster relief, Indian child welfare, tribal

government, Indian self-determination, and reservation roads programs.

https://www.bia.gov/bia/ois
The Office of Justice Services directly operates or funds law enforcement, tribal courts, and detention facilities on

Federal Indian lands.

https://www.bia.gov/bia/ojs
The Office of Trust Services works with tribes and individual American Indians and Alaska Natives in the
management of their trust lands, assets, and resources.

https://www.bia.gov/bia/ots
Lastly, the Office of Field Operations oversees 12 regional offices and 83 agencies that carry out the mission of

the BIA at the tribal level. The regional offices and agencies administer delivery of program services to the

federally recognized Tribes, to individual Indians, and to Alaska Natives, either directly or through contracts,

grants or compacts.

https://www.bia.gov/regional-offices



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Bureau of Indian

Affairs records have been assigned to record group 075.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/075.html

Boarding Schools
On April 1, 2022, Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs Bryan T. Newland submitted the first "Federal Indian

Boarding School Initiative Investigative Report" to Secretary Debra A. Haaland. In his cover letter to the report,

Assistant Secretary Newland described the report's achievements: "[It] shows for the first time that between 1819

and 1969, the United States operated or supported 408 boarding schools across 37 States (or then-territories),

including 21 schools in Alaska and 7 schools in Hawaii. This report identifies each of those schools by name and

location, some of which operated across multiple sites." To conclude his letter, and with an eye on the future, he

added: "This report . . . is only a first step to acknowledge the experiences of Federal Indian boarding school

children. It notes a desire from people across Indian Country and the Native Hawaiian Community to share their

individual and family experiences within the Federal Indian boarding school system and the resulting impacts

today. This report also presents an opportunity for us to reorient our Federal policies to support the

revitalization of Tribal languages and cultural practices. This reorientation of Federal policy is necessary to

counteract nearly two centuries of Federal policies aimed at the destruction of Tribal languages and cultures."

https://www.bia.gov/service/federal-indian-boarding-school-initiative

Career Opportunities
BIA job opportunities, common job documents, and hiring information for American Indian and Alaska Native

veterans are available online.

https://www.bia.gov/jobs
The BIA posted a short video to promote its firefighting and aviation program. It focuses on the program's

Helitack crews, which rely heavily on helicopters in their efforts to extinguish wildfires.

https://youtu.be/c8VnzD87Qj8
In 2020, the BIA ranked 358th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.
https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=IN06

Contact Information
The BIA posts its mailing address and fax and phone numbers on the Indian Affairs' website on the "Contact Us"

web page.

https://www.bia.gov/contact-us

Estate Planning
The American Indian Probate Reform Act of 2004 (AIPRA) made changes to the way trust or restricted land and

property is inherited. It also made changes that affected land management and purchases. The BIA website has

information that explains how AIPRA affects wills and inheritance.

https://www.bia.gov/service/estate-planning

Federal Register
Significant documents, from 1995 (volume 60) to the present, and recent documents that the BIA has published

in the Federal Register are available online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/indian-affairs-bureau

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA establishes a presumption that the public may access records in the possession of Federal agencies.

The Act is based on the principle of openness in government and generally provides that a person has a right of

access to Federal agency records. This right of access is restricted, however, by nine exemptions and three

special law enforcement record exclusions that shield certain records, or parts of them, from disclosure. More

information on the FOIA and instructions for submitting a request to access BIA records are available on the

Indian Affairs website.

https://www.bia.gov/as-ia/foia | Email: foia@bia.gov
Before submitting a FOIA request in writing with the FOIA officer, the requester should check that the

information being sought is not already in the public domain. The DOI maintains FOIA libraries that include the

following record types and resources: final opinions made in the adjudication of cases; policy statements and

interpretations that the DOI has adopted, but not published in the Federal Register; administrative staff manuals

and staff instructions that affect a member of the public; records that have been requested repeatedly by

submitters of FOIA requests or records that the DOI anticipates will be requested repeatedly in the future; an

index of frequently requested records; and links to other related sites and reference materials.

https://www.doi.gov/foia/library

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
Indian Affairs posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.bia.gov/frequently-asked-questions

Library
Frequently requested documents and links are accessible on the Indian Affairs website in the electronic

document library.
https://www.bia.gov/bia/document-library

Maps
The Office of Trust Services' Branch of Geospatial Support (BGS) posts web maps and static maps, as well as

downloadable data, on the Indian Affairs' website. The BGS provides geographic information systems software,

training, and system support for the management of natural resources on Indian lands. Phone, 877-293-9494.

https://biamaps.doi.gov | Email: geospatial@bia.gov
The Office of Trust Services posted the "Indian Lands of Federally Recognized Tribes of the United States" map

on the BIA website in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.bia.gov/sites/default/files/dup/assets/bia/ots/webteam/pdf/idc1-028635.pdf
The "National Climate Assessment: Indigenous People's Resilience Actions" map, which is posted on the Office of

Trust Services' website, provides an overview of indigenous people's actions to prepare for changes in climate by

taking steps to increase resilience.

https://biamaps.doi.gov/portal/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=53794ae1ce054029bd5b55bcf269434c

Programs / Services
Federally recognized Tribes look to the BIA for a range of services. The "Programs and Services" web page,

which is accessible on the Indian Affairs' website, provides information about them.

https://www.bia.gov/programs-services

Regional Offices
Contact information for the 12 BIA regional offices is available online.

https://www.bia.gov/regional-offices

Regulations in Development
The "Regulations and Other Documents in Development" web page, which is part of the Indian Affairs' website,

allows visitors to monitor the progress of regulations that are in development, under review, or in development

and under review.

https://www.bia.gov/as-ia/raca/regulations-and-other-documents-in-development

Site Map
The site map, which is part of the Indian Affairs' website, allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse

content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.bia.gov/sitemap.xml

Social Media
The BIA posts content on Facebook.

https://www.facebook.com/USIndianAffairs
The BIA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/USIndianAffairs

Tracing Ancestry
The "Tracing American Indian and Alaska Native Ancestry" web page has information on genealogical research

and on tribal contacts and services. It also answers some oft asked questions about tracing one's family ancestry.

https://www.bia.gov/guide/tracing-american-indian-and-alaska-native-aian-ancestry

Wildland Fire Management
Indian Affairs posted a collection of fire prevention and education videos on wildland fire management in Indian

country on its website. Note that not all of the videos in the collection were produced by the BIA.

https://www.bia.gov/bia/ots/dfwfm/bwfm/Video-Library

  The Sources of Information were updated 5–2022.




Bureau of Indian Education
Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240


202-208-3710

http://www.bie.edu


  DIRECTOR *                                               Tony L. Dearman




  * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs.


https://www.bie.edu/cs/groups/webteam/documents/text/idc2-092903.pdf



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Bureau of Indian Education provides educational opportunities for eligible American Indian and Alaska Native

elementary, secondary, and postsecondary students from federally recognized Tribes




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
To reflect the parallel purpose and organizational structure that the BIE has in relation to other programs within

the Office of the Assistant Secretary–Indian Affairs, the Office of Indian Education Programs was renamed the

Bureau of Indian Education (BIE) by departmental manual release no. 3721 of August 29, 2006.

https://www.bia.gov/bie
Nearly 95 years earlier, President Warren G. Harding approved Public Law 67–85, which is also referred to as the

Snyder Act of 1921, to authorize the BIA, under the supervision of the Secretary of the Interior, to "direct,

supervise, and expend such moneys as Congress may from time to time appropriate, for the benefit, care, and

assistance of the Indians throughout the United States for the following purposes . . ." One of those purposes

was for the "general support and civilization, including education." Since the passage of the Snyder Act of 1921,
three major legislative actions have restructured the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) with regard to educating

American Indians.

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/67th-congress/Session%201/c67s1ch115.pdf
On June 18, 1934, the day on which President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved Public Law 73–383, which is also

referred to as the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 and the Wheeler-Howard Act, the longstanding Federal

policy of acculturating and assimilating Indian people through a boarding school system ended. The new law

introduced the teaching of Indian history and culture in BIA schools.

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/73rd-congress/session-2/c73s2ch576.pdf
On January 4, 1975, President Gerald R. Ford approved Public Law 93–638, which is also cited as the Indian Self-

Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975, "to establish a program of assistance to upgrade Indian

education" and "to support the right of Indian citizens to control their own educational activities." The law allows

federally recognized Tribes to contract with the BIA for the operation of Bureau-funded schools and to

determine education programs suitable for their children.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-88/pdf/STATUTE-88-Pg2203.pdf
On November 1, 1978, President James E. Carter approved Public Law 95–561, which is also cited as the

Education Amendments of 1978. Additional amendments followed: Public Laws 98–511, 99–99, and 100–297.

These legislative actions provided direct funding to tribally operated schools, empowered Indian school boards,

permitted local hiring of teachers and staff, and created a direct line of authority between the Education Director

and the Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-92/pdf/STATUTE-92-Pg2143.pdf
The BIE organizational chart is part of the organizational chart of Indian Affairs.

https://www.indianaffairs.gov/sites/bia.gov/files/OrgChartFY18Greenbook.pdf



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Rules and regulations affecting Indians and their education are codified in 25 CFR 30–47 (subchapter E).

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=7954367ce0b81d96674d6b175d0dea54&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title25/25CIsubchapE.tpl



ACTIVITIES
The BIE provides quality education opportunities from early childhood throughout adulthood, in accordance

with the Tribes' needs for cultural and economic well-being, and in keeping with the diversity of Indian Tribes

and Alaska Native villages as distinct cultural and governmental entities. The BIE considers the whole person as it

carries out its mission, taking into account the cultural, mental, physical, and spiritual aspects of the person within

the contexts of family and Tribe or Alaska Native village.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=317c41e73ba08bd8f84a0dbdfba8a9c3&mc=true&node=pt25.1.32&rgn=div5#se25.1.32_13
The BIE educates over 45,000 American Indian and Alaska Native children at 183 elementary and secondary
schools on 64 reservations in 23 States. The Bureau operates 53 of these schools. The other 130 schools are

tribally operated. The BIE oversees two postsecondary schools: Haskell Indian Nations University in Lawrence, KS,

and Southwestern Indian Polytechnic Institute in Albuquerque, NM. It also funds the Navajo and United Tribes

Technical Colleges.

https://www.bia.gov/bie



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Bureau of Indian

Affairs records have been assigned to record group 075. "Records of the Education Division 1874–1972" are part

of that record group.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/075.html

Career Opportunities
American Indian children deserve a quality education—and that starts with highly qualified, dedicated staff and

educators. The BIE employees nearly 4,500 professionals in careers that offer unique and diverse cultural and

lifestyle experiences. Phone, 505-563-5304.

https://www.bie.edu/Jobs/index.htm | Email: staffing@bie.edu

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has addresses and phone numbers for contacting the BIE.

https://www.bie.edu/ContactUs/index.htm
The Human Resources Office maintains a web page with contact information.

https://www.bie.edu/HR/Contact/index.htm
The BIE "National Staff Directory" (APR 2019) is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and

downloading.

https://www.bie.edu/cs/groups/xbie/documents/text/idc2-093307.pdf

Divisions / Programs
The BIE website features a web page with a list of the agency's divisions and programs and links to their

websites.

https://www.bie.edu/Programs/index

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA establishes a presumption that the public may access records in the possession of Federal agencies.

The Act is based on the principle of openness in government and generally provides that a person has a right of

access to Federal agency records. This right of access is restricted, however, by nine exemptions and three

special law enforcement record exclusions that shield certain records, or parts of them, from disclosure. More

information on the FOIA and instructions for submitting a request to access BIE records are available on the
Indian Affairs website.

https://www.bia.gov/as-ia/foia | Email: foia@bia.gov
Before submitting a FOIA request in writing with the FOIA officer, the requester should check that the

information being sought is not already in the public domain. The DOI maintains FOIA libraries that include the

following record types and resources: final opinions made in the adjudication of cases; policy statements and

interpretations that the DOI has adopted, but not published in the Federal Register; administrative staff manuals

and staff instructions that affect a member of the public; records that have been requested repeatedly by

submitters of FOIA requests or records that the DOI anticipates will be requested repeatedly in the future; an

index of frequently requested records; and links to other related sites and reference materials.

https://www.doi.gov/foia/library

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The BIE posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.bie.edu/HR/FAQ/index.htm

News
The BIE posts news items on its website.

https://www.bie.edu/NewsEvents/index.htm

Reports
Performance and special education reports and school report cards are accessible online.

https://www.bie.edu/HowAreWeDoing/index.htm

Resources
BIE education line officers, school superintendents, principals, teachers, and staff can access program guidance,

handbooks, templates, and training provided in various formats—WebEx or PowerPoint—to refresh professional

skills. These online documents and presentations are provided to supplement staff training throughout the

school year.

https://www.bie.edu/Resources/index.htm

Scholarships
The BIE website provides information on scholarship opportunities for American Indian students.

https://www.bie.edu/ParentsStudents/Grants/index.htm

Schools
Contact information for schools that the BIE oversees is available online.

https://www.bie.edu/Schools/index.htm

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.bie.edu/SiteMap/index.htm
Social Media
The BIE maintains a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/Bureauofindianeducation
The BIE tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/BureauIndianEdu

Tribal Resources
A directory of external resources to support tribes is accessible on the BIE website. The directory file is in

Portable Document Format for viewing and downloading.

https://www.bie.edu/Resources/index.htm
The Sources of Information were updated 12–2019.



Bureau of Land Management
Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240


202-208-3801

http://www.blm.gov


  DIRECTOR *                                             Tracy Stone-Manning




  * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Land and Minerals Management.


https://www.blm.gov/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Bureau of Land Management sustains the health, diversity, and productivity of public lands for the use and

enjoyment of present and future generations.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
President Harry S. Truman prepared and transmitted to the U.S. Congress a plan of reorganization that created

the Bureau of Land Management (BLM). Section 403 of reorganization plan no. 3 of 1946 consolidated the

General Land Office with the Grazing Service to establish the Bureau of Land Management. The plan became

effective on July 16, 1946.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title5a-node84-leaf93&num=0&edition=prelim
On October 21, 1976, President Gerald R. Ford approved the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976

(PL 94–579) to establish public land policy; to establish guidelines for its administration; to provide for the

management, protection, development, and enhancement of the public lands; and for other purposes" (90
STAT. 2743). In the law, Congress declared that national policy governing the management of public lands "be

on the basis of multiple use and sustained yield."

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-90/pdf/STATUTE-90-Pg2743.pdf
The BLM posts its organization chart online.

https://www.blm.gov/about/organization-chart



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Laws that affect public lands are codified in 43 U.S.C. Chapter 1 of that title contains codified material that is

associated with the BLM.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title43/chapter1&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that affect public lands and that are associated with the BLM are codified in 43 CFR 1000–

9999 (subtitle B, ch. II). The codified subjects include forest, general, land resource, minerals, and range

management; preservation and conservation; recreation programs; and technical services.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=5167eb7d8c784969301611a596a7818a&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title43/43chapterII.tpl



ACTIVITIES
The BLM sustains the diversity, health, and productivity of America's public lands for the benefit of present and

future generations through a mandate of multiple-use and sustained-yield. It manages 1 of every 10 acres of

land across the United States, about 245 million acres of land, most of which is located in Alaska and 11 other

Western States. The Bureau also manages about 30 percent, or 700 million acres, of the Nation’s subsurface

mineral estate. The BLM oversees conventional and renewable energy development, livestock grazing,

recreation, and timber harvesting, and it protects cultural, historical, and natural resources. Many of these

resources are found on National Conservation Lands, a subset of BLM lands that are federally designated, that

cover 32 million acres, and that include 260 wilderness areas and 28 national monuments.

https://www.blm.gov/programs
A number of energy resources are accessible on public lands. The BLM supports a diversified energy approach

that includes coal, oil and gas, strategic minerals, as well as renewable energy resources like geothermal, solar,

wind, and woody biomass. A diversified approach strengthens the Nation's energy security, strengthens its

energy infrastructure, and stimulates job creation. To serve industry and the American public, the BLM is making

energy development easier on public lands by reviewing and streamlining business processes.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/energy-and-minerals
The Bureau manages livestock on 155 million acres of land, administering nearly 18,000 permits and leases held

by ranchers who graze mostly cattle and sheep.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/natural-resources/rangelands-and-grazing
Under the Wild Free-­Roaming Horses and Burros Act of 1971, it also manages herds of wild horses and burros

on public rangelands.
https://www.blm.gov/whb
Recreation is also part of the BLM's portfolio. Birdwatchers, campers, hang gliders, horseback riders, hunters,

mountain bikers, photographers, whitewater rafters, and visitors to cultural and natural heritage sites recreate on

hundreds of millions of acres of public lands. The Bureau estimates that it receives approximately 62 million

recreational visits per year.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/recreation
The BLM manages habitat for over 300 wildlife, fish, and plant species that are listed as threatened or

endangered under the Endangered Species Act and 12 species identified as candidates for listing. Public lands

that the BLM manages offer the best opportunity for recovery of some rare or listed plant and animal species

because their unique requirements for survival can be met only on Federal lands.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/fish-and-wildlife/threatened-and-endangered
The Federal Land Policy and Management Act (FLPMA) of 1976 authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to stand

up a law enforcement body to enforce Federal laws and regulations affecting public lands and their resources.

As a result, the BLM has been given specific resource protection and law enforcement responsibilities that

further the FLPMA's public lands management policy of multiple use. The Bureau's law enforcement program

helps ensure public safety, while supporting its multiple-use mission. Law enforcement officers investigate

vandalism and looting, support emergency responders, and maintain a safe environment for visitors to the

public lands and for BLM employees.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/public-safety-and-fire/law-enforcement
The BLM carries out a broad range of actions to protect the public, natural landscapes, wildlife habitat, and

recreational areas from wildfire. The BLM's national fire and aviation program consists of community assistance

and protection, fire prevention through education, fire suppression, preparedness, predictive services, prescribed

fire, and vegetative fuels management.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/fire-and-aviation
The BLM's lands, realty and cadastral survey program manages public land transactions: purchases and

acquisitions, sales and exchanges, withdrawals, leases and permits, right-of-way authorizations, and, cadastral

(i.e., mapping) survey services. From enabling energy development, to permitting commercial filming, to

defining boundaries and maintaining public land records, BLM professionals regard the public lands as working

landscapes, and they manage them for the benefit of current and future generations. The BLM's mission—which

is built on the principles of multiple-use and sustained yield—requires the agency to promote commerce,

conservation, and recreation on public lands.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/lands-and-realty
The Bureau's broad management responsibilities require balancing public land uses and protection of public

land resources. Working with State and local and tribal governments, stakeholder groups, and the public, the

BLM creates land use plans, referred to as Resource Management Plans, to guide decisions for approved uses of

and actions affecting public lands.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/planning-and-nepa
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Adoption Schedule
The BLM offers wild horses and burros for adoption or purchase at events nationwide throughout the year. The

most current adoption event schedule is accessible online.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/wild-horse-and-burro/adoption-and-sales/events

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that BLM records have

been assigned to record group 049.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/049.html

Artist-in-Residence Program
Residencies of 6–8 weeks are available in several Western States for painters, photographers, potters, sculptors,

and other artists.

https://www.blm.gov/get-involved/artist-in-residence/about-the-program

Business Opportunities
The BLM procures a wide array of goods and services.

https://www.blm.gov/services/acquisition/contracting
Stewardship contracting refers to trading forest products for land management and services. In exchange for

thinning the forest and keeping the trees to sell, for example, a contractor or an organization performs service-

work that helps to achieve key land management goals like improving wildlife habitat or reestablishing native

plant species. The intent of stewardship is to improve, maintain, or restore forest or rangeland health; restore or

maintain water quality; improve fish and wildlife habitat; and reduce danger from wildfires.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/natural-resources/forests-and-woodlands/stewardship-contracting

Career Opportunities
The BLM relies on people with diverse skills and from various professional backgrounds—business, engineering,

fire management, law enforcement, science, and other fields—to manage the Nation’s public lands and

resources.

https://www.blm.gov/careers
In 2020, the BLM ranked 322d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=IN05

Climate Change
Climate change presents challenges to the BLM as it manages inland freshwater ecosystems (e.g., lakes, rivers,

streams, wetlands) and coastal wetlands. Researchers project the disappearance of cold-water fish from large

areas of their current geographic ranges as streams become more sporadic and warmer; the expansion of the

ranges of warm-water fish as surface waters warm; and more frequent and widespread algal blooms that
adversely affect water quality.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/fish-and-wildlife/fisheries-and-aquatics/about-the-program

Contact Information
Contact information is available online.

https://www.blm.gov/office/national-office

Data Resources
The BLM regularly gathers, maintains, and publishes data to inform stakeholders and the general public. These

data include detailed information on the commercial uses of the public lands; recreational activities and

revenues; wild horse and burro management; cadastral (i.e., mapping) surveys; conservation of rangeland

resources and 870 special units (e.g., wilderness areas); and the socioeconomic effects of public land

management.

https://www.blm.gov/about/data

Federal Register
Significant documents, from 1995 (volume 60) to the present, and recent documents that the BLM has published

in the Federal Register are available online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/land-management-bureau

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives the right to request access to BLM records to anyone. In response to a FOIA request, the BLM

will disclose the desired information, unless this right of access is restricted by one of nine exemptions or three

special law enforcement record exclusions that shield certain records, or parts of them, from disclosure. More

information on the FOIA and instructions for submitting a request are available on the BLM website. Phone, 202-

912-7650.

https://www.blm.gov/about/foia | Email: blm_wo_foia@blm.gov
Before submitting a records request in writing to the FOIA officer, the requester should check that the

information being sought is not already publicly accessible. The BLM maintains an electronic FOIA reading room

where it posts records that have been released into the public domain in response to previous requests.

https://www.blm.gov/about/foia/foia-reading-room

General Land Office Records
The General Land Office Records website allows visitors to access Federal land conveyance records for the Public

Land States (i.e., States created out of the public domain). The website contains images of more than five million

Federal land title records that were issued since 1820. It also has images related to survey plats and field notes

dating back to 1810.

https://www.blm.gov/services/land-records

Geographic Information System (GIS) Data
BLM Navigator serves as a centralized location for accessing project, State, and national geospatial data.
https://navigator.blm.gov/home
The Landscape Approach Data Portal is a one-stop source for geospatial data, maps, models, and reports that

BLM's landscape initiatives have produced.

https://landscape.blm.gov/geoportal/catalog/main/home.page

History
A timeline that is structured around the enactment of land management legislation is available online. Specific

public laws have guided the BLM's mission, and the passage of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of

1976 was the culmination of that process of policymaking.

https://www.blm.gov/about/history/timeline

Information Center
The "Information Center" web page has links to BLM policy, congressional testimony, Federal Register, live

events, magazines and newsletters, notices, Office of Civil Rights, press releases, public room (brochures, maps,

reports), and social media web pages.

https://www.blm.gov/media

Kids
Giving young people the opportunity to learn outdoors and recreate on public lands promotes the development

of the next generation of public land stewards and conservation leaders.

https://www.blm.gov/kids

Library
The library has professional staff who can assist BLM employees nationwide. The library staff is also available to

assist members of the general public seeking BLM publications and information. The library offers a range of

resources and services that include journals, databases, publications, subject guides, and an online library

catalog.

https://www.blm.gov/learn/blm-library | Email: blm_library@blm.gov

Management
The BLM manages public lands in accordance with the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976.

https://www.blm.gov/about/how-we-manage
The BLM manages one in every 10 acres of land in the United States, and approximately 30 percent of the

Nation’s minerals. These lands and their minerals are found in each of the 50 States in diverse ecosystems like

arctic tundra, deserts, forests, mountains, and grasslands.

https://www.blm.gov/about/what-we-manage

Maps
Map and geospatial products inform BLM decision making. These maps and products are becoming more

accessible online.

https://www.blm.gov/maps
Paleontology
The BLM manages more than 245 million acres of public lands where Deinonychus, Edmontosaurus,

Pentaceratops, and Stegosaurus once roamed. To learn more, visit the BLM's "Paleontology" web pages.

https://www.blm.gov/paleontology

Recreation
The National Conservation Lands program offers online recreational guides for a convenient connection to

public lands.

https://www.blm.gov/visit
The BLM website provides resources for mountain bikers. These resources include the BLM Top 20 Mountain

Biking Opportunities list and interactive mountain biking maps for trails on BLM lands.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/recreation/mountainbike

Social Media
The BLM uses digital media tools to connect people with public lands and to keep people informed about

activities on them.

https://www.blm.gov/media/social-media

Statistics
Tables and spreadsheets with data that include the numbers of BLM-administered oil and gas leases, of

applications for permit to drill, and of oil and gas wells are accessible on the BLM website. Most of the statistics

presented cover Fiscal Years 1988–2015.

https://www.blm.gov/about/data/public-land-statistics

Timber Sales
The availability of timber for harvest depends on the age and condition of the timber, land status, and public

demand, as well as on other land use considerations.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/natural-resources/forests-and-woodlands/timber-sales

Woody Biomass
Woody biomass is used to produce electricity and products like furniture, paper, and wood for housing.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/natural-resources/forests-and-woodlands/biomass-and-bioenergy

  The Sources of Information were updated 7–2021.




Bureau of Ocean Energy Management
Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240-0001


202-208-6474

http://www.boem.gov
  DIRECTOR *                                               Amanda Lefton




  * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Land and Minerals Management.


https://www.boem.gov/about-boem/boem-leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management manages development of U.S. Outer Continental Shelf energy and

mineral resources in a way that is environmentally and economically responsible.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
In April of 2010, the Deepwater Horizon oil rig explosion and resulting oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico exposed

inadequacies in the Federal offshore energy regulatory system. In response to the disaster, former Secretary of

the Interior Kenneth L. Salazar issued two secretarial orders. On May 19, 2010, he issued Order 3299 "to separate

and reassign the responsibilities that had been conducted by the Minerals Management Service [MMS] into new

management structures that will improve the management, oversight, and accountability of activities on the

Outer Continental Shelf [OCS]."

https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/elips/documents/3299a2-
establishment_of_the_bureau_of_ocean_energy_management_the_bureau_of_safety_and_environmental_enforce
ment_and_the_office_of_natural_resources_revenue.pdf
Within the Department of the Interior, Order 3299 initiated the establishment of the new Bureau of Ocean

Energy Management (BOEM), whose director would report to the Assistant Secretary–Land and Minerals

Management. The order also initiated the establishment of the new Bureau of Safety and Environmental

Enforcement (BSEE), whose director also would report to the same Assistant Secretary. A third new agency, the

Office of Natural Resources Revenue, formerly the MMS's minerals revenue management program, would be

established within the Department, and its director would report to a different Assistant Secretary.

https://www.boem.gov/about-boem/reorganization/reorganization-former-mms
On June 18, 2010, former Secretary Salazar issued Order 3302, which announced that the MMS would be

renamed the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement (BOEMRE) for the duration of

the reorganization period.

https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/elips/documents/3302_-
change_of_the_name_of_the_minerals_management_service_to_the_bureau_of_ocean_energy_management_reg
ulation_and_enforcement.pdf
On October 1, 2011, BOEMRE rules and regulations that now applied to the BOEM were recodified in a new

chapter by reorganization of 30 CFR. The establishment of the BOEM and its sibling the BSEE and the

recodification of their respective rules and regulations in a revised second chapter and a newly added fifth

chapter marked the completion of the reorganization of the former MMS.
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2011-10-18/pdf/2011-22675.pdf
The BOEM posts an organizational chart on its website.

https://www.boem.gov/about-boem/boem-organizational-chart



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material that affects mineral lands and mining is codified in 30 U.S.C. Chapter 26 of that title deals with

deep seabed hard mineral resources.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title30/chapter26&edition=prelim
Statutory material that affects public lands is codified in 43 U.S.C. Chapter 36 of that title deals with management

of OCS resources.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title43/chapter36&edition=prelim
BOEM rules and regulations are codified in chapter V, parts 500–599, of 30 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=9eabfe008f51a5c2935452c280fb4160&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title30/30chapterV.tpl



ACTIVITIES
The BOEM manages the exploration and development of offshore energy and marine mineral resources on the

OCS. The BOEM supports energy independence, environmental protection, and economic development by

responsibly managing these offshore resources in ways that comport with the best available science.


The OCS is a significant source of oil and gas for the Nation’s energy supply. OCS production accounts for about

18 percent of domestic crude oil and 4 percent of domestic natural gas supply. The BOEM manages about 2,674

active oil and gas leases on more than 14.2 million OCS acres. In fiscal year 2019, offshore Federal production

reached approximately 683 million barrels of oil and 1.03 trillion cubic feet of gas, almost all of which was

produced in the Gulf of Mexico.

https://www.boem.gov/oil-gas-energy
The BOEM manages offshore development of renewable energy in Federal waters. The renewable energy

program began in 2009, when the Department of the Interior announced the final regulations for the OCS

Renewable Energy Program, which the Energy Policy Act of 2005 had authorized. The regulations provide a

framework for all of the activities that support the production and transmission of energy from sources other

than oil and natural gas. The BOEM anticipates managing the development of more hydrokinetic and more

offshore wind and solar energy on the OCS.

https://www.boem.gov/renewable-energy
The BOEM's environmental program covers the three major areas that the agency regulates on the OCS: oil and

gas, renewable energy, and nonenergy minerals like sand, gravel, and hard minerals. The Office of

Environmental Programs develops national policy, provides guidance, and coordinates with regional activities.

The environmental program’s two key functions are to support science and to conduct environmental

assessments, which include consultations with stakeholders and other regulatory agencies to strengthen decision
making. The Chief Environmental Officer also manages and leads engagement and consultation at the national

and regional levels with federally recognized Tribes.

https://www.boem.gov/environment
The BOEM partners with communities through its marine minerals program to address erosion along the

Nation's barrier islands, coastal beaches, dunes, and wetlands. Erosion affects defense, energy, natural resources,

public infrastructure, and tourism. To mitigate the effects of erosion, the BOEM leases gravel and sand and shell

resources for nourishing beaches, protecting shorelines, and restoring wetlands. These resources are extracted

from Federal waters on the OCS with environmental and safety oversight. The Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act

(PL 83–212) provides the authority to manage minerals on the OCS and the requirement to provide

environmental oversight. BOEM is the only Federal agency with the authority to lease marine minerals from the

OCS.

https://www.boem.gov/marine-minerals



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that MMS records have

been assigned to record group 473. The MMS is the predecessor agency to the BOEM. See the above

"Establishment and Organization" section.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/473.html

Business Opportunities
Information on doing business with the BOEM and related links are available on the "Procurement Business

Opportunities" website.

http://www.boem.gov/Doing-Business-with-BOEM

Calendar
The BOEM maintains an online events calendar.

http://www.boem.gov/Upcoming-Events

Career Opportunities
The BOEM relies on professionals with engineering and science backgrounds for ensuring the safe and

environmentally responsible development of the Nation's offshore energy and marine mineral resources.

http://www.boem.gov/employment
In 2020, the BOEM ranked 58th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/IN12

Contact Information
Information is available on the "Contact Us" web page.
https://www.boem.gov/about-boem/contact-us

Educational Resources
BOEM teacher resources are available online.

http://www.boem.gov/Environmental-Studies-Program-Teacher-Resources

Factsheets
The BOEM posts factsheets on the following topics: about the agency, environment, marine minerals, oil and gas

energy, and renewable energy.

https://www.boem.gov/newsroom/boem-fact-sheets

Federal Register
Significant documents, from 1995 (volume 60) to the present, and recent documents that the BOEM has

published in the Federal Register are available online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/ocean-energy-management-bureau

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Effective on July 5, 1967, the FOIA gives any person a right to obtain access to Federal agency records; however,

nine exemptions and three special law enforcement exclusions shield certain records, or parts of them, from

public disclosure. A FOIA request may be made for any agency record. Instructions for submitting a BOEM

record request under the FOIA are available online. The BOEM operates a FOIA requester service center. Phone,

703-787-1128.

https://www.boem.gov/foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The BOEM posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.boem.gov/newsroom/frequently-asked-questions

Glossaries
The BOEM has posted a glossary of ecological terms.

https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/boem-newsroom/Technical-Announcements/2016/Chapter-7-
Glossary-of-Ecological-Terms.pdf
The BOEM has posted a glossary of terms that are associated with wind energy.

https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/renewable-energy-program/Studies/FEIS/Section12.0Glossary.pdf

Greenhouse Gas Emissions
BOEM OCS Report 2016–065, whose authors are E. Wolvovsky. and W. Anderson, is titled "OCS Oil and Natural

Gas: Potential Lifecycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Social Cost of Carbon." The report's key findings are the

following: Most lifecycle greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are the result of oil and gas products consumption;

the price of oil and gas and production volume have a large effect on the amount of oil and gas lifecycle GHG

emissions; the magnitude of emissions and their related social costs are comparable for the 2017–2022 program

and the 2017–2022 program's "No Action Alternative"; the production of oil and gas from other global sources
can be more carbon-intense relative to oil and gas that are produced on the OCS; absent policy changes or

technological advancements, OCS emissions could consume a measurable increment of the remaining

worldwide and domestic GHG emissions budget.

https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/oil-and-gas-energy-program/Leasing/Five-Year-Program/2017-
2022/OCS-Report-BOEM-2016-065---OCS-Oil-and-Natural-Gas---Potential-Lifecycle-GHG-Emissions-and-
Social-Cost-of-Carbon.pdf

Historic Preservation
Archaeologists in Office of Renewable Energy Programs coordinate studies and conduct National Historic

Preservation Act reviews to identify and protect archaeological sites and other historic properties. OCS historic

properties include aircraft, lighthouses, precontact (European contact with Native Americans) archaeological

sites, and shipwrecks. Historic properties onshore come under review when a proposed renewable energy

project may affect them. To learn more about investigating the steamship "City of Houston" and German

submarine "U–576" and other preservation activities, visit the "Historic Preservation Activities" web page.

https://www.boem.gov/Renewable-Energy/Historic-Preservation-Activities

Library
The BOEM website has an electronic library.

http://www.boem.gov/Library

Marine Minerals
Mineral resources from the OCS are used in coastal restoration projects to address erosion. The BOEM has

conveyed rights to millions of cubic yards of OCS sand for coastal restoration projects in multiple States. These

projects have restored hundreds of miles of the Nation's coastline, protecting both infrastructure and ecological

habitat. The BOEM posts key marine mineral statistics on its website.

https://www.boem.gov/marine-minerals/current-statistics/current-marine-minerals-statistics           |        Email:
MarineMinerals@boem.gov

Oil / Gas
The BOEM has posted the 2017–2022 lease sale schedule and 2017–2022 quicklinks on its "Leasing" web page.

https://www.boem.gov/oil-gas-energy/leasing/2017-2022-lease-sale-schedule

Posters
Colorful BOEM posters that promote maritime history, ocean science and stewardship, and awareness of marine

animals and their habitats are available from the Gulf of Mexico Public Information Office. Phone, 800-200-4853.

http://www.boem.gov/BOEM-Posters

Press Releases
The BOEM posts press releases.

https://www.boem.gov/newsroom/news-items?news_type=11

Regional Offices
The BOEM operates three regional offices, one for the Alaska Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) region, one for the
Pacific OCS region, and one for the Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic OCS regions. Phone, 907-334-5200 (Alaska).

Phone, 805-384-6305 (Pacific). Phone, 800-200-4853 (Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic).

https://www.boem.gov/regions

Renewable Energy
A list of leases that the BOEM has executed since the inception of its renewable energy program is available

online.

http://www.boem.gov/Lease-and-Grant-Information
The BOEM collaborates with States on offshore energy development and is in the process of coordinating

Federal-State task forces in certain coastal States. A summary of the status of activity in the various States is

available online.

https://www.boem.gov/Renewable-Energy-Program/State-Activities/Index.aspx

Science / Technology
"Ocean Science" is BOEM's science and technology journal. The agency is a leading contributor to the growing

body of scientific knowledge on the Nation's marine and coastal environments.

https://www.boem.gov/newsroom/library/ocean-science

Shipwrecks
The BOEM Alaskan shipwreck table is the most comprehensive compilation of Alaskan shipwrecks to date. The

table offers a list of wrecks that occurred in Alaskan waters from 1741 to 2011. The "Shipwrecks Off Alaska's

Coast" web page also features maritime history, ship, and shipwreck links to external websites.

https://www.boem.gov/about-boem/shipwrecks-alaskas-coast

Site Map
The website map helps visitors find specific topics or allows them to browse the site's contents.

https://www.boem.gov/sitemap

Social Media
The BOEM maintains a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/BureauOfOceanEnergyManagement
The BOEM tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/BOEM
The BOEM has a YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCXL807nkJMCuxNj5kF09LLQ/featured

Statistics / Facts
BOEM collects data on its offshore oil and gas energy programs and makes them available in multiple formats.

https://www.boem.gov/newsroom/statistics-and-facts

  The above Sources of Information were updated 7–2021.
Bureau of Reclamation
Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240


202-513-0575

http://www.usbr.gov


  COMMISSIONER *                                           Camille C. Touton




  * The Commissioner reports to the Assistant Secretary of Water and Science.


https://www.usbr.gov/newsroom/#/biography/1?recordid=1



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Bureau of Reclamation develops, manages, and protects water and related resources in a way that is
environmentally and economically responsible and that benefits the American public.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 17, 1902, President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr., approved an act to appropriate "the receipts from the sale

and disposal of public lands in certain States and Territories to the construction of irrigation works for the

reclamation of arid lands." Pursuant to Public Law 161 (32 Stat. 388), which is popularly known as the

Reclamation Act or National Irrigation Act of 1902, former Secretary of the Interior Ethan A. Hitchcock

established the U.S. Reclamation Service (USRS) in the Geological Survey in July.

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/57th-congress/session-1/c57s1ch1093.pdf
In 1907, the USRS separated from the Geological Survey and became an independent bureau within the

Department of the Interior. Sixteen years later, the independent USRS was renamed the Bureau of Reclamation.

https://www.usbr.gov/history/2019%20NEW%20BRIEF%20HISTORY%20V1.pdf
On August 4, 1977, President James E. Carter approved Public Law 95–91, which is also cited as the Department

of Energy Organization Act. The law transferred the Bureau's power marketing functions to the Department of

Energy (91 STAT. 578) as part of an effort "to secure effective management to assure a coordinated national

energy policy" (STAT. 565).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-91/pdf/STATUTE-91-Pg565.pdf
On November 6, 1979, former Secretary of the Interior Cecil D. Andrus issued Secretarial Order 3042, which

changed the Bureau's name to the Water and Power Resources Service (WPRS). On May 18, 1981, former

Secretary of the Interior James G. Watt issued Secretarial Order 3064, which renamed the WPRS the Bureau of

Reclamation (BR).
The BR posts its organizational chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.usbr.gov/main/images/br_org_chart.pdf



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Codified statutory material dealing the Federal Government's reclamation and irrigation of public lands is found

in 43 U.S.C. chapter 12. The Reclamation Act of 1902 is classified generally to this chapter.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title43/chapter12&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that affect public lands and that are associated with the BR are codified in 43 CFR 400–999

(subtitle B, chapter I).

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=f90eabe3636e1549dfc39643c94595c2&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title43/43chapterI.tpl



ACTIVITIES
The BR is the largest wholesaler of water in the United States. It brings water to more than 31 million people and

provides 140,000 Western farmers with irrigation water for 10 million acres of farmland. This irrigated farmland

produces 60% of the Nation's vegetables and 25% of its fruits and nuts.


The Bureau is also the second largest producer of hydroelectric power in the United States. Its 53 powerplants

produce annually more than 40 billion kilowatt hours of electricity, earning nearly $1 billion in revenues and

generating enough energy for 3.5 million homes.

http://www.usbr.gov/main/about/mission.html
The BR's approach to water resource development has evolved over the years: from single-purpose agricultural

projects to projects of multipurpose whose scope includes promoting water-based outdoor recreation.

Recreation sites that are developed as a result of BR water projects rank among the Nation's most popular

places for water-based outdoor recreation. These projects include approximately 6.5 million acres of land and

water that are, for the most part, open to the public for recreation.

https://www.usbr.gov/recreation
The BR also engages in conservation activities to support native species and their habitats. In partnership with

Arizona, California, and Nevada, the BR implemented a program to conserve native species and habitats across

the Colorado River Basin. In partnership with the Bonneville Power Administration, Confederated Tribes of the

Umatilla Indian Reservation, and U.S. Forest Service, the BR implemented a project to increase mainstem and

off-channel habitat in a segment of the Grand Ronde River. The BR also tries to prevent invasive quagga and

zebra mussels from spreading. These bivalve mollusks adversely affect the natural ecology, which harms

endangered native species. The disruption that they visit upon ecosystems can cause new listings under the

Endangered Species Act. Mussel infestations threaten agriculture, navigation locks, and biodiversity that supports

the Western outdoor recreation industry.

https://www.usbr.gov/conservation/
BR operations and facilities support flood control. Its programs also mitigate the effects of drought through
contingency planning, resiliency projects, and emergency response actions.

https://www.usbr.gov/drought/



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The BR website has an A–Z index to help visitors navigate its content.

https://www.usbr.gov/main/index/

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that BR records have been

assigned to record group 115.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/115.html

Art Collection
In the late 1960s, the BR launched a program to present its accomplishments through art. The Bureau

commissioned 40 of America's most prominent artists to visit BR water resource development sites and record

their impressions on canvas. When the project was completed, the artists had created more than 375 pieces of

artwork. In the early 1970s, the public had an opportunity to view much of the work in a traveling exhibition that

was circulated by the Smithsonian Institution and entitled "The American Artist and Water Reclamation." The BR

maintains about 200 pieces of the original artwork. Many of the paintings are on display at the Main Interior

Building and some regional offices.

https://www.usbr.gov/museumproperty/art/homepage.html

Business Opportunities
The BR purchases a wide range of products and services and supports various Federal socioeconomic

development programs by assisting businesses. The Bureau also provides financial assistance for programs

related to conservation, Endangered Species Act mitigation, rural water, and water management and

reclamation and reuse. Phone, 303-445-2431.

http://www.usbr.gov/mso/aamd/doing-business.html

Career Opportunities
The BR relies on professionals with expertise in administration, engineering and design, environmental

protection, research, wildlife management, and other disciplines to carry out its mission.

https://www.usbr.gov/hr/contact.html
In 2019, the BR ranked 121st among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/IN07

Contact Information
Contact information for the Washington, DC, and Denver, CO, based offices and Upper Colorado, Great Plains,
Lower Colorado, Mid-Pacific, and Pacific Northwest regional offices is available on the "Addresses and Contacts"

web page.

http://www.usbr.gov/main/offices.html
Media contact information is posted online.

https://www.usbr.gov/newsroom/presskit/mediacontact.html
Contact information for the Acquisition and Assistance Management Division is posted online.

https://www.usbr.gov/mso/aamd/org-contact.html

Cooperative Agricultural Weather Network (AgriMet))
In cooperation with local, State, and other Federal sponsors, the BR promotes energy and water conservation

through AgriMet, which is a network of more than 90 automated weather stations that collect and telemeter

site-specific weather data. The original AgriMet program started in the Pacific Northwest in the 1980s and was

expanded into the Great Plains region.


Great Plains Region—

https://www.usbr.gov/gp/agrimet/index.html
Pacific Northwest—

https://www.usbr.gov/pn/agrimet/

Environmental Resources and Reports
The BR maintains a list of links to online resources that provide environmental information.

http://www.usbr.gov/environmental

Factsheet
The BR posts a factsheet on its website.

https://www.usbr.gov/main/about/fact.html

Federal Register
Significant documents, from 1995 (volume 60) to the present, and recent documents that the BR has published

in the Federal Register are available online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/reclamation-bureau
The BR maintains a "Federal Register Notices and Rulemaking" web page.

https://www.usbr.gov/fedreg/index.html

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA establishes a presumption that records in the possession of Federal agencies are accessible to the

public. Before the law was passed in 1966, the individual had to establish a right to examine Government

records. Passage of the FOIA shifted the burden of proof from the individual to the Government: A "right to

know" doctrine replaced a "need to know" standard. The law established standards for determining records that

must be disclosed and records that can be withheld. The law also provided administrative and judicial remedies

for information seekers who have been denied access to records.
http://www.usbr.gov/foia/contacts.html
The BR maintains an electronic reading room that contains frequently requested records and documents that

are currently of special interest. Information seekers should avail themselves of this online resource to determine

if the information that they seek is immediately available and readily accessible without the additional step of

filing a FOIA request.

http://www.usbr.gov/foia/readroom.html

Glossaries
Definitions for terms commonly used by the BR are accessible in its online glossary.

http://www.usbr.gov/library/glossary
The BR maintains a separate online glossary of recreation-related terms.

http://www.usbr.gov/recreation/glossary.html

Hydrologic and Meteorologic Monitoring (HydroMet)
The BR operates a network of automated Hydromet stations, including their communications and computer

systems, throughout the Great Plains and the Pacific Northwest regions. The Hydromet network collects remote

environmental and water data and transmits them via radio and satellite. The Hydromet network provides cost-

effective, near-real-time water management capability. Streamflow forecasts and current river and resevoir

operations conditions are then calculated by combining Hydromet data with other information.


Great Plains Region—

https://www.usbr.gov/gp/hydromet
Pacific Northwest—

https://www.usbr.gov/pn/hydromet/

Invasive Mussels
Two species of dreissenid mussels, namely quagga and zebra, have become established in U.S. freshwater lakes,

reservoirs, and rivers. Invasive dreissenid mussels pose significant challenges for all agencies and industries that

manage water because they are prolific breeders and settle on or within water facility infrastructure.

https://www.usbr.gov/mussels

Library
The BR's website has an online search tool that allows visitors to search the electronic library catalog. External

patrons may use the library, which is located in Denver, CO, by appointment only, 8:00 a.m.–3:00 p.m. Phone,

303-445-2072.

https://www.usbr.gov/library/ | Email: library@usbr.gov

Multimedia Media
Links to BR's historic photographs and photograph database are available on the "Reclamation Multimedia" web

page. Other links that lead to podcasts on water management and to Really Simple Syndication (RSS) feeds also

are available. BR Social Media links include Facebook, Flickr, Instagram, Twitter, and YouTube.
https://www.usbr.gov/main/multimedia/index.html#social

News
The BR posts news releases and stories, as well as congressional testimony, factsheets, photos, and speeches.

http://www.usbr.gov/newsroom/newsrelease

Outdoor Recreation / Cultural Activities
The BR participates in Recreation.gov. This partnership of twelve Government agencies provides information on

all recreation facilities on Federal lands, including those owned and managed by the BR. Online visitors may use

the Recreation.gov website to make reservations at facilities requiring them.

https://www.recreation.gov/about-us

Publications
The BR posts publications on its website.

https://www.usbr.gov/library/reclamationpubs.html

Reclamation Manual
The BR's website has an online tool that allows users to search for keywords and terms in the "Reclamation

Manual." The manual comprises a series of policy and directives and standards, which collectively assign

program responsibility and establish and document agencywide methods of doing business.

http://www.usbr.gov/recman

Research / Science
The Research and Development Office publishes the quarterly magazine "Knowledge Stream," whose content

centers on mission-critical news about research and science and on the challenges of managing water and

generating power in the American West.

https://www.usbr.gov/research/ks.html

Water Conservation
The WaterSMART program allows all Department of the Interior bureaus to work with States, tribes, local

governments, and nongovernmental organizations to pursue a sustainable water supply for the Nation by

establishing a framework that provides Federal leadership and assistance on the efficient use of water, that

integrates water and energy policies to support the sustainable use of all natural resources, and that coordinates

the water conservation activities of the various departmental offices.

https://www.usbr.gov/watersmart
The Sources of Information were updated 2–2020.



Bureau of Safety                                             and                Environmental
Enforcement
Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240


202-208-3985
http://www.bsee.gov


  DIRECTOR *                                                Kevin M. Sligh, Sr.




  * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Land and Minerals Management.


https://www.bsee.gov/who-we-are/our-organization/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement promotes safety, protects the environment, and conserves

resources offshore by overseeing the regulatory process and enforcing Federal rules and regulations.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
In April of 2010, the Deepwater Horizon oil rig explosion and resulting oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico exposed

inadequacies in the Federal offshore energy regulatory system. In response to the disaster, former Secretary of

the Interior Kenneth L. Salazar issued two secretarial orders. On May 19, 2010, he issued Order 3299 "to separate

and reassign the responsibilities that had been conducted by the Minerals Management Service [MMS] into new

management structures that will improve the management, oversight, and accountability of activities on the

Outer Continental Shelf [OCS]."

https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/elips/documents/3299a2-
establishment_of_the_bureau_of_ocean_energy_management_the_bureau_of_safety_and_environmental_enforce
ment_and_the_office_of_natural_resources_revenue.pdf
Within the Department of the Interior, Order 3299 initiated the establishment of the new Bureau of Safety and

Environmental Enforcement (BSEE), whose director would report to the Assistant Secretary–Land and Minerals

Management. The order also initiated the establishment of the new Bureau of Ocean Energy Management

(BOEM), whose director also would report to the same Assistant Secretary. A third new agency, the Office of

Natural Resources Revenue (ONRR), formerly the MMS's minerals revenue management program, would be

established within the Department, and its director would report to the Assistant Secretary–Policy, Management

and Budget.


On June 18, 2010, former Secretary Salazar issued Order 3302, which announced that the MMS would be

renamed the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement (BOEMRE) for the duration of

the reorganization period.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/safety-and-environmental-enforcement-bureau
On October 1, 2010, the functions of the MMS's minerals revenue management program were transferred to the

ONRR. A few days later, the ONRR published a final rule in the Federal Register to move the regulations

associated with its royalty and revenue functions from chapter II in 30 CFR to chapter XII in the same title.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2010-10-04/pdf/2010-24721.pdf
A year later, in October of 2011, 30 CFR was reorganized. BOEMRE rules and regulations that now applied to the
BOEM were recodified in a new fifth chapter; the rules and regulations that now applied to the BSEE were

recodified in a revised second chapter. The establishment of the BSEE and its sibling the BOEM and the

reorganization of 30 CFR marked the completion of separating and reassigning the responsibilities of the former

MMS.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2011-10-18/pdf/2011-22675.pdf
The BSEE posts an organizational chart on its website.

https://www.bsee.gov/who-we-are/our-organization

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material affecting "Deep Seabed Hard Mineral Resources" is codified in chapter 26, sections 1401–1473,

of 30 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title30/chapter26&edition=prelim
BSEE rules and regulations are codified in chapter II, parts 200–299, of 30 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=e5dd5863d76dc4809df5de6afce53bf6&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title30/30chapterII.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The BSEE promotes safety, protects the environment, and conserves resources on the Outer Continental Shelf

(OCS) through regulatory oversight and enforcement. The Offshore Regulatory Program develops standards

and regulations to improve operational safety and to strengthen environmental protection. The Oil Spill

Preparedness Division develops standards and guidelines for offshore operators. It also collaborates with sister

agencies on spill response technologies and capabilities.


Three regional offices support the Bureau. Their personnel inspect gas and oil drilling rigs and production

platforms to ensure compliance with safety requirements. Inspection teams are multiperson, and the expertise of

their members spans a range of disciplines.

https://www.bsee.gov/what-we-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that MMS records have

been assigned to record group 473. The MMS is the predecessor agency to the BSEE. See the above

"Establishment and Organization" section.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/473.html

Business Opportunities
Information on doing business with the BSEE is available online.

http://www.bsee.gov/About-BSEE/Doing-Business-with-BSEE/index

Career Opportunities
The BSEE relies on professionals with backgrounds in biology, geology, geophysics, engineering, and other fields

to carry out its mission.

http://www.bsee.gov/careers
In 2019, the BSEE ranked 128th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/IN11

Contact Information
To contact the BSEE, visit the "Connect With Us" web page, where addresses (email and postal) and phone

numbers are available.

https://www.bsee.gov/who-we-are/connect

Director's Corner
Director Scott A. Angelle posts his thoughts and views on issues facing the BSEE and America's offshore oil and

gas industry. "Energy Dominance Requires New Thinking" (SEP 2017) was the first piece that he posted.

https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom/directors-corner

Federal Register
Significant documents, from 1995 (volume 60) to the present, and recent documents that the BSEE has published

in the Federal Register are available online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/safety-and-environmental-enforcement-bureau

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives the public the right to request Federal agency records and requires Federal agencies to make

certain records available. The BSEE website serves as the portal to the agency's FOIA program. The FOIA is

based on the principle of openness in Government: Any person has a right of access to Federal agency records,

except to the extent that such records or portions of them are protected from disclosure by exemption or by

special law-enforcement record exclusion.

https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom/library/foia
The BSEE maintains an electronic FOIA reading room.

https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom/library/FOIA-Reading-Rooom

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The BSEE promotes safety, protects the environment, and conserves resources offshore through regulatory

oversight and enforcement. To carry out its mission, the BSEE relies on a wide range of world-class professionals.

The BSEE posts answers to questions that its experts are asked frequently.

https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom/library/frequently-asked-questions | Email: webmaster@bsee.gov

Glossary
This glossary contains common oil and gas exploration and leasing terms, many of which are unique to the

drilling industry.
https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom/library/glossary

News
The BSEE newsroom contains feature stories, media advisories, news briefs, photos and videos, press releases,

and posts from the Director. The briefing room contains annual reports, congressional testimony, factsheets,

speeches, statements, and technical presentations.

https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom

Offshore Statistics
The BSEE posts offshore statistics and facts on its website.

https://www.bsee.gov/stats-facts

Reading Room
The Bureau's Deepwater Horizon electronic reading room contains documents that deal with the BP/Deepwater

Horizon explosion and ensuing oil spill and that have been cleared for public release.

https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom/library/archive/deepwater-horizon-reading-room

Regional Offices
Information on the BSEE's three geographic regions—Alaska OCS, Gulf of Mexico OCS, and Pacific OCS—and

their respective regional offices is available on the "BSEE Regions" web page.

http://www.bsee.gov/About-BSEE/BSEE-Regions/BSEE-Regions

Site Map
The website map helps visitors find specific topics or allows them to browse the site's contents.

https://www.bsee.gov/sitemap

Social Media
The BSEE has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/BSEEgov/
The BSEE tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/BSEEgov
The Sources of Information were updated 4–2020.



National Park Service
Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240


202-208-6843

http://www.nps.gov


  DIRECTOR *                                                   Charles F. Sams III




  * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Fish and Wildlife and Parks.
https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/director.htm



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The National Park Service (NPS) was established in the Department of the Interior on August 25, 1916 (16 U.S.C.

1).

http://www.nps.gov/aboutus/index.htm
The National Park Service protects the natural and cultural resources and values of the National Park System for

the benefit of present and future generations. The National Park System comprises 401 units. These units include

national parks, monuments and memorials, battlefield sites and national military parks, scenic parkways,

preserves and reserves, trails and riverways, rivers and lakeshores and seashores, recreation areas, and historic

sites of American or international importance. The Service also manages a variety of national and international

programs to promote natural and cultural resource conservation and to expand the benefits of outdoor

recreation.


The NPS develops and implements park management plans and staffs the areas under its administration.

Through exhibits, films, publications talks, tours, and other interpretive media, it promotes the natural values of

these areas and communicates their historical significance to the public. The NPS operates a range of visitor

facilities, including campgrounds, and provides a variety of food, lodging, and transportation services.


The National Park Service also administers the State portion of the Land and Water Conservation Fund, State

comprehensive outdoor recreation planning, nationwide outdoor recreation coordination and information, the

National Register of Historic Places and the National Trails System, natural area programs, national historic

landmarks and historic preservation, technical preservation services, the historic American engineering record

and buildings survey, interagency archeological services, and planning and technical assistance for the national

wild and scenic rivers system.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

America the Beautiful Passes
A pass may be used at more than 2,000 Federal recreation sites. A pass covers entrance fees at national parks

and national wildlife refuges, as well as standard amenity fees and day use fees at national forests and grasslands

and at lands managed by the Bureaus of Land Management and Reclamation and the U.S. Army Corps of

Engineers. Five types of America the Beautiful passes are available: access, annual, annual fourth grade, senior,

and volunteer.

https://www.nps.gov/planyourvisit/passes.htm

Business Opportunities
Visit the "Doing Business With Us" Web page to find information on commercial tours, contracts and
procurement, National Park concessions, and special park uses, including commercial filming.

http://www.nps.gov/aboutus/doingbusinesswithus.htm

Career Opportunities
To find permanent and seasonal NPS career opportunities online, visit USAJobs, the Federal Government's

official source for Federal job listings.

https://my.usajobs.gov
Additional information on internships, permanent careers, seasonal opportunities, and volunteering is available

on the "Work With Us" Web page.

http://www.nps.gov/aboutus/workwithus.htm

Directories
An online text box allows Internet visitors to search for NPS employees by last name.

https://www.nps.gov/directory
A park directory (SEP 2016) that includes park addresses, codes, phone numbers, and superintendents is

available online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/upload/NPS-Park-Listing-09-01-16.pdf

Find a Park
NPS website visitors may search for a park by name or by State.

https://www.nps.gov/findapark/index.htm

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Instructions for submitting a FOIA request to obtain NPS records are available online.

https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/foia/index.htm
The NPS maintains an electronic FOIA library on its website.

https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/foia/foia-reading-room.htm

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The NPS posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/faqs.htm

Glossaries
The NPS's National Center for Preservation Technology and Training maintains an extensive glossary of building

stone terms.

https://ncptt.nps.gov/buildingstone/glossary
The online series "Defining the Southwest" includes a glossary of terms that are often encountered in discussions

of the cultures and environments of the American Southwest.

https://www.nps.gov/articles/southwest-glossary.htm
A glossary of geologic terms that the NPS and U.S. Geological Survey western Earth surface processes team

compiled is available on the NPS website.
http://www.nature.nps.gov/geology/usgsnps/misc/glossaryAtoC.html | Email: parkgeology@den.nps.gov

Grants
Information is available online for grants authorized under the Land and Water Conservation Fund. Phone, 202-

354-6900.

http://www.nps.gov/lwcf/index.htm
Information is also available online for grants authorized under the Historic Preservation Fund. Phone, 202-354-

2067.

http://www.nps.gov/preservation-grants

News
The NPS posts new releases online.

https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/news/news-releases.htm
The NPS website has a multimedia section that includes audio, photographs, videos, and webcam.

https://www.nps.gov/media/multimedia-search.htm
The NPS tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/natlparkservice
The NPS maintains a Facebook page.

https://www.facebook.com/nationalparkservice

Publications
To explain decisions, document information, and disseminate knowledge, the NPS uses a variety of publications,

many of which are accessible online. For example, "The National Parks: Index 2012–2016" can be downloaded as

a PDF. The "Publications" Web page offers online access to contemporary and historic reports, periodicals,

virtual stacks, and public databases.

http://www.nps.gov/aboutus/publications.htm
Some publications are available for purchase in hardcopy from the U.S. Government Bookstore. Phone, 202-512-

1800. Phone, 866-512-1800.

https://bookstore.gpo.gov/agency/222 | Email: contactcenter@gpo.gov

Regional Offices
Contact information is available online for NPS regional offices and parks and the Washington office.

http://www.nps.gov/aboutus/contactinformation.htm
https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/contactus.htm
For further information, contact the Office of Communications, National Park Service, Department of the Interior,

1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240. Phone, 202-208-6843.



Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
Enforcement
Department of the Interior, 1951 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20240


202-208-2565

TDD, 202-208-2694

http://www.osmre.gov


  DIRECTOR *                                                (vacancy)


  Deputy Director                                           Glenda H. Owens




  * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Land and Minerals Management.


https://www.osmre.gov/about/offices



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSMRE) was established in the Department of the

Interior by the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (30 U.S.C. 1211).

http://www.osmre.gov/about.shtm
The OSMRE carries out the requirements of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act in cooperation with

States and tribes. The Office protects people and the environment from the adverse effects of coal mining. The

OSMRE assures that land is restored to beneficial use after mining operations cease, and it mitigates the effects

of past operations by reclamation of abandoned coal mines. The Office mainly oversees State mining regulatory

and abandoned-mine reclamation programs, assists States in meeting the objectives of surface mining law, and

regulates mining and reclamation activities on Federal and Indian lands and in those States opting not to assume

primary responsibility for regulating coal mining and reclamation activities within their borders.


The Office establishes national policy for the surface mining control and reclamation program, reviews and

approves amendments to previously approved State programs, and reviews and recommends approval of new

State program submissions. It also manages the collection, disbursement, and accounting of abandoned-mine

land reclamation fees; administers civil penalties programs; establishes technical standards and regulatory policy

for reclamation and enforcement; offers guidance for environmental considerations, research, training, and

technology transfers; and monitors and evaluates State and tribal regulatory programs, cooperative agreements,

and abandoned-mine land reclamation programs.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Abandoned Mine Land Inventory System
To provide information for implementing the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, the OSMRE

maintains an inventory of land and water affected by past mining. The inventory contains information on the
location, type, and extent of abandoned mine land impacts, as well as information on the reclamation costs. The

inventory is based on field surveys by State, tribal, and OSMRE program officials.

https://amlis.osmre.gov/About.aspx

Business Opportunities
Information to assist small business operators and owners is available online. For additional information, contact

the Acquisition Management Branch. Phone, 202-208-2902.

http://www.osmre.gov/contacts/business.shtm

Career Opportunities
To find employment opportunities at the OSMRE, visit the "Jobs at OSMRE" Web page and click on the USAJobs

quick link.

http://www.osmre.gov/contacts/jobs.shtm

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
A FOIA request for OSMRE records may be submitted via electronic or postal mail or by using the Department

of the Interior's electronic request form and selecting "Office of Surface Mining" in the drop-down menu.

http://www.osmre.gov/lrg/foia.shtm | Email: foia@osmre.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The OSMRE posts answers to FAQs online.

http://www.osmre.gov/resources/FAQs.shtm
The OSMRE website also has a "How Do I?" section.

http://www.osmre.gov/howdoi.shtm

Grants
Information on regulatory program grants and abandoned mine land grants is available on the OSMRE website.

http://www.osmre.gov/resources/grants.shtm

Library
The general public may use the OSMRE online library catalog to locate legal and technical information.

http://o10007.eos-intl.net/O10007/OPAC/Index.aspx

Mine Maps
The National Mine Map Repository collects and maintains mine map information and images for the entire

country.

http://mmr.osmre.gov
An index that includes over 180,000 maps of closed and abandoned mines is available online. The index serves

as an inventory for determining which maps are available. To obtain actual copies of maps, contact the National

Mine Map Repository. Fax, 412-937-2888.

http://mmr.osmre.gov/MultiPub.aspx
Most Requested Content
The OSMRE website maintains a collection of links for its most frequently requested web pages.

http://www.osmre.gov/resources/mostRequested.shtm

Newsroom
The newsroom features OSMRE stories and news releases.

http://www.osmre.gov/resources/newsroom.shtm
The OSMRE tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/OSMRE
The OSMRE has a Facebook page.

https://www.facebook.com/Office.of.Surface.Mining.Reclamation.Enforcement

Regional Offices
Appalachian Region Office

http://www.arcc.osmre.gov/contacts.shtm
Mid-Continent Region Office

http://www.mcrcc.osmre.gov/contacts.shtm
Western Region Office

http://www.wrcc.osmre.gov/contacts.shtm

Resources
The OSMRE website has a section that is dedicated to electronic, informational resources.

http://www.osmre.gov/resources.shtm

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

http://www.osmre.gov/resources/sitemap.shtm
An A–Z index is also available to help visitors find the information that they seek.

http://www.osmre.gov/resources/AtoZ.shtm

Top Priorities
The OSMRE website has a section highlighting the agency's major programs.

https://www.osmre.gov/programs.shtm
http://www.osmre.gov/contacts.shtm | Email: getinfo@osmre.gov
For further information, contact the Office of Communications, Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and

Enforcement, Department of the Interior, 1951 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20240. Phone, 202-

208-2565. TDD, 202-208-2694.



United States Fish and Wildlife Service
Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240
703-358-4545

http://www.fws.gov




DIRECTOR


  DIRECTOR *                                                Paul Souza, Acting

https://www.fws.gov/staff-profile/paul-souza



DEPUTY DIRECTORS


  Program Management and Policy                             Steve Chase, Acting


  Operations                                                Dave Miko, Acting


  * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Fish and Wildlife and Parks.


https://www.fws.gov/about/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 4–2025.



The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) is the principal Federal agency dedicated to fish and wildlife

conservation. The Service's history spans 145 years, dating from the establishment of its predecessor agency, the

Bureau of Fisheries, in 1871. First created as an independent agency, the Bureau of Fisheries was later placed in

the Department of Commerce. A second predecessor agency, the Bureau of Biological Survey, was established

in 1885 in the Department of Agriculture. In 1939, the two Bureaus and their functions were transferred to the

Department of the Interior. In 1940, they were consolidated into one agency and redesignated the Fish and

Wildlife Service by Reorganization Plan No. 3 (5 U.S.C. app.).

http://training.fws.gov/history/USFWS-history.html
The USFWS statement of organization may be found in subchapter A, part 2, of 50 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=fd103790cdbf5f4aa28f53fa458756ca&mc=true&node=pt50.1.2&rgn=div5
The USFWS works with others to conserve, protect, and enhance fish, wildlife and plants and their habitats for

the continuing benefit of the American people. The Service manages the 150-million-acre National Wildlife

Refuge System, which comprises 563 refuges and 38 wetland management districts. It operates 72 national fish

hatcheries, a historic national fish hatchery, 65 fishery resource offices, and 81 ecological service field stations.

The USFWS enforces Federal wildlife laws, administers the Endangered Species Act, manages migratory bird

populations, restores nationally significant fisheries, conserves and restores wildlife habitats, and assists foreign
governments with conservation. It also collects excise taxes on fishing and hunting equipment and distributes the

revenues to State fish and wildlife agencies.


The Service improves and maintains fish and wildlife resources by proper management of wildlife and habitat. It

also helps meet public demand for wildlife dependent recreational activities by maintaining public lands and

restoring native fish and wildlife populations.


Wildlife and fishery resource programs support the management of wildlife refuges on public lands. Wildlife-

related activities include population control, migration and harvest surveys, and law and gaming enforcement for

migratory and nonmigratory birds and mammals. Fishery-related activities include hatchery production

monitoring, stocking, and fishery management. Fishery resource programs also provide technical assistance for

coastal anadromous, Great Lakes, and other inland fisheries.


The USFWS identifies, protects, and restores endangered fish, wildlife, and plant species. It maintains Federal lists

of endangered and threatened wildlife and plants that are published in the Code of Federal Regulations (50 CFR

17.11 et seq.), conducts status surveys, prepares recovery plans, and coordinates national and international

wildlife refuge operations.


The Service protects and improves land and water environments to benefit living natural resources and to

enhance the quality of human life. It administers grant programs that help imperiled species, assists private

landowners restore habitat, asses environmental impact and reviews potential environmental threats, manages

Coastal Barrier Resource System mapping, monitors potential wildlife contaminants, and studies fish and wildlife

population trends.


Public use and information activities include preparing informational brochures and maintaining public websites;

coordinating environmental studies on USFWS lands; operating visitor centers, self-guided nature trails,

observation towers, and display ponds; and promoting birdwatching, fishing, hunting, wildlife photography, and

other forms of wildlife-dependent outdoor recreation.


The Wildlife and Sport Fish Restoration Program supports the conservation and enhancement of the Nation's

fish and wildlife resources. Excise taxes on sporting arms and fishing equipment fund these efforts.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that USFWS records have

been assigned to record group 022.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/022.html

(%blankline%)

Business Opportunities
An online guide explains how to find business opportunities and to compete for them. Information is also
available from regional offices and from the Division of Contracting and General Services in Falls Church, VA.

Phone, 703-358-2500.

http://www.fws.gov/program/contracting | Email: small_business_opts@fws.gov

Career Opportunities
Information on careers in conservation is available on the USFWS website. Additional information is available

from USFWS regional offices and the Human Capital Office in Falls Church, VA. Phone, 703-358-1743.

https://www.fws.gov/humancapital

Crimes Against Wildlife
To report a violation of wildlife laws or to learn about enforcement of them, visit the "Office of Law Enforcement"

website, contact the nearest regional law enforcement office, or call the Office of Law Enforcement in Falls

Church, VA. Phone, 703-358-1949.

http://www.fws.gov/le | Email: lawenforcement@fws.gov
The USFWS forensic laboratory is unique in its dedication to crimes against wildlife. Forensic experts examine,

identify, and compare physical evidence to connect crime scenes, suspects, and victims with it.

https://www.fws.gov/lab

Endangered Species
The USFWS website features a search tool for learning about and identifying endangered species. The text boxes

can search for an endangered species based on the State, U.S. Territory, or county where it lives, or according to

its common or scientific name.

https://www.fws.gov/endangered/?ref=topbar

Energy Development
The USFWS website has a section that is dedicated to the development of domestic energy sources and its effect

on wildlife.

https://www.fws.gov/ecological-services/energy-development/energy.html

Federal Register
Significant documents, from 1995 (volume 60) to the present, and recent documents that the USFWS has

published in the Federal Register are available online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/fish-and-wildlife-service

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The USFWS makes records available, by law, to the public to the greatest extent possible. The records that are

being sought already may be posted online. If the information cannot be found online or if the location of the

desired records is uncertain, consider contacting the USFWS FOIA public liaison before submitting a FOIA

request.

https://www.fws.gov/irm/bpim/foia.html | Email: fwhq_foia@fws.gov
Ecological Services maintains an online glossary of terms found in environmental legislation.
https://www.fws.gov/irm/bpim/foiaread.html

Glossaries
Ecological Services maintains an online glossary of terms found in environmental legislation.

https://www.fws.gov/ecological-services/about/glossary.html
The Midwest Region maintains an online glossary of terms associated with endangered species.

https://www.fws.gov/media/endangered-species-glossary
The USFWS website features a short glossary of National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) terms in Portable

Document Format (PDF).

https://www.fws.gov/media/glossary-termspdf

National Wildlife Refuges
For information on the National Wildlife Refuge System, including information on specific wildlife refuges and

wetland management districts, visit the "National Wildlife Refuge System" website. Phone, 800-344-9453.

https://fws.gov/program/national-wildlife-refuge-system

News Media Inquiries
Journalists, reporters, and other media professionals seeking information or to arrange an interview should

contact a regional public affairs officer or the Division of Public Affairs in Falls Church, VA.

http://www.fws.gov/media-contacts | Email: publicaffairs@fws.gov

Newsroom
The USFWS posts news releases online.

https://www.fws.gov/news

Permits
Visit the "Do I Need a Permit" web page to learn the rules for importing, exporting, and reexporting protected

species. Information on Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora

(CITES) permits and certificates is also available from the Division of Management Authority. Phone, 800-358-

2104 or 703-358-2093.

https://www.fws.gov/service/permits

Publications
The USFWS national publications unit is headquartered at the National Conservation Training Center in

Shepherdstown, WV. It is the primary distribution center for printed material published by the USFWS. The

publications unit handles requests from Federal and State agencies, businesses, educators, and the general

public. USFWS publications include booklets, brochures, posters, and reports. Phone, 800-344-9543.

http://nctc.fws.gov/resources/knowledge-resources
Some publications may need to be ordered from the U.S. Government Bookstore, which the Government

Publishing Office operates. Phone, 866-512-1800 (customer contact center). Phone, 202-512-0132 (store phone).

https://bookstore.gpo.gov | Email: ContactCenter@gpo.gov
Regional Offices
USFWS has regional offices that represent each of its geographic regions. Contact information for each of these

regional offices is available on the USFWS website.

https://www.fws.gov/external-affairs/contacts.html
The Office of Law Enforcement, in addition to its national office in Falls Church, VA, maintains regional offices.

Contact information for these offices is available on the USFWS website.

https://www.fws.gov/program/office-of-law-enforcement/contact-us
A State list of other USFWS offices and their contact information is also available online.

https://www.fws.gov/offices

Social Media
The USFWS uses social media to communicate and connect with Internet users worldwide. The agency posts

informative, educational and news content, photos, graphics and video to social media using the following

platforms: X, Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, Pinterest, Flickr, and YouTube. Information technology moves at a

rapid pace, and there will likely be other platforms to be used in the future to communicate with our audiences.

http://www.fws.gov/home/socialmedia/index.html?ref=topbar

Water Resource Development
The Ecological Services program includes USFWS participation in projects to develop water resources for

meeting the needs of local communities and for conserving fish and wildlife. The USFWS works alongside the

U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Bureau of Reclamation when participating in these development projects.

https://www.fws.gov/social-media
The Sources of Information were updated 5–2020.



United States Geological Survey
12201 Sunrise Valley Drive, Reston, VA 20192


703-648-4000

http://www.usgs.gov | Email: ASK@usgs.gov


  DIRECTOR *                                                David Applegate




DEPUTY DIRECTORS


  Administration and Policy                                 Roseann C. Gonzales-Schreiner


  Operations                                                Cynthia L. Lodge


  * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Water and Science.
https://www.usgs.gov/about/key-officials



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The United States Geological Survey (USGS) was established by the Organic Act of March 3, 1879 (Ch. 182 / 20

Stat. 394 / 43 U.S.C. 31). Since March 3, 1879, the Survey has provided the United States with science information

needed to make important land use and resource management policy decisions.

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/45th-congress/session-3/c45s3ch182.pdf
The USGS serves as the Earth and natural science research bureau for the Department of the Interior. It is the

only integrated natural resources research agency in the Federal Government. USGS research and data support

the Department's resource and land management information needs. Other Federal, State, tribal, and local

government agencies rely on USGS research and data for their biological, climate, energy, mineral resources,

natural hazards, and water information needs. Emergency response organizations, natural resource managers,

land use planners, and other customers use USGS research and data to protect lives and property, to address

environmental health issues, and to promote the public weal.

http://www.usgs.gov/about/about-us/who-we-are
The USGS conducts research, monitoring, and assessments to increase understanding of America's biological,

land, and water resources. The Service informs American citizens and members of the global community by

producing data, maps, and reports containing analyses and interpretations. These analyses and interpretations

cover a range of topics: biological, energy, mineral, and water resources; land surfaces; marine environments;

geologic structures; natural hazards; and dynamic processes of the Earth. Citizens, managers, and planners

regularly use USGS data, analytical, and interpretive products to respond to and plan for changes in ecosystems

and the environment.


The USGS has over 140 years of experience generating science-based data. In more than 400 science centers

across the United States, the Service employs approximately 10,000 science and science-support staff, who work

on locally, regionally, and nationally scaled studies, on research projects, and at sampling and monitoring sites.

https://www.usgs.gov/about/organization



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that USGS records have

been assigned to record group 057.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/057.html

Business Opportunities
General information on contracting is available from the Office of Acquisition and Grants. Phone, 703-648-7376.
https://www.usgs.gov/about/organization/science-support/administration/office-acquisition-and-grants
The "Small Business Program" web page has resources to help small-business owners.

https://www.usgs.gov/about/organization/science-support/administration/office-acquisition-and-grants/small-
business?qt-science_support_page_related_con=1#qt-science_support_page_related_con            |        Email:
gs_smallbusiness@usgs.gov

Career Opportunities
The USGS relies on professionals with a range of expertise and diverse skills to carry out its mission. Many of

these professionals have been educated and trained in various scientific disciplines: biology, cartography,

chemistry, ecology, geology, geography, hydrology, and physics.

https://www.usgs.gov/about/organization/science-support/human-capital/employment-and-information-center
| Email: hcweb@usgs.gov
In 2019, the USGS ranked 168th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/IN08

Contact Information
The "Contact USGS" web page has an electronic message form, as well as information on social media and web

chat. Phone, 888-275-8747.

https://answers.usgs.gov

Critical Minerals List
On May 18, 2018, the Department of the Interior's Office of the Secretary published the notice "Final List of

Critical Minerals 2018" in the Federal Register (83 FR 23295). The expertise of USGS staff plays a key role in

reducing the Nation's vulnerability to disruptions in the supply of these minerals. On its website, the USGS

posted the announcement "Interior Releases 2018's Final List of 35 Minerals Deemed Critical to U.S. National

Security and the Economy." Each of the critical minerals is hyperlinked to a web page with statistics and other

information on that particular mineral. Although the list is a final version, it should not be characterized as a

permanent, but as a dynamic, list that will be updated.

https://www.usgs.gov/news/interior-releases-2018-s-final-list-35-minerals-deemed-critical-us-national-security-
and

Earthquakes for Kids
Earthquakes for kids provides online resources to help children and adults learn about earthquakes and

earthquake science.

http://earthquake.usgs.gov/learn/kids

Federal Register
Documents that the USGS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/geological-survey

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA electronic reading room contains documents related to the Flow Rate Technical Group in response to
the Deepwater Horizon oil spill. These documents have been cleared for public release, and the USGS expects to

publish additional documents to this collection. Before submitting a FOIA request for agency records, an

information seeker should search this reading room and other Federal Government Deepwater Horizon

electronic reading rooms for documents and information.

https://www.usgs.gov/about/organization/science-support/foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The USGS posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.usgs.gov/faq

Glossaries
A landslides glossary is available on the USGS website.

https://www.usgs.gov/natural-hazards/landslide-hazards/science/landslides-glossary?qt-
science_center_objects=0#qt-science_center_objects
The earthquake hazards program includes an online glossary.

http://earthquake.usgs.gov/learn/glossary
The Office of Budget, Planning, and Integration maintains an online glossary of common terms and financial

terms.

https://www.usgs.gov/about/organization/science-support/budget/glossary
A glossary of collections management terms is available online.

https://www.usgs.gov/products/scientific-collections/glossary-terms
A Landsat glossary and list of acronyms are available online.

https://www.usgs.gov/core-science-systems/nli/landsat/landsat-glossary
The USGS published a glossary of glacier-related terms.

https://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2004/1216/a/a.html
A list of water-related terms and their definitions are available online.

https://www.usgs.gov/special-topic/water-science-school/science/dictionary-water-terms?qt-
science_center_objects=0#qt-science_center_objects

History
Mary C. Rabbitt's "The United States Geological Survey: 1879–1989" is available in electronic form on the USGS

website. It is a 110-year history of the relation of geology to the development of policies for public land, Federal

science, and mapping, and to the development of mineral resources in the United States.

http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/c1050

Landsat Satellite Missions
In 1966, former Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall announced the launching of the Earth Resources

Observation Satellites (EROS) project. His vision was to observe the Earth for the benefit of all. One of the

purposes of the ongoing project is to collect valuable resource data and use them to improve the environmental

quality of the biosphere.
https://www.usgs.gov/core-science-systems/nli/landsat/landsat-satellite-missions?qt-
science_support_page_related_con=0#qt-science_support_page_related_con

Library
Established in 1879, the USGS library is now the largest library for earth sciences in the world. Professional

librarians develop and maintain USGS library guides to connect users to relevant resources and research

strategies.

https://usgs.libguides.com/home | Email: library@usgs.gov

National Map
The National Map website offers Internet users a trove of topographical information.

https://www.usgs.gov/core-science-systems/national-geospatial-program/national-map

Natural Hazards
Information on the programs and activities of the natural hazards mission—including information on

earthquakes, flooding, landslides, volcanoes, and wildfires—is available online.

https://www.usgs.gov/mission-areas/natural-hazards

News
The USGS posts national and State news items.

https://www.usgs.gov/news/news-releases

Publications
The USGS publications warehouse provides access to over 130,000 publications written by USGS scientists

throughout the agency's history.

https://pubs.er.usgs.gov

Science Snippets
The USGS posts fun facts and interesting snippets of science.

https://www.usgs.gov/news/science-snippets

Site Map
The Website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.usgs.gov/sitemap

USGS Store
Educational materials, Federal recreation passes, maps, scientific reports, and more are available from the online

USGS Store.

https://store.usgs.gov

Social Media
The USGS maintains a presence on social media.

https://www.usgs.gov/connect/social-media
     Volcanic Activity Alerts
     Information on U.S. volcanoes and current activity alerts are available on the "Volcano Hazards" web page.

     https://www.usgs.gov/volcano

     Water Resources
     Reliable, impartial, and timely information on the Nation's water resources is available on the "Water Resources"

     web page. Phone, 888-275-8747.

     http://www.usgs.gov/water
     A nationwide list of all of the USGS water resources mission area science centers and regions and hubs for

     critical water science that Federal, State, and other partners and stakeholders fund is available online.

     https://www.usgs.gov/mission-areas/water-resources/about/water-resources-mission-area-science-centers-and-
     regions

     Wetlands and Aquatics Research
     The Wetlands and Aquatics Research Center conducts research, develops new approaches and technologies,

     and disseminates scientific information that is needed for understanding, managing, conserving, and restoring

     wetlands and other aquatic and coastal ecosystems and their associated plant and animal communities

     throughout the Nation and the world.

     https://www.usgs.gov/centers/wetland-and-aquatic-research-center-warc
     The Sources of Information were updated 12–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                   Bureau of Indian Affairs




The United States Government Manual




     BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
    Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240


    202-208-3710

    http://www.bia.gov/bia


      DIRECTOR *                                                                            Darryl LaCounte




      * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs.
https://www.bia.gov/person/darryl-lacounte



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Bureau of Indian Affairs enhances the quality of life, promotes economic opportunity, and protects and improves the

trust assets of American Indians, Indian tribes, and Alaska Natives.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
Secretary of War John C. Calhoun established the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) on March 11, 1824, to oversee and

carry out the Federal Government’s trade and treaty relations with tribes. The BIA remains the oldest Department of

the Interior (DOI) component in continuous existence and one of the oldest agencies in the Federal Government. The

DOI formally adopted Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) as the agency’s official name on September 17, 1947. Prior to that

time, it was referred to as the Indian office, Indian bureau, Indian department, and Indian service.

https://www.bia.gov/about-us
On March 3, 1849, President James K. Polk approved an act that transferred the "supervisory and appellate powers

now exercised by the Secretary of the War Department, in relation to all the acts of the Commissioner of Indian

Affairs," to the Secretary of the Interior, who now headed the newly created DOI (9 Stat. 395).

https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/llsl//llsl-c30/llsl-c30.pdf

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material affecting the BIA is codified in 25 U.S.C. 1–17 (chapter 1).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title25/chapter1&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that affect Indians are codified in 25 CFR. Parts 1–299 contain rules and regulations that are

associated with the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Parts 900–999 contain rules and regulations that are associated with the

Bureau of Indian Affairs and with the Department of Health and Human Service's Indian Health Service.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=2dff2e4675b2891abcf7c9eb0078703c&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title25/25tab_02.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The BIA's mission centers on fulfilling its trust responsibilities and promoting self-determination on behalf of federally

recognized tribal governments, American Indians, and Alaska Natives. The BIA provides services to members of 574

federally recognized Indian Tribes in the 48 contiguous United States and Alaska—nearly two million American Indians

and Alaska Natives.

https://www.bia.gov/bia
The BIA serves the federally recognized Tribes through four Offices:


The Office of Indian Services operates the BIA's general assistance, disaster relief, Indian child welfare, tribal

government, Indian self-determination, and reservation roads programs.

https://www.bia.gov/bia/ois
The Office of Justice Services directly operates or funds law enforcement, tribal courts, and detention facilities on
Federal Indian lands.

https://www.bia.gov/bia/ojs
The Office of Trust Services works with tribes and individual American Indians and Alaska Natives in the management

of their trust lands, assets, and resources.

https://www.bia.gov/bia/ots
Lastly, the Office of Field Operations oversees 12 regional offices and 83 agencies that carry out the mission of the BIA

at the tribal level. The regional offices and agencies administer delivery of program services to the federally recognized

Tribes, to individual Indians, and to Alaska Natives, either directly or through contracts, grants or compacts.

https://www.bia.gov/regional-offices



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Bureau of Indian Affairs

records have been assigned to record group 075.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/075.html

Boarding Schools
On April 1, 2022, Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs Bryan T. Newland submitted the first "Federal Indian Boarding

School Initiative Investigative Report" to Secretary Debra A. Haaland. In his cover letter to the report, Assistant

Secretary Newland described the report's achievements: "[It] shows for the first time that between 1819 and 1969, the

United States operated or supported 408 boarding schools across 37 States (or then-territories), including 21 schools

in Alaska and 7 schools in Hawaii. This report identifies each of those schools by name and location, some of which

operated across multiple sites." To conclude his letter, and with an eye on the future, he added: "This report . . . is only

a first step to acknowledge the experiences of Federal Indian boarding school children. It notes a desire from people

across Indian Country and the Native Hawaiian Community to share their individual and family experiences within the

Federal Indian boarding school system and the resulting impacts today. This report also presents an opportunity for us

to reorient our Federal policies to support the revitalization of Tribal languages and cultural practices. This

reorientation of Federal policy is necessary to counteract nearly two centuries of Federal policies aimed at the

destruction of Tribal languages and cultures."

https://www.bia.gov/service/federal-indian-boarding-school-initiative

Career Opportunities
BIA job opportunities, common job documents, and hiring information for American Indian and Alaska Native veterans

are available online.

https://www.bia.gov/jobs
The BIA posted a short video to promote its firefighting and aviation program. It focuses on the program's Helitack

crews, which rely heavily on helicopters in their efforts to extinguish wildfires.

https://youtu.be/c8VnzD87Qj8
In 2020, the BIA ranked 358th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=IN06

Contact Information
The BIA posts its mailing address and fax and phone numbers on the Indian Affairs' website on the "Contact Us" web

page.

https://www.bia.gov/contact-us

Estate Planning
The American Indian Probate Reform Act of 2004 (AIPRA) made changes to the way trust or restricted land and

property is inherited. It also made changes that affected land management and purchases. The BIA website has

information that explains how AIPRA affects wills and inheritance.

https://www.bia.gov/service/estate-planning

Federal Register
Significant documents, from 1995 (volume 60) to the present, and recent documents that the BIA has published in the

Federal Register are available online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/indian-affairs-bureau

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA establishes a presumption that the public may access records in the possession of Federal agencies. The Act

is based on the principle of openness in government and generally provides that a person has a right of access to

Federal agency records. This right of access is restricted, however, by nine exemptions and three special law

enforcement record exclusions that shield certain records, or parts of them, from disclosure. More information on the

FOIA and instructions for submitting a request to access BIA records are available on the Indian Affairs website.

https://www.bia.gov/as-ia/foia | Email: foia@bia.gov
Before submitting a FOIA request in writing with the FOIA officer, the requester should check that the information

being sought is not already in the public domain. The DOI maintains FOIA libraries that include the following record

types and resources: final opinions made in the adjudication of cases; policy statements and interpretations that the

DOI has adopted, but not published in the Federal Register; administrative staff manuals and staff instructions that

affect a member of the public; records that have been requested repeatedly by submitters of FOIA requests or records

that the DOI anticipates will be requested repeatedly in the future; an index of frequently requested records; and links

to other related sites and reference materials.

https://www.doi.gov/foia/library

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
Indian Affairs posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.bia.gov/frequently-asked-questions

Library
Frequently requested documents and links are accessible on the Indian Affairs website in the electronic document
library.

https://www.bia.gov/bia/document-library

Maps
The Office of Trust Services' Branch of Geospatial Support (BGS) posts web maps and static maps, as well as

downloadable data, on the Indian Affairs' website. The BGS provides geographic information systems software,

training, and system support for the management of natural resources on Indian lands. Phone, 877-293-9494.

https://biamaps.doi.gov | Email: geospatial@bia.gov
The Office of Trust Services posted the "Indian Lands of Federally Recognized Tribes of the United States" map on the

BIA website in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.bia.gov/sites/default/files/dup/assets/bia/ots/webteam/pdf/idc1-028635.pdf
The "National Climate Assessment: Indigenous People's Resilience Actions" map, which is posted on the Office of Trust

Services' website, provides an overview of indigenous people's actions to prepare for changes in climate by taking

steps to increase resilience.

https://biamaps.doi.gov/portal/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=53794ae1ce054029bd5b55bcf269434c

Programs / Services
Federally recognized Tribes look to the BIA for a range of services. The "Programs and Services" web page, which is

accessible on the Indian Affairs' website, provides information about them.

https://www.bia.gov/programs-services

Regional Offices
Contact information for the 12 BIA regional offices is available online.

https://www.bia.gov/regional-offices

Regulations in Development
The "Regulations and Other Documents in Development" web page, which is part of the Indian Affairs' website, allows

visitors to monitor the progress of regulations that are in development, under review, or in development and under

review.

https://www.bia.gov/as-ia/raca/regulations-and-other-documents-in-development

Site Map
The site map, which is part of the Indian Affairs' website, allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content

that aligns with their interests.

https://www.bia.gov/sitemap.xml

Social Media
The BIA posts content on Facebook.

https://www.facebook.com/USIndianAffairs
The BIA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/USIndianAffairs
     Tracing Ancestry
     The "Tracing American Indian and Alaska Native Ancestry" web page has information on genealogical research and on

     tribal contacts and services. It also answers some oft asked questions about tracing one's family ancestry.

     https://www.bia.gov/guide/tracing-american-indian-and-alaska-native-aian-ancestry

     Wildland Fire Management
     Indian Affairs posted a collection of fire prevention and education videos on wildland fire management in Indian

     country on its website. Note that not all of the videos in the collection were produced by the BIA.

     https://www.bia.gov/bia/ots/dfwfm/bwfm/Video-Library

        The Sources of Information were updated 5–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                 Bureau of Indian Education




The United States Government Manual




     BUREAU OF INDIAN EDUCATION
    Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240


    202-208-3710

    http://www.bie.edu


      DIRECTOR *                                                                            Tony L. Dearman




      * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs.
https://www.bie.edu/cs/groups/webteam/documents/text/idc2-092903.pdf



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Bureau of Indian Education provides educational opportunities for eligible American Indian and Alaska Native

elementary, secondary, and postsecondary students from federally recognized Tribes




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
To reflect the parallel purpose and organizational structure that the BIE has in relation to other programs within the

Office of the Assistant Secretary–Indian Affairs, the Office of Indian Education Programs was renamed the Bureau of

Indian Education (BIE) by departmental manual release no. 3721 of August 29, 2006.

https://www.bia.gov/bie
Nearly 95 years earlier, President Warren G. Harding approved Public Law 67–85, which is also referred to as the

Snyder Act of 1921, to authorize the BIA, under the supervision of the Secretary of the Interior, to "direct, supervise,

and expend such moneys as Congress may from time to time appropriate, for the benefit, care, and assistance of the

Indians throughout the United States for the following purposes . . ." One of those purposes was for the "general

support and civilization, including education." Since the passage of the Snyder Act of 1921, three major legislative

actions have restructured the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) with regard to educating American Indians.

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/67th-congress/Session%201/c67s1ch115.pdf
On June 18, 1934, the day on which President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved Public Law 73–383, which is also referred

to as the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 and the Wheeler-Howard Act, the longstanding Federal policy of

acculturating and assimilating Indian people through a boarding school system ended. The new law introduced the

teaching of Indian history and culture in BIA schools.

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/73rd-congress/session-2/c73s2ch576.pdf
On January 4, 1975, President Gerald R. Ford approved Public Law 93–638, which is also cited as the Indian Self-

Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975, "to establish a program of assistance to upgrade Indian

education" and "to support the right of Indian citizens to control their own educational activities." The law allows

federally recognized Tribes to contract with the BIA for the operation of Bureau-funded schools and to determine

education programs suitable for their children.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-88/pdf/STATUTE-88-Pg2203.pdf
On November 1, 1978, President James E. Carter approved Public Law 95–561, which is also cited as the Education

Amendments of 1978. Additional amendments followed: Public Laws 98–511, 99–99, and 100–297. These legislative

actions provided direct funding to tribally operated schools, empowered Indian school boards, permitted local hiring

of teachers and staff, and created a direct line of authority between the Education Director and the Assistant Secretary

of Indian Affairs.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-92/pdf/STATUTE-92-Pg2143.pdf
The BIE organizational chart is part of the organizational chart of Indian Affairs.
https://www.indianaffairs.gov/sites/bia.gov/files/OrgChartFY18Greenbook.pdf



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Rules and regulations affecting Indians and their education are codified in 25 CFR 30–47 (subchapter E).

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=7954367ce0b81d96674d6b175d0dea54&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title25/25CIsubchapE.tpl



ACTIVITIES
The BIE provides quality education opportunities from early childhood throughout adulthood, in accordance with the

Tribes' needs for cultural and economic well-being, and in keeping with the diversity of Indian Tribes and Alaska Native

villages as distinct cultural and governmental entities. The BIE considers the whole person as it carries out its mission,

taking into account the cultural, mental, physical, and spiritual aspects of the person within the contexts of family and

Tribe or Alaska Native village.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=317c41e73ba08bd8f84a0dbdfba8a9c3&mc=true&node=pt25.1.32&rgn=div5#se25.1.32_13
The BIE educates over 45,000 American Indian and Alaska Native children at 183 elementary and secondary schools on

64 reservations in 23 States. The Bureau operates 53 of these schools. The other 130 schools are tribally operated. The

BIE oversees two postsecondary schools: Haskell Indian Nations University in Lawrence, KS, and Southwestern Indian

Polytechnic Institute in Albuquerque, NM. It also funds the Navajo and United Tribes Technical Colleges.

https://www.bia.gov/bie



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Bureau of Indian Affairs

records have been assigned to record group 075. "Records of the Education Division 1874–1972" are part of that

record group.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/075.html

Career Opportunities
American Indian children deserve a quality education—and that starts with highly qualified, dedicated staff and

educators. The BIE employees nearly 4,500 professionals in careers that offer unique and diverse cultural and lifestyle

experiences. Phone, 505-563-5304.

https://www.bie.edu/Jobs/index.htm | Email: staffing@bie.edu

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has addresses and phone numbers for contacting the BIE.
https://www.bie.edu/ContactUs/index.htm
The Human Resources Office maintains a web page with contact information.

https://www.bie.edu/HR/Contact/index.htm
The BIE "National Staff Directory" (APR 2019) is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and

downloading.

https://www.bie.edu/cs/groups/xbie/documents/text/idc2-093307.pdf

Divisions / Programs
The BIE website features a web page with a list of the agency's divisions and programs and links to their websites.

https://www.bie.edu/Programs/index

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA establishes a presumption that the public may access records in the possession of Federal agencies. The Act

is based on the principle of openness in government and generally provides that a person has a right of access to

Federal agency records. This right of access is restricted, however, by nine exemptions and three special law

enforcement record exclusions that shield certain records, or parts of them, from disclosure. More information on the

FOIA and instructions for submitting a request to access BIE records are available on the Indian Affairs website.

https://www.bia.gov/as-ia/foia | Email: foia@bia.gov
Before submitting a FOIA request in writing with the FOIA officer, the requester should check that the information

being sought is not already in the public domain. The DOI maintains FOIA libraries that include the following record

types and resources: final opinions made in the adjudication of cases; policy statements and interpretations that the

DOI has adopted, but not published in the Federal Register; administrative staff manuals and staff instructions that

affect a member of the public; records that have been requested repeatedly by submitters of FOIA requests or records

that the DOI anticipates will be requested repeatedly in the future; an index of frequently requested records; and links

to other related sites and reference materials.

https://www.doi.gov/foia/library

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The BIE posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.bie.edu/HR/FAQ/index.htm

News
The BIE posts news items on its website.

https://www.bie.edu/NewsEvents/index.htm

Reports
Performance and special education reports and school report cards are accessible online.

https://www.bie.edu/HowAreWeDoing/index.htm

Resources
BIE education line officers, school superintendents, principals, teachers, and staff can access program guidance,

handbooks, templates, and training provided in various formats—WebEx or PowerPoint—to refresh professional skills.
     These online documents and presentations are provided to supplement staff training throughout the school year.

     https://www.bie.edu/Resources/index.htm

     Scholarships
     The BIE website provides information on scholarship opportunities for American Indian students.

     https://www.bie.edu/ParentsStudents/Grants/index.htm

     Schools
     Contact information for schools that the BIE oversees is available online.

     https://www.bie.edu/Schools/index.htm

     Site Map
     The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

     https://www.bie.edu/SiteMap/index.htm

     Social Media
     The BIE maintains a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/Bureauofindianeducation
     The BIE tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/BureauIndianEdu

     Tribal Resources
     A directory of external resources to support tribes is accessible on the BIE website. The directory file is in Portable

     Document Format for viewing and downloading.

     https://www.bie.edu/Resources/index.htm

        The Sources of Information were updated 12–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Bureau of Land Management




The United States Government Manual




     BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT
    Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240


    202-208-3801

    http://www.blm.gov


      DIRECTOR *                                                                            Tracy Stone-Manning




      * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Land and Minerals Management.
https://www.blm.gov/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Bureau of Land Management sustains the health, diversity, and productivity of public lands for the use and

enjoyment of present and future generations.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
President Harry S. Truman prepared and transmitted to the U.S. Congress a plan of reorganization that created the

Bureau of Land Management (BLM). Section 403 of reorganization plan no. 3 of 1946 consolidated the General Land

Office with the Grazing Service to establish the Bureau of Land Management. The plan became effective on July 16,

1946.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title5a-node84-leaf93&num=0&edition=prelim
On October 21, 1976, President Gerald R. Ford approved the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (PL 94–

579) to establish public land policy; to establish guidelines for its administration; to provide for the management,

protection, development, and enhancement of the public lands; and for other purposes" (90 STAT. 2743). In the law,

Congress declared that national policy governing the management of public lands "be on the basis of multiple use

and sustained yield."

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-90/pdf/STATUTE-90-Pg2743.pdf
The BLM posts its organization chart online.

https://www.blm.gov/about/organization-chart



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Laws that affect public lands are codified in 43 U.S.C. Chapter 1 of that title contains codified material that is associated

with the BLM.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title43/chapter1&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that affect public lands and that are associated with the BLM are codified in 43 CFR 1000–9999

(subtitle B, ch. II). The codified subjects include forest, general, land resource, minerals, and range management;

preservation and conservation; recreation programs; and technical services.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=5167eb7d8c784969301611a596a7818a&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title43/43chapterII.tpl



ACTIVITIES
The BLM sustains the diversity, health, and productivity of America's public lands for the benefit of present and future

generations through a mandate of multiple-use and sustained-yield. It manages 1 of every 10 acres of land across the
United States, about 245 million acres of land, most of which is located in Alaska and 11 other Western States. The

Bureau also manages about 30 percent, or 700 million acres, of the Nation’s subsurface mineral estate. The BLM

oversees conventional and renewable energy development, livestock grazing, recreation, and timber harvesting, and it

protects cultural, historical, and natural resources. Many of these resources are found on National Conservation Lands,

a subset of BLM lands that are federally designated, that cover 32 million acres, and that include 260 wilderness areas

and 28 national monuments.

https://www.blm.gov/programs
A number of energy resources are accessible on public lands. The BLM supports a diversified energy approach that

includes coal, oil and gas, strategic minerals, as well as renewable energy resources like geothermal, solar, wind, and

woody biomass. A diversified approach strengthens the Nation's energy security, strengthens its energy infrastructure,

and stimulates job creation. To serve industry and the American public, the BLM is making energy development easier

on public lands by reviewing and streamlining business processes.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/energy-and-minerals
The Bureau manages livestock on 155 million acres of land, administering nearly 18,000 permits and leases held by

ranchers who graze mostly cattle and sheep.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/natural-resources/rangelands-and-grazing
Under the Wild Free-­Roaming Horses and Burros Act of 1971, it also manages herds of wild horses and burros on

public rangelands.

https://www.blm.gov/whb
Recreation is also part of the BLM's portfolio. Birdwatchers, campers, hang gliders, horseback riders, hunters, mountain

bikers, photographers, whitewater rafters, and visitors to cultural and natural heritage sites recreate on hundreds of

millions of acres of public lands. The Bureau estimates that it receives approximately 62 million recreational visits per

year.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/recreation
The BLM manages habitat for over 300 wildlife, fish, and plant species that are listed as threatened or endangered

under the Endangered Species Act and 12 species identified as candidates for listing. Public lands that the BLM

manages offer the best opportunity for recovery of some rare or listed plant and animal species because their unique

requirements for survival can be met only on Federal lands.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/fish-and-wildlife/threatened-and-endangered
The Federal Land Policy and Management Act (FLPMA) of 1976 authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to stand up a

law enforcement body to enforce Federal laws and regulations affecting public lands and their resources. As a result,

the BLM has been given specific resource protection and law enforcement responsibilities that further the FLPMA's

public lands management policy of multiple use. The Bureau's law enforcement program helps ensure public safety,

while supporting its multiple-use mission. Law enforcement officers investigate vandalism and looting, support

emergency responders, and maintain a safe environment for visitors to the public lands and for BLM employees.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/public-safety-and-fire/law-enforcement
The BLM carries out a broad range of actions to protect the public, natural landscapes, wildlife habitat, and

recreational areas from wildfire. The BLM's national fire and aviation program consists of community assistance and

protection, fire prevention through education, fire suppression, preparedness, predictive services, prescribed fire, and
vegetative fuels management.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/fire-and-aviation
The BLM's lands, realty and cadastral survey program manages public land transactions: purchases and acquisitions,

sales and exchanges, withdrawals, leases and permits, right-of-way authorizations, and, cadastral (i.e., mapping) survey

services. From enabling energy development, to permitting commercial filming, to defining boundaries and

maintaining public land records, BLM professionals regard the public lands as working landscapes, and they manage

them for the benefit of current and future generations. The BLM's mission—which is built on the principles of multiple-

use and sustained yield—requires the agency to promote commerce, conservation, and recreation on public lands.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/lands-and-realty
The Bureau's broad management responsibilities require balancing public land uses and protection of public land

resources. Working with State and local and tribal governments, stakeholder groups, and the public, the BLM creates

land use plans, referred to as Resource Management Plans, to guide decisions for approved uses of and actions

affecting public lands.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/planning-and-nepa



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Adoption Schedule
The BLM offers wild horses and burros for adoption or purchase at events nationwide throughout the year. The most

current adoption event schedule is accessible online.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/wild-horse-and-burro/adoption-and-sales/events

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that BLM records have been

assigned to record group 049.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/049.html

Artist-in-Residence Program
Residencies of 6–8 weeks are available in several Western States for painters, photographers, potters, sculptors, and

other artists.

https://www.blm.gov/get-involved/artist-in-residence/about-the-program

Business Opportunities
The BLM procures a wide array of goods and services.

https://www.blm.gov/services/acquisition/contracting
Stewardship contracting refers to trading forest products for land management and services. In exchange for thinning

the forest and keeping the trees to sell, for example, a contractor or an organization performs service-work that helps

to achieve key land management goals like improving wildlife habitat or reestablishing native plant species. The intent

of stewardship is to improve, maintain, or restore forest or rangeland health; restore or maintain water quality;

improve fish and wildlife habitat; and reduce danger from wildfires.
https://www.blm.gov/programs/natural-resources/forests-and-woodlands/stewardship-contracting

Career Opportunities
The BLM relies on people with diverse skills and from various professional backgrounds—business, engineering, fire

management, law enforcement, science, and other fields—to manage the Nation’s public lands and resources.

https://www.blm.gov/careers
In 2020, the BLM ranked 322d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=IN05

Climate Change
Climate change presents challenges to the BLM as it manages inland freshwater ecosystems (e.g., lakes, rivers, streams,

wetlands) and coastal wetlands. Researchers project the disappearance of cold-water fish from large areas of their

current geographic ranges as streams become more sporadic and warmer; the expansion of the ranges of warm-

water fish as surface waters warm; and more frequent and widespread algal blooms that adversely affect water quality.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/fish-and-wildlife/fisheries-and-aquatics/about-the-program

Contact Information
Contact information is available online.

https://www.blm.gov/office/national-office

Data Resources
The BLM regularly gathers, maintains, and publishes data to inform stakeholders and the general public. These data

include detailed information on the commercial uses of the public lands; recreational activities and revenues; wild

horse and burro management; cadastral (i.e., mapping) surveys; conservation of rangeland resources and 870 special

units (e.g., wilderness areas); and the socioeconomic effects of public land management.

https://www.blm.gov/about/data

Federal Register
Significant documents, from 1995 (volume 60) to the present, and recent documents that the BLM has published in the

Federal Register are available online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/land-management-bureau

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives the right to request access to BLM records to anyone. In response to a FOIA request, the BLM will

disclose the desired information, unless this right of access is restricted by one of nine exemptions or three special law

enforcement record exclusions that shield certain records, or parts of them, from disclosure. More information on the

FOIA and instructions for submitting a request are available on the BLM website. Phone, 202-912-7650.

https://www.blm.gov/about/foia | Email: blm_wo_foia@blm.gov
Before submitting a records request in writing to the FOIA officer, the requester should check that the information

being sought is not already publicly accessible. The BLM maintains an electronic FOIA reading room where it posts
records that have been released into the public domain in response to previous requests.

https://www.blm.gov/about/foia/foia-reading-room

General Land Office Records
The General Land Office Records website allows visitors to access Federal land conveyance records for the Public Land

States (i.e., States created out of the public domain). The website contains images of more than five million Federal

land title records that were issued since 1820. It also has images related to survey plats and field notes dating back to

1810.

https://www.blm.gov/services/land-records

Geographic Information System (GIS) Data
BLM Navigator serves as a centralized location for accessing project, State, and national geospatial data.

https://navigator.blm.gov/home
The Landscape Approach Data Portal is a one-stop source for geospatial data, maps, models, and reports that BLM's

landscape initiatives have produced.

https://landscape.blm.gov/geoportal/catalog/main/home.page

History
A timeline that is structured around the enactment of land management legislation is available online. Specific public

laws have guided the BLM's mission, and the passage of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 was the

culmination of that process of policymaking.

https://www.blm.gov/about/history/timeline

Information Center
The "Information Center" web page has links to BLM policy, congressional testimony, Federal Register, live events,

magazines and newsletters, notices, Office of Civil Rights, press releases, public room (brochures, maps, reports), and

social media web pages.

https://www.blm.gov/media

Kids
Giving young people the opportunity to learn outdoors and recreate on public lands promotes the development of

the next generation of public land stewards and conservation leaders.

https://www.blm.gov/kids

Library
The library has professional staff who can assist BLM employees nationwide. The library staff is also available to assist

members of the general public seeking BLM publications and information. The library offers a range of resources and

services that include journals, databases, publications, subject guides, and an online library catalog.

https://www.blm.gov/learn/blm-library | Email: blm_library@blm.gov

Management
The BLM manages public lands in accordance with the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976.
https://www.blm.gov/about/how-we-manage
The BLM manages one in every 10 acres of land in the United States, and approximately 30 percent of the Nation’s

minerals. These lands and their minerals are found in each of the 50 States in diverse ecosystems like arctic tundra,

deserts, forests, mountains, and grasslands.

https://www.blm.gov/about/what-we-manage

Maps
Map and geospatial products inform BLM decision making. These maps and products are becoming more accessible

online.

https://www.blm.gov/maps

Paleontology
The BLM manages more than 245 million acres of public lands where Deinonychus, Edmontosaurus, Pentaceratops,

and Stegosaurus once roamed. To learn more, visit the BLM's "Paleontology" web pages.

https://www.blm.gov/paleontology

Recreation
The National Conservation Lands program offers online recreational guides for a convenient connection to public

lands.

https://www.blm.gov/visit
The BLM website provides resources for mountain bikers. These resources include the BLM Top 20 Mountain Biking

Opportunities list and interactive mountain biking maps for trails on BLM lands.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/recreation/mountainbike

Social Media
The BLM uses digital media tools to connect people with public lands and to keep people informed about activities on

them.

https://www.blm.gov/media/social-media

Statistics
Tables and spreadsheets with data that include the numbers of BLM-administered oil and gas leases, of applications

for permit to drill, and of oil and gas wells are accessible on the BLM website. Most of the statistics presented cover

Fiscal Years 1988–2015.

https://www.blm.gov/about/data/public-land-statistics

Timber Sales
The availability of timber for harvest depends on the age and condition of the timber, land status, and public demand,

as well as on other land use considerations.

https://www.blm.gov/programs/natural-resources/forests-and-woodlands/timber-sales

Woody Biomass
Woody biomass is used to produce electricity and products like furniture, paper, and wood for housing.
     https://www.blm.gov/programs/natural-resources/forests-and-woodlands/biomass-and-bioenergy

        The Sources of Information were updated 7–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                           Bureau of Ocean Energy Management




The United States Government Manual




     BUREAU OF OCEAN ENERGY MANAGEMENT
    Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240-0001


    202-208-6474

    http://www.boem.gov


      DIRECTOR *                                                                            Amanda Lefton




      * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Land and Minerals Management.
https://www.boem.gov/about-boem/boem-leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Bureau of Ocean Energy Management manages development of U.S. Outer Continental Shelf energy and mineral

resources in a way that is environmentally and economically responsible.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
In April of 2010, the Deepwater Horizon oil rig explosion and resulting oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico exposed

inadequacies in the Federal offshore energy regulatory system. In response to the disaster, former Secretary of the

Interior Kenneth L. Salazar issued two secretarial orders. On May 19, 2010, he issued Order 3299 "to separate and

reassign the responsibilities that had been conducted by the Minerals Management Service [MMS] into new

management structures that will improve the management, oversight, and accountability of activities on the Outer

Continental Shelf [OCS]."

https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/elips/documents/3299a2-
establishment_of_the_bureau_of_ocean_energy_management_the_bureau_of_safety_and_environmental_enforcement_
and_the_office_of_natural_resources_revenue.pdf
Within the Department of the Interior, Order 3299 initiated the establishment of the new Bureau of Ocean Energy

Management (BOEM), whose director would report to the Assistant Secretary–Land and Minerals Management. The

order also initiated the establishment of the new Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement (BSEE), whose

director also would report to the same Assistant Secretary. A third new agency, the Office of Natural Resources

Revenue, formerly the MMS's minerals revenue management program, would be established within the Department,

and its director would report to a different Assistant Secretary.

https://www.boem.gov/about-boem/reorganization/reorganization-former-mms
On June 18, 2010, former Secretary Salazar issued Order 3302, which announced that the MMS would be renamed the

Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement (BOEMRE) for the duration of the reorganization

period.

https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/elips/documents/3302_-
change_of_the_name_of_the_minerals_management_service_to_the_bureau_of_ocean_energy_management_regulatio
n_and_enforcement.pdf
On October 1, 2011, BOEMRE rules and regulations that now applied to the BOEM were recodified in a new chapter by

reorganization of 30 CFR. The establishment of the BOEM and its sibling the BSEE and the recodification of their

respective rules and regulations in a revised second chapter and a newly added fifth chapter marked the completion

of the reorganization of the former MMS.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2011-10-18/pdf/2011-22675.pdf
The BOEM posts an organizational chart on its website.

https://www.boem.gov/about-boem/boem-organizational-chart
STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material that affects mineral lands and mining is codified in 30 U.S.C. Chapter 26 of that title deals with deep

seabed hard mineral resources.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title30/chapter26&edition=prelim
Statutory material that affects public lands is codified in 43 U.S.C. Chapter 36 of that title deals with management of

OCS resources.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title43/chapter36&edition=prelim
BOEM rules and regulations are codified in chapter V, parts 500–599, of 30 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=9eabfe008f51a5c2935452c280fb4160&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title30/30chapterV.tpl



ACTIVITIES
The BOEM manages the exploration and development of offshore energy and marine mineral resources on the OCS.

The BOEM supports energy independence, environmental protection, and economic development by responsibly

managing these offshore resources in ways that comport with the best available science.


The OCS is a significant source of oil and gas for the Nation’s energy supply. OCS production accounts for about 18

percent of domestic crude oil and 4 percent of domestic natural gas supply. The BOEM manages about 2,674 active

oil and gas leases on more than 14.2 million OCS acres. In fiscal year 2019, offshore Federal production reached

approximately 683 million barrels of oil and 1.03 trillion cubic feet of gas, almost all of which was produced in the Gulf

of Mexico.

https://www.boem.gov/oil-gas-energy
The BOEM manages offshore development of renewable energy in Federal waters. The renewable energy program

began in 2009, when the Department of the Interior announced the final regulations for the OCS Renewable Energy

Program, which the Energy Policy Act of 2005 had authorized. The regulations provide a framework for all of the

activities that support the production and transmission of energy from sources other than oil and natural gas. The

BOEM anticipates managing the development of more hydrokinetic and more offshore wind and solar energy on the

OCS.

https://www.boem.gov/renewable-energy
The BOEM's environmental program covers the three major areas that the agency regulates on the OCS: oil and gas,

renewable energy, and nonenergy minerals like sand, gravel, and hard minerals. The Office of Environmental

Programs develops national policy, provides guidance, and coordinates with regional activities. The environmental

program’s two key functions are to support science and to conduct environmental assessments, which include

consultations with stakeholders and other regulatory agencies to strengthen decision making. The Chief Environmental

Officer also manages and leads engagement and consultation at the national and regional levels with federally

recognized Tribes.

https://www.boem.gov/environment
The BOEM partners with communities through its marine minerals program to address erosion along the Nation's
barrier islands, coastal beaches, dunes, and wetlands. Erosion affects defense, energy, natural resources, public

infrastructure, and tourism. To mitigate the effects of erosion, the BOEM leases gravel and sand and shell resources for

nourishing beaches, protecting shorelines, and restoring wetlands. These resources are extracted from Federal waters

on the OCS with environmental and safety oversight. The Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (PL 83–212) provides the

authority to manage minerals on the OCS and the requirement to provide environmental oversight. BOEM is the only

Federal agency with the authority to lease marine minerals from the OCS.

https://www.boem.gov/marine-minerals



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that MMS records have been

assigned to record group 473. The MMS is the predecessor agency to the BOEM. See the above "Establishment and

Organization" section.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/473.html

Business Opportunities
Information on doing business with the BOEM and related links are available on the "Procurement Business

Opportunities" website.

http://www.boem.gov/Doing-Business-with-BOEM

Calendar
The BOEM maintains an online events calendar.

http://www.boem.gov/Upcoming-Events

Career Opportunities
The BOEM relies on professionals with engineering and science backgrounds for ensuring the safe and

environmentally responsible development of the Nation's offshore energy and marine mineral resources.

http://www.boem.gov/employment
In 2020, the BOEM ranked 58th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/IN12

Contact Information
Information is available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.boem.gov/about-boem/contact-us

Educational Resources
BOEM teacher resources are available online.

http://www.boem.gov/Environmental-Studies-Program-Teacher-Resources
Factsheets
The BOEM posts factsheets on the following topics: about the agency, environment, marine minerals, oil and gas

energy, and renewable energy.

https://www.boem.gov/newsroom/boem-fact-sheets

Federal Register
Significant documents, from 1995 (volume 60) to the present, and recent documents that the BOEM has published in

the Federal Register are available online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/ocean-energy-management-bureau

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Effective on July 5, 1967, the FOIA gives any person a right to obtain access to Federal agency records; however, nine

exemptions and three special law enforcement exclusions shield certain records, or parts of them, from public

disclosure. A FOIA request may be made for any agency record. Instructions for submitting a BOEM record request

under the FOIA are available online. The BOEM operates a FOIA requester service center. Phone, 703-787-1128.

https://www.boem.gov/foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The BOEM posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.boem.gov/newsroom/frequently-asked-questions

Glossaries
The BOEM has posted a glossary of ecological terms.

https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/boem-newsroom/Technical-Announcements/2016/Chapter-7-Glossary-of-
Ecological-Terms.pdf
The BOEM has posted a glossary of terms that are associated with wind energy.

https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/renewable-energy-program/Studies/FEIS/Section12.0Glossary.pdf

Greenhouse Gas Emissions
BOEM OCS Report 2016–065, whose authors are E. Wolvovsky. and W. Anderson, is titled "OCS Oil and Natural Gas:

Potential Lifecycle Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Social Cost of Carbon." The report's key findings are the following:

Most lifecycle greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are the result of oil and gas products consumption; the price of oil and

gas and production volume have a large effect on the amount of oil and gas lifecycle GHG emissions; the magnitude

of emissions and their related social costs are comparable for the 2017–2022 program and the 2017–2022 program's

"No Action Alternative"; the production of oil and gas from other global sources can be more carbon-intense relative

to oil and gas that are produced on the OCS; absent policy changes or technological advancements, OCS emissions

could consume a measurable increment of the remaining worldwide and domestic GHG emissions budget.

https://www.boem.gov/sites/default/files/oil-and-gas-energy-program/Leasing/Five-Year-Program/2017-2022/OCS-
Report-BOEM-2016-065---OCS-Oil-and-Natural-Gas---Potential-Lifecycle-GHG-Emissions-and-Social-Cost-of-
Carbon.pdf

Historic Preservation
Archaeologists in Office of Renewable Energy Programs coordinate studies and conduct National Historic Preservation

Act reviews to identify and protect archaeological sites and other historic properties. OCS historic properties include

aircraft, lighthouses, precontact (European contact with Native Americans) archaeological sites, and shipwrecks.

Historic properties onshore come under review when a proposed renewable energy project may affect them. To learn

more about investigating the steamship "City of Houston" and German submarine "U–576" and other preservation

activities, visit the "Historic Preservation Activities" web page.

https://www.boem.gov/Renewable-Energy/Historic-Preservation-Activities

Library
The BOEM website has an electronic library.

http://www.boem.gov/Library

Marine Minerals
Mineral resources from the OCS are used in coastal restoration projects to address erosion. The BOEM has conveyed

rights to millions of cubic yards of OCS sand for coastal restoration projects in multiple States. These projects have

restored hundreds of miles of the Nation's coastline, protecting both infrastructure and ecological habitat. The BOEM

posts key marine mineral statistics on its website.

https://www.boem.gov/marine-minerals/current-statistics/current-marine-minerals-statistics            |            Email:
MarineMinerals@boem.gov

Oil / Gas
The BOEM has posted the 2017–2022 lease sale schedule and 2017–2022 quicklinks on its "Leasing" web page.

https://www.boem.gov/oil-gas-energy/leasing/2017-2022-lease-sale-schedule

Posters
Colorful BOEM posters that promote maritime history, ocean science and stewardship, and awareness of marine

animals and their habitats are available from the Gulf of Mexico Public Information Office. Phone, 800-200-4853.

http://www.boem.gov/BOEM-Posters

Press Releases
The BOEM posts press releases.

https://www.boem.gov/newsroom/news-items?news_type=11

Regional Offices
The BOEM operates three regional offices, one for the Alaska Outer Continental Shelf (OCS) region, one for the Pacific

OCS region, and one for the Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic OCS regions. Phone, 907-334-5200 (Alaska). Phone, 805-

384-6305 (Pacific). Phone, 800-200-4853 (Gulf of Mexico and Atlantic).

https://www.boem.gov/regions

Renewable Energy
A list of leases that the BOEM has executed since the inception of its renewable energy program is available online.

http://www.boem.gov/Lease-and-Grant-Information
    The BOEM collaborates with States on offshore energy development and is in the process of coordinating Federal-

    State task forces in certain coastal States. A summary of the status of activity in the various States is available online.

    https://www.boem.gov/Renewable-Energy-Program/State-Activities/Index.aspx

    Science / Technology
    "Ocean Science" is BOEM's science and technology journal. The agency is a leading contributor to the growing body

    of scientific knowledge on the Nation's marine and coastal environments.

    https://www.boem.gov/newsroom/library/ocean-science

    Shipwrecks
    The BOEM Alaskan shipwreck table is the most comprehensive compilation of Alaskan shipwrecks to date. The table

    offers a list of wrecks that occurred in Alaskan waters from 1741 to 2011. The "Shipwrecks Off Alaska's Coast" web page

    also features maritime history, ship, and shipwreck links to external websites.

    https://www.boem.gov/about-boem/shipwrecks-alaskas-coast

    Site Map
    The website map helps visitors find specific topics or allows them to browse the site's contents.

    https://www.boem.gov/sitemap

    Social Media
    The BOEM maintains a Facebook account.

    https://www.facebook.com/BureauOfOceanEnergyManagement
    The BOEM tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/BOEM
    The BOEM has a YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCXL807nkJMCuxNj5kF09LLQ/featured

    Statistics / Facts
    BOEM collects data on its offshore oil and gas energy programs and makes them available in multiple formats.

    https://www.boem.gov/newsroom/statistics-and-facts

        The above Sources of Information were updated 7–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy
Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                   Bureau of Reclamation




The United States Government Manual




     BUREAU OF RECLAMATION
    Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240


    202-513-0575

    http://www.usbr.gov


      COMMISSIONER *                                                                        Camille C. Touton




      * The Commissioner reports to the Assistant Secretary of Water and Science.
https://www.usbr.gov/newsroom/#/biography/1?recordid=1



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Bureau of Reclamation develops, manages, and protects water and related resources in a way that is

environmentally and economically responsible and that benefits the American public.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 17, 1902, President Theodore Roosevelt, Jr., approved an act to appropriate "the receipts from the sale and

disposal of public lands in certain States and Territories to the construction of irrigation works for the reclamation of

arid lands." Pursuant to Public Law 161 (32 Stat. 388), which is popularly known as the Reclamation Act or National

Irrigation Act of 1902, former Secretary of the Interior Ethan A. Hitchcock established the U.S. Reclamation Service

(USRS) in the Geological Survey in July.

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/57th-congress/session-1/c57s1ch1093.pdf
In 1907, the USRS separated from the Geological Survey and became an independent bureau within the Department

of the Interior. Sixteen years later, the independent USRS was renamed the Bureau of Reclamation.

https://www.usbr.gov/history/2019%20NEW%20BRIEF%20HISTORY%20V1.pdf
On August 4, 1977, President James E. Carter approved Public Law 95–91, which is also cited as the Department of

Energy Organization Act. The law transferred the Bureau's power marketing functions to the Department of Energy (91

STAT. 578) as part of an effort "to secure effective management to assure a coordinated national energy policy" (STAT.

565).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-91/pdf/STATUTE-91-Pg565.pdf
On November 6, 1979, former Secretary of the Interior Cecil D. Andrus issued Secretarial Order 3042, which changed

the Bureau's name to the Water and Power Resources Service (WPRS). On May 18, 1981, former Secretary of the

Interior James G. Watt issued Secretarial Order 3064, which renamed the WPRS the Bureau of Reclamation (BR).


The BR posts its organizational chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.usbr.gov/main/images/br_org_chart.pdf



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Codified statutory material dealing the Federal Government's reclamation and irrigation of public lands is found in 43

U.S.C. chapter 12. The Reclamation Act of 1902 is classified generally to this chapter.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title43/chapter12&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that affect public lands and that are associated with the BR are codified in 43 CFR 400–999

(subtitle B, chapter I).

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=f90eabe3636e1549dfc39643c94595c2&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title43/43chapterI.tpl



ACTIVITIES
The BR is the largest wholesaler of water in the United States. It brings water to more than 31 million people and

provides 140,000 Western farmers with irrigation water for 10 million acres of farmland. This irrigated farmland

produces 60% of the Nation's vegetables and 25% of its fruits and nuts.


The Bureau is also the second largest producer of hydroelectric power in the United States. Its 53 powerplants

produce annually more than 40 billion kilowatt hours of electricity, earning nearly $1 billion in revenues and generating

enough energy for 3.5 million homes.

http://www.usbr.gov/main/about/mission.html
The BR's approach to water resource development has evolved over the years: from single-purpose agricultural

projects to projects of multipurpose whose scope includes promoting water-based outdoor recreation. Recreation

sites that are developed as a result of BR water projects rank among the Nation's most popular places for water-based

outdoor recreation. These projects include approximately 6.5 million acres of land and water that are, for the most

part, open to the public for recreation.

https://www.usbr.gov/recreation
The BR also engages in conservation activities to support native species and their habitats. In partnership with Arizona,

California, and Nevada, the BR implemented a program to conserve native species and habitats across the Colorado

River Basin. In partnership with the Bonneville Power Administration, Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian

Reservation, and U.S. Forest Service, the BR implemented a project to increase mainstem and off-channel habitat in a

segment of the Grand Ronde River. The BR also tries to prevent invasive quagga and zebra mussels from spreading.

These bivalve mollusks adversely affect the natural ecology, which harms endangered native species. The disruption

that they visit upon ecosystems can cause new listings under the Endangered Species Act. Mussel infestations threaten

agriculture, navigation locks, and biodiversity that supports the Western outdoor recreation industry.

https://www.usbr.gov/conservation/
BR operations and facilities support flood control. Its programs also mitigate the effects of drought through

contingency planning, resiliency projects, and emergency response actions.

https://www.usbr.gov/drought/



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The BR website has an A–Z index to help visitors navigate its content.

https://www.usbr.gov/main/index/

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that BR records have been

assigned to record group 115.
https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/115.html

Art Collection
In the late 1960s, the BR launched a program to present its accomplishments through art. The Bureau commissioned

40 of America's most prominent artists to visit BR water resource development sites and record their impressions on

canvas. When the project was completed, the artists had created more than 375 pieces of artwork. In the early 1970s,

the public had an opportunity to view much of the work in a traveling exhibition that was circulated by the

Smithsonian Institution and entitled "The American Artist and Water Reclamation." The BR maintains about 200 pieces

of the original artwork. Many of the paintings are on display at the Main Interior Building and some regional offices.

https://www.usbr.gov/museumproperty/art/homepage.html

Business Opportunities
The BR purchases a wide range of products and services and supports various Federal socioeconomic development

programs by assisting businesses. The Bureau also provides financial assistance for programs related to conservation,

Endangered Species Act mitigation, rural water, and water management and reclamation and reuse. Phone, 303-445-

2431.

http://www.usbr.gov/mso/aamd/doing-business.html

Career Opportunities
The BR relies on professionals with expertise in administration, engineering and design, environmental protection,

research, wildlife management, and other disciplines to carry out its mission.

https://www.usbr.gov/hr/contact.html
In 2019, the BR ranked 121st among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/IN07

Contact Information
Contact information for the Washington, DC, and Denver, CO, based offices and Upper Colorado, Great Plains, Lower

Colorado, Mid-Pacific, and Pacific Northwest regional offices is available on the "Addresses and Contacts" web page.

http://www.usbr.gov/main/offices.html
Media contact information is posted online.

https://www.usbr.gov/newsroom/presskit/mediacontact.html
Contact information for the Acquisition and Assistance Management Division is posted online.

https://www.usbr.gov/mso/aamd/org-contact.html

Cooperative Agricultural Weather Network (AgriMet))
In cooperation with local, State, and other Federal sponsors, the BR promotes energy and water conservation through

AgriMet, which is a network of more than 90 automated weather stations that collect and telemeter site-specific

weather data. The original AgriMet program started in the Pacific Northwest in the 1980s and was expanded into the

Great Plains region.
Great Plains Region—

https://www.usbr.gov/gp/agrimet/index.html
Pacific Northwest—

https://www.usbr.gov/pn/agrimet/

Environmental Resources and Reports
The BR maintains a list of links to online resources that provide environmental information.

http://www.usbr.gov/environmental

Factsheet
The BR posts a factsheet on its website.

https://www.usbr.gov/main/about/fact.html

Federal Register
Significant documents, from 1995 (volume 60) to the present, and recent documents that the BR has published in the

Federal Register are available online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/reclamation-bureau
The BR maintains a "Federal Register Notices and Rulemaking" web page.

https://www.usbr.gov/fedreg/index.html

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA establishes a presumption that records in the possession of Federal agencies are accessible to the public.

Before the law was passed in 1966, the individual had to establish a right to examine Government records. Passage of

the FOIA shifted the burden of proof from the individual to the Government: A "right to know" doctrine replaced a

"need to know" standard. The law established standards for determining records that must be disclosed and records

that can be withheld. The law also provided administrative and judicial remedies for information seekers who have

been denied access to records.

http://www.usbr.gov/foia/contacts.html
The BR maintains an electronic reading room that contains frequently requested records and documents that are

currently of special interest. Information seekers should avail themselves of this online resource to determine if the

information that they seek is immediately available and readily accessible without the additional step of filing a FOIA

request.

http://www.usbr.gov/foia/readroom.html

Glossaries
Definitions for terms commonly used by the BR are accessible in its online glossary.

http://www.usbr.gov/library/glossary
The BR maintains a separate online glossary of recreation-related terms.

http://www.usbr.gov/recreation/glossary.html

Hydrologic and Meteorologic Monitoring (HydroMet)
The BR operates a network of automated Hydromet stations, including their communications and computer systems,

throughout the Great Plains and the Pacific Northwest regions. The Hydromet network collects remote environmental

and water data and transmits them via radio and satellite. The Hydromet network provides cost-effective, near-real-

time water management capability. Streamflow forecasts and current river and resevoir operations conditions are then

calculated by combining Hydromet data with other information.


Great Plains Region—

https://www.usbr.gov/gp/hydromet
Pacific Northwest—

https://www.usbr.gov/pn/hydromet/

Invasive Mussels
Two species of dreissenid mussels, namely quagga and zebra, have become established in U.S. freshwater lakes,

reservoirs, and rivers. Invasive dreissenid mussels pose significant challenges for all agencies and industries that

manage water because they are prolific breeders and settle on or within water facility infrastructure.

https://www.usbr.gov/mussels

Library
The BR's website has an online search tool that allows visitors to search the electronic library catalog. External patrons

may use the library, which is located in Denver, CO, by appointment only, 8:00 a.m.–3:00 p.m. Phone, 303-445-2072.

https://www.usbr.gov/library/ | Email: library@usbr.gov

Multimedia Media
Links to BR's historic photographs and photograph database are available on the "Reclamation Multimedia" web page.

Other links that lead to podcasts on water management and to Really Simple Syndication (RSS) feeds also are

available. BR Social Media links include Facebook, Flickr, Instagram, Twitter, and YouTube.

https://www.usbr.gov/main/multimedia/index.html#social

News
The BR posts news releases and stories, as well as congressional testimony, factsheets, photos, and speeches.

http://www.usbr.gov/newsroom/newsrelease

Outdoor Recreation / Cultural Activities
The BR participates in Recreation.gov. This partnership of twelve Government agencies provides information on all

recreation facilities on Federal lands, including those owned and managed by the BR. Online visitors may use the

Recreation.gov website to make reservations at facilities requiring them.

https://www.recreation.gov/about-us

Publications
The BR posts publications on its website.

https://www.usbr.gov/library/reclamationpubs.html

Reclamation Manual
     The BR's website has an online tool that allows users to search for keywords and terms in the "Reclamation Manual."

     The manual comprises a series of policy and directives and standards, which collectively assign program responsibility

     and establish and document agencywide methods of doing business.

     http://www.usbr.gov/recman

     Research / Science
     The Research and Development Office publishes the quarterly magazine "Knowledge Stream," whose content centers

     on mission-critical news about research and science and on the challenges of managing water and generating power

     in the American West.

     https://www.usbr.gov/research/ks.html

     Water Conservation
     The WaterSMART program allows all Department of the Interior bureaus to work with States, tribes, local

     governments, and nongovernmental organizations to pursue a sustainable water supply for the Nation by establishing

     a framework that provides Federal leadership and assistance on the efficient use of water, that integrates water and

     energy policies to support the sustainable use of all natural resources, and that coordinates the water conservation

     activities of the various departmental offices.

     https://www.usbr.gov/watersmart

        The Sources of Information were updated 2–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                   Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement




The United States Government Manual




     BUREAU OF SAFETY AND ENVIRONMENTAL ENFORCEMENT
    Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240


    202-208-3985

    http://www.bsee.gov


      DIRECTOR *                                                                            Kevin M. Sligh, Sr.




      * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Land and Minerals Management.
https://www.bsee.gov/who-we-are/our-organization/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement promotes safety, protects the environment, and conserves

resources offshore by overseeing the regulatory process and enforcing Federal rules and regulations.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
In April of 2010, the Deepwater Horizon oil rig explosion and resulting oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico exposed

inadequacies in the Federal offshore energy regulatory system. In response to the disaster, former Secretary of the

Interior Kenneth L. Salazar issued two secretarial orders. On May 19, 2010, he issued Order 3299 "to separate and

reassign the responsibilities that had been conducted by the Minerals Management Service [MMS] into new

management structures that will improve the management, oversight, and accountability of activities on the Outer

Continental Shelf [OCS]."

https://www.doi.gov/sites/doi.gov/files/elips/documents/3299a2-
establishment_of_the_bureau_of_ocean_energy_management_the_bureau_of_safety_and_environmental_enforcement_
and_the_office_of_natural_resources_revenue.pdf
Within the Department of the Interior, Order 3299 initiated the establishment of the new Bureau of Safety and

Environmental Enforcement (BSEE), whose director would report to the Assistant Secretary–Land and Minerals

Management. The order also initiated the establishment of the new Bureau of Ocean Energy Management (BOEM),

whose director also would report to the same Assistant Secretary. A third new agency, the Office of Natural Resources

Revenue (ONRR), formerly the MMS's minerals revenue management program, would be established within the

Department, and its director would report to the Assistant Secretary–Policy, Management and Budget.


On June 18, 2010, former Secretary Salazar issued Order 3302, which announced that the MMS would be renamed the

Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, Regulation and Enforcement (BOEMRE) for the duration of the reorganization

period.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/safety-and-environmental-enforcement-bureau
On October 1, 2010, the functions of the MMS's minerals revenue management program were transferred to the

ONRR. A few days later, the ONRR published a final rule in the Federal Register to move the regulations associated

with its royalty and revenue functions from chapter II in 30 CFR to chapter XII in the same title.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2010-10-04/pdf/2010-24721.pdf
A year later, in October of 2011, 30 CFR was reorganized. BOEMRE rules and regulations that now applied to the

BOEM were recodified in a new fifth chapter; the rules and regulations that now applied to the BSEE were recodified in

a revised second chapter. The establishment of the BSEE and its sibling the BOEM and the reorganization of 30 CFR

marked the completion of separating and reassigning the responsibilities of the former MMS.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2011-10-18/pdf/2011-22675.pdf
The BSEE posts an organizational chart on its website.

https://www.bsee.gov/who-we-are/our-organization
STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material affecting "Deep Seabed Hard Mineral Resources" is codified in chapter 26, sections 1401–1473, of 30

U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title30/chapter26&edition=prelim
BSEE rules and regulations are codified in chapter II, parts 200–299, of 30 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=e5dd5863d76dc4809df5de6afce53bf6&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title30/30chapterII.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The BSEE promotes safety, protects the environment, and conserves resources on the Outer Continental Shelf (OCS)

through regulatory oversight and enforcement. The Offshore Regulatory Program develops standards and regulations

to improve operational safety and to strengthen environmental protection. The Oil Spill Preparedness Division

develops standards and guidelines for offshore operators. It also collaborates with sister agencies on spill response

technologies and capabilities.


Three regional offices support the Bureau. Their personnel inspect gas and oil drilling rigs and production platforms to

ensure compliance with safety requirements. Inspection teams are multiperson, and the expertise of their members

spans a range of disciplines.

https://www.bsee.gov/what-we-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that MMS records have been

assigned to record group 473. The MMS is the predecessor agency to the BSEE. See the above "Establishment and

Organization" section.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/473.html

Business Opportunities
Information on doing business with the BSEE is available online.

http://www.bsee.gov/About-BSEE/Doing-Business-with-BSEE/index

Career Opportunities
The BSEE relies on professionals with backgrounds in biology, geology, geophysics, engineering, and other fields to

carry out its mission.

http://www.bsee.gov/careers
In 2019, the BSEE ranked 128th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/IN11

Contact Information
To contact the BSEE, visit the "Connect With Us" web page, where addresses (email and postal) and phone numbers

are available.

https://www.bsee.gov/who-we-are/connect

Director's Corner
Director Scott A. Angelle posts his thoughts and views on issues facing the BSEE and America's offshore oil and gas

industry. "Energy Dominance Requires New Thinking" (SEP 2017) was the first piece that he posted.

https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom/directors-corner

Federal Register
Significant documents, from 1995 (volume 60) to the present, and recent documents that the BSEE has published in

the Federal Register are available online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/safety-and-environmental-enforcement-bureau

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives the public the right to request Federal agency records and requires Federal agencies to make certain

records available. The BSEE website serves as the portal to the agency's FOIA program. The FOIA is based on the

principle of openness in Government: Any person has a right of access to Federal agency records, except to the extent

that such records or portions of them are protected from disclosure by exemption or by special law-enforcement

record exclusion.

https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom/library/foia
The BSEE maintains an electronic FOIA reading room.

https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom/library/FOIA-Reading-Rooom

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The BSEE promotes safety, protects the environment, and conserves resources offshore through regulatory oversight

and enforcement. To carry out its mission, the BSEE relies on a wide range of world-class professionals. The BSEE posts

answers to questions that its experts are asked frequently.

https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom/library/frequently-asked-questions | Email: webmaster@bsee.gov

Glossary
This glossary contains common oil and gas exploration and leasing terms, many of which are unique to the drilling

industry.

https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom/library/glossary

News
The BSEE newsroom contains feature stories, media advisories, news briefs, photos and videos, press releases, and

posts from the Director. The briefing room contains annual reports, congressional testimony, factsheets, speeches,

statements, and technical presentations.

https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom

Offshore Statistics
     The BSEE posts offshore statistics and facts on its website.

     https://www.bsee.gov/stats-facts

     Reading Room
     The Bureau's Deepwater Horizon electronic reading room contains documents that deal with the BP/Deepwater

     Horizon explosion and ensuing oil spill and that have been cleared for public release.

     https://www.bsee.gov/newsroom/library/archive/deepwater-horizon-reading-room

     Regional Offices
     Information on the BSEE's three geographic regions—Alaska OCS, Gulf of Mexico OCS, and Pacific OCS—and their

     respective regional offices is available on the "BSEE Regions" web page.

     http://www.bsee.gov/About-BSEE/BSEE-Regions/BSEE-Regions

     Site Map
     The website map helps visitors find specific topics or allows them to browse the site's contents.

     https://www.bsee.gov/sitemap

     Social Media
     The BSEE has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/BSEEgov/
     The BSEE tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/BSEEgov

        The Sources of Information were updated 4–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                    National Park Service




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL PARK SERVICE
    Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240


    202-208-6843

    http://www.nps.gov


      DIRECTOR *                                                                            Charles F. Sams III




      * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Fish and Wildlife and Parks.
https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/director.htm



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The National Park Service (NPS) was established in the Department of the Interior on August 25, 1916 (16 U.S.C. 1).

http://www.nps.gov/aboutus/index.htm
The National Park Service protects the natural and cultural resources and values of the National Park System for the

benefit of present and future generations. The National Park System comprises 401 units. These units include national

parks, monuments and memorials, battlefield sites and national military parks, scenic parkways, preserves and reserves,

trails and riverways, rivers and lakeshores and seashores, recreation areas, and historic sites of American or

international importance. The Service also manages a variety of national and international programs to promote

natural and cultural resource conservation and to expand the benefits of outdoor recreation.


The NPS develops and implements park management plans and staffs the areas under its administration. Through

exhibits, films, publications talks, tours, and other interpretive media, it promotes the natural values of these areas and

communicates their historical significance to the public. The NPS operates a range of visitor facilities, including

campgrounds, and provides a variety of food, lodging, and transportation services.


The National Park Service also administers the State portion of the Land and Water Conservation Fund, State

comprehensive outdoor recreation planning, nationwide outdoor recreation coordination and information, the

National Register of Historic Places and the National Trails System, natural area programs, national historic landmarks

and historic preservation, technical preservation services, the historic American engineering record and buildings

survey, interagency archeological services, and planning and technical assistance for the national wild and scenic rivers

system.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

America the Beautiful Passes
A pass may be used at more than 2,000 Federal recreation sites. A pass covers entrance fees at national parks and

national wildlife refuges, as well as standard amenity fees and day use fees at national forests and grasslands and at

lands managed by the Bureaus of Land Management and Reclamation and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. Five

types of America the Beautiful passes are available: access, annual, annual fourth grade, senior, and volunteer.

https://www.nps.gov/planyourvisit/passes.htm

Business Opportunities
Visit the "Doing Business With Us" Web page to find information on commercial tours, contracts and procurement,

National Park concessions, and special park uses, including commercial filming.

http://www.nps.gov/aboutus/doingbusinesswithus.htm

Career Opportunities
To find permanent and seasonal NPS career opportunities online, visit USAJobs, the Federal Government's official

source for Federal job listings.

https://my.usajobs.gov
Additional information on internships, permanent careers, seasonal opportunities, and volunteering is available on the

"Work With Us" Web page.

http://www.nps.gov/aboutus/workwithus.htm

Directories
An online text box allows Internet visitors to search for NPS employees by last name.

https://www.nps.gov/directory
A park directory (SEP 2016) that includes park addresses, codes, phone numbers, and superintendents is available

online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/upload/NPS-Park-Listing-09-01-16.pdf

Find a Park
NPS website visitors may search for a park by name or by State.

https://www.nps.gov/findapark/index.htm

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Instructions for submitting a FOIA request to obtain NPS records are available online.

https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/foia/index.htm
The NPS maintains an electronic FOIA library on its website.

https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/foia/foia-reading-room.htm

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The NPS posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/faqs.htm

Glossaries
The NPS's National Center for Preservation Technology and Training maintains an extensive glossary of building stone

terms.

https://ncptt.nps.gov/buildingstone/glossary
The online series "Defining the Southwest" includes a glossary of terms that are often encountered in discussions of

the cultures and environments of the American Southwest.

https://www.nps.gov/articles/southwest-glossary.htm
A glossary of geologic terms that the NPS and U.S. Geological Survey western Earth surface processes team compiled

is available on the NPS website.

http://www.nature.nps.gov/geology/usgsnps/misc/glossaryAtoC.html | Email: parkgeology@den.nps.gov

Grants
    Information is available online for grants authorized under the Land and Water Conservation Fund. Phone, 202-354-

    6900.

    http://www.nps.gov/lwcf/index.htm
    Information is also available online for grants authorized under the Historic Preservation Fund. Phone, 202-354-2067.

    http://www.nps.gov/preservation-grants

    News
    The NPS posts new releases online.

    https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/news/news-releases.htm
    The NPS website has a multimedia section that includes audio, photographs, videos, and webcam.

    https://www.nps.gov/media/multimedia-search.htm
    The NPS tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/natlparkservice
    The NPS maintains a Facebook page.

    https://www.facebook.com/nationalparkservice

    Publications
    To explain decisions, document information, and disseminate knowledge, the NPS uses a variety of publications, many

    of which are accessible online. For example, "The National Parks: Index 2012–2016" can be downloaded as a PDF. The

    "Publications" Web page offers online access to contemporary and historic reports, periodicals, virtual stacks, and

    public databases.

    http://www.nps.gov/aboutus/publications.htm
    Some publications are available for purchase in hardcopy from the U.S. Government Bookstore. Phone, 202-512-1800.

    Phone, 866-512-1800.

    https://bookstore.gpo.gov/agency/222 | Email: contactcenter@gpo.gov

    Regional Offices
    Contact information is available online for NPS regional offices and parks and the Washington office.

    http://www.nps.gov/aboutus/contactinformation.htm
    https://www.nps.gov/aboutus/contactus.htm

        For further information, contact the Office of Communications, National Park Service, Department of the
        Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240. Phone, 202-208-6843.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement




The United States Government Manual




     OFFICE OF SURFACE MINING RECLAMATION AND ENFORCEMENT
    Department of the Interior, 1951 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20240


    202-208-2565

    TDD, 202-208-2694

    http://www.osmre.gov


      DIRECTOR *                                                                            (vacancy)


      Deputy Director                                                                       Glenda H. Owens
  * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Land and Minerals Management.


https://www.osmre.gov/about/offices



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and Enforcement (OSMRE) was established in the Department of the Interior

by the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (30 U.S.C. 1211).

http://www.osmre.gov/about.shtm
The OSMRE carries out the requirements of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act in cooperation with

States and tribes. The Office protects people and the environment from the adverse effects of coal mining. The

OSMRE assures that land is restored to beneficial use after mining operations cease, and it mitigates the effects of past

operations by reclamation of abandoned coal mines. The Office mainly oversees State mining regulatory and

abandoned-mine reclamation programs, assists States in meeting the objectives of surface mining law, and regulates

mining and reclamation activities on Federal and Indian lands and in those States opting not to assume primary

responsibility for regulating coal mining and reclamation activities within their borders.


The Office establishes national policy for the surface mining control and reclamation program, reviews and approves

amendments to previously approved State programs, and reviews and recommends approval of new State program

submissions. It also manages the collection, disbursement, and accounting of abandoned-mine land reclamation fees;

administers civil penalties programs; establishes technical standards and regulatory policy for reclamation and

enforcement; offers guidance for environmental considerations, research, training, and technology transfers; and

monitors and evaluates State and tribal regulatory programs, cooperative agreements, and abandoned-mine land

reclamation programs.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Abandoned Mine Land Inventory System
To provide information for implementing the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977, the OSMRE

maintains an inventory of land and water affected by past mining. The inventory contains information on the location,

type, and extent of abandoned mine land impacts, as well as information on the reclamation costs. The inventory is

based on field surveys by State, tribal, and OSMRE program officials.

https://amlis.osmre.gov/About.aspx

Business Opportunities
Information to assist small business operators and owners is available online. For additional information, contact the

Acquisition Management Branch. Phone, 202-208-2902.

http://www.osmre.gov/contacts/business.shtm
Career Opportunities
To find employment opportunities at the OSMRE, visit the "Jobs at OSMRE" Web page and click on the USAJobs quick

link.

http://www.osmre.gov/contacts/jobs.shtm

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
A FOIA request for OSMRE records may be submitted via electronic or postal mail or by using the Department of the

Interior's electronic request form and selecting "Office of Surface Mining" in the drop-down menu.

http://www.osmre.gov/lrg/foia.shtm | Email: foia@osmre.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The OSMRE posts answers to FAQs online.

http://www.osmre.gov/resources/FAQs.shtm
The OSMRE website also has a "How Do I?" section.

http://www.osmre.gov/howdoi.shtm

Grants
Information on regulatory program grants and abandoned mine land grants is available on the OSMRE website.

http://www.osmre.gov/resources/grants.shtm

Library
The general public may use the OSMRE online library catalog to locate legal and technical information.

http://o10007.eos-intl.net/O10007/OPAC/Index.aspx

Mine Maps
The National Mine Map Repository collects and maintains mine map information and images for the entire country.

http://mmr.osmre.gov
An index that includes over 180,000 maps of closed and abandoned mines is available online. The index serves as an

inventory for determining which maps are available. To obtain actual copies of maps, contact the National Mine Map

Repository. Fax, 412-937-2888.

http://mmr.osmre.gov/MultiPub.aspx

Most Requested Content
The OSMRE website maintains a collection of links for its most frequently requested web pages.

http://www.osmre.gov/resources/mostRequested.shtm

Newsroom
The newsroom features OSMRE stories and news releases.

http://www.osmre.gov/resources/newsroom.shtm
The OSMRE tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/OSMRE
     The OSMRE has a Facebook page.

     https://www.facebook.com/Office.of.Surface.Mining.Reclamation.Enforcement

     Regional Offices
     Appalachian Region Office

     http://www.arcc.osmre.gov/contacts.shtm
     Mid-Continent Region Office

     http://www.mcrcc.osmre.gov/contacts.shtm
     Western Region Office

     http://www.wrcc.osmre.gov/contacts.shtm

     Resources
     The OSMRE website has a section that is dedicated to electronic, informational resources.

     http://www.osmre.gov/resources.shtm

     Site Map
     The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

     http://www.osmre.gov/resources/sitemap.shtm
     An A–Z index is also available to help visitors find the information that they seek.

     http://www.osmre.gov/resources/AtoZ.shtm

     Top Priorities
     The OSMRE website has a section highlighting the agency's major programs.

     https://www.osmre.gov/programs.shtm
     http://www.osmre.gov/contacts.shtm | Email: getinfo@osmre.gov

        For further information, contact the Office of Communications, Office of Surface Mining Reclamation and
        Enforcement, Department of the Interior, 1951 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20240. Phone,
        202-208-2565. TDD, 202-208-2694.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act
No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                           United States Fish and Wildlife Service




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE
    Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW., Washington, DC 20240


    703-358-4545

    http://www.fws.gov




    DIRECTOR
  DIRECTOR *                                                                               Paul Souza, Acting

https://www.fws.gov/staff-profile/paul-souza



DEPUTY DIRECTORS


  Program Management and Policy                                                            Steve Chase, Acting


  Operations                                                                               Dave Miko, Acting


  * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Fish and Wildlife and Parks.


https://www.fws.gov/about/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 4–2025.



The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) is the principal Federal agency dedicated to fish and wildlife conservation.

The Service's history spans 145 years, dating from the establishment of its predecessor agency, the Bureau of Fisheries,

in 1871. First created as an independent agency, the Bureau of Fisheries was later placed in the Department of

Commerce. A second predecessor agency, the Bureau of Biological Survey, was established in 1885 in the Department

of Agriculture. In 1939, the two Bureaus and their functions were transferred to the Department of the Interior. In 1940,

they were consolidated into one agency and redesignated the Fish and Wildlife Service by Reorganization Plan No. 3

(5 U.S.C. app.).

http://training.fws.gov/history/USFWS-history.html
The USFWS statement of organization may be found in subchapter A, part 2, of 50 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=fd103790cdbf5f4aa28f53fa458756ca&mc=true&node=pt50.1.2&rgn=div5
The USFWS works with others to conserve, protect, and enhance fish, wildlife and plants and their habitats for the

continuing benefit of the American people. The Service manages the 150-million-acre National Wildlife Refuge System,

which comprises 563 refuges and 38 wetland management districts. It operates 72 national fish hatcheries, a historic

national fish hatchery, 65 fishery resource offices, and 81 ecological service field stations. The USFWS enforces Federal

wildlife laws, administers the Endangered Species Act, manages migratory bird populations, restores nationally

significant fisheries, conserves and restores wildlife habitats, and assists foreign governments with conservation. It also

collects excise taxes on fishing and hunting equipment and distributes the revenues to State fish and wildlife agencies.


The Service improves and maintains fish and wildlife resources by proper management of wildlife and habitat. It also

helps meet public demand for wildlife dependent recreational activities by maintaining public lands and restoring

native fish and wildlife populations.


Wildlife and fishery resource programs support the management of wildlife refuges on public lands. Wildlife-related

activities include population control, migration and harvest surveys, and law and gaming enforcement for migratory

and nonmigratory birds and mammals. Fishery-related activities include hatchery production monitoring, stocking, and
fishery management. Fishery resource programs also provide technical assistance for coastal anadromous, Great

Lakes, and other inland fisheries.


The USFWS identifies, protects, and restores endangered fish, wildlife, and plant species. It maintains Federal lists of

endangered and threatened wildlife and plants that are published in the Code of Federal Regulations (50 CFR 17.11 et

seq.), conducts status surveys, prepares recovery plans, and coordinates national and international wildlife refuge

operations.


The Service protects and improves land and water environments to benefit living natural resources and to enhance the

quality of human life. It administers grant programs that help imperiled species, assists private landowners restore

habitat, asses environmental impact and reviews potential environmental threats, manages Coastal Barrier Resource

System mapping, monitors potential wildlife contaminants, and studies fish and wildlife population trends.


Public use and information activities include preparing informational brochures and maintaining public websites;

coordinating environmental studies on USFWS lands; operating visitor centers, self-guided nature trails, observation

towers, and display ponds; and promoting birdwatching, fishing, hunting, wildlife photography, and other forms of

wildlife-dependent outdoor recreation.


The Wildlife and Sport Fish Restoration Program supports the conservation and enhancement of the Nation's fish and

wildlife resources. Excise taxes on sporting arms and fishing equipment fund these efforts.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that USFWS records have been

assigned to record group 022.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/022.html

(%blankline%)

Business Opportunities
An online guide explains how to find business opportunities and to compete for them. Information is also available

from regional offices and from the Division of Contracting and General Services in Falls Church, VA. Phone, 703-358-

2500.

http://www.fws.gov/program/contracting | Email: small_business_opts@fws.gov

Career Opportunities
Information on careers in conservation is available on the USFWS website. Additional information is available from

USFWS regional offices and the Human Capital Office in Falls Church, VA. Phone, 703-358-1743.

https://www.fws.gov/humancapital

Crimes Against Wildlife
To report a violation of wildlife laws or to learn about enforcement of them, visit the "Office of Law Enforcement"
website, contact the nearest regional law enforcement office, or call the Office of Law Enforcement in Falls Church, VA.

Phone, 703-358-1949.

http://www.fws.gov/le | Email: lawenforcement@fws.gov
The USFWS forensic laboratory is unique in its dedication to crimes against wildlife. Forensic experts examine, identify,

and compare physical evidence to connect crime scenes, suspects, and victims with it.

https://www.fws.gov/lab

Endangered Species
The USFWS website features a search tool for learning about and identifying endangered species. The text boxes can

search for an endangered species based on the State, U.S. Territory, or county where it lives, or according to its

common or scientific name.

https://www.fws.gov/endangered/?ref=topbar

Energy Development
The USFWS website has a section that is dedicated to the development of domestic energy sources and its effect on

wildlife.

https://www.fws.gov/ecological-services/energy-development/energy.html

Federal Register
Significant documents, from 1995 (volume 60) to the present, and recent documents that the USFWS has published in

the Federal Register are available online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/fish-and-wildlife-service

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The USFWS makes records available, by law, to the public to the greatest extent possible. The records that are being

sought already may be posted online. If the information cannot be found online or if the location of the desired

records is uncertain, consider contacting the USFWS FOIA public liaison before submitting a FOIA request.

https://www.fws.gov/irm/bpim/foia.html | Email: fwhq_foia@fws.gov
Ecological Services maintains an online glossary of terms found in environmental legislation.

https://www.fws.gov/irm/bpim/foiaread.html

Glossaries
Ecological Services maintains an online glossary of terms found in environmental legislation.

https://www.fws.gov/ecological-services/about/glossary.html
The Midwest Region maintains an online glossary of terms associated with endangered species.

https://www.fws.gov/media/endangered-species-glossary
The USFWS website features a short glossary of National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) terms in Portable Document

Format (PDF).

https://www.fws.gov/media/glossary-termspdf

National Wildlife Refuges
For information on the National Wildlife Refuge System, including information on specific wildlife refuges and wetland

management districts, visit the "National Wildlife Refuge System" website. Phone, 800-344-9453.

https://fws.gov/program/national-wildlife-refuge-system

News Media Inquiries
Journalists, reporters, and other media professionals seeking information or to arrange an interview should contact a

regional public affairs officer or the Division of Public Affairs in Falls Church, VA.

http://www.fws.gov/media-contacts | Email: publicaffairs@fws.gov

Newsroom
The USFWS posts news releases online.

https://www.fws.gov/news

Permits
Visit the "Do I Need a Permit" web page to learn the rules for importing, exporting, and reexporting protected species.

Information on Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) permits and

certificates is also available from the Division of Management Authority. Phone, 800-358-2104 or 703-358-2093.

https://www.fws.gov/service/permits

Publications
The USFWS national publications unit is headquartered at the National Conservation Training Center in

Shepherdstown, WV. It is the primary distribution center for printed material published by the USFWS. The publications

unit handles requests from Federal and State agencies, businesses, educators, and the general public. USFWS

publications include booklets, brochures, posters, and reports. Phone, 800-344-9543.

http://nctc.fws.gov/resources/knowledge-resources
Some publications may need to be ordered from the U.S. Government Bookstore, which the Government Publishing

Office operates. Phone, 866-512-1800 (customer contact center). Phone, 202-512-0132 (store phone).

https://bookstore.gpo.gov | Email: ContactCenter@gpo.gov

Regional Offices
USFWS has regional offices that represent each of its geographic regions. Contact information for each of these

regional offices is available on the USFWS website.

https://www.fws.gov/external-affairs/contacts.html
The Office of Law Enforcement, in addition to its national office in Falls Church, VA, maintains regional offices. Contact

information for these offices is available on the USFWS website.

https://www.fws.gov/program/office-of-law-enforcement/contact-us
A State list of other USFWS offices and their contact information is also available online.

https://www.fws.gov/offices

Social Media
The USFWS uses social media to communicate and connect with Internet users worldwide. The agency posts
     informative, educational and news content, photos, graphics and video to social media using the following platforms:

     X, Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, Pinterest, Flickr, and YouTube. Information technology moves at a rapid pace, and

     there will likely be other platforms to be used in the future to communicate with our audiences.

     http://www.fws.gov/home/socialmedia/index.html?ref=topbar

     Water Resource Development
     The Ecological Services program includes USFWS participation in projects to develop water resources for meeting the

     needs of local communities and for conserving fish and wildlife. The USFWS works alongside the U.S. Army Corps of

     Engineers and the Bureau of Reclamation when participating in these development projects.

     https://www.fws.gov/social-media

        The Sources of Information were updated 5–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                              United States Geological Survey




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL SURVEY
    12201 Sunrise Valley Drive, Reston, VA 20192


    703-648-4000

    http://www.usgs.gov | Email: ASK@usgs.gov


      DIRECTOR *                                                                            David Applegate
DEPUTY DIRECTORS


                                                                                          Roseann C. Gonzales-
  Administration and Policy
                                                                                          Schreiner


  Operations                                                                              Cynthia L. Lodge


  * The Director reports to the Assistant Secretary of Water and Science.


https://www.usgs.gov/about/key-officials



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The United States Geological Survey (USGS) was established by the Organic Act of March 3, 1879 (Ch. 182 / 20 Stat.

394 / 43 U.S.C. 31). Since March 3, 1879, the Survey has provided the United States with science information needed to

make important land use and resource management policy decisions.

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/45th-congress/session-3/c45s3ch182.pdf
The USGS serves as the Earth and natural science research bureau for the Department of the Interior. It is the only

integrated natural resources research agency in the Federal Government. USGS research and data support the

Department's resource and land management information needs. Other Federal, State, tribal, and local government

agencies rely on USGS research and data for their biological, climate, energy, mineral resources, natural hazards, and

water information needs. Emergency response organizations, natural resource managers, land use planners, and other

customers use USGS research and data to protect lives and property, to address environmental health issues, and to

promote the public weal.

http://www.usgs.gov/about/about-us/who-we-are
The USGS conducts research, monitoring, and assessments to increase understanding of America's biological, land,

and water resources. The Service informs American citizens and members of the global community by producing data,

maps, and reports containing analyses and interpretations. These analyses and interpretations cover a range of topics:

biological, energy, mineral, and water resources; land surfaces; marine environments; geologic structures; natural

hazards; and dynamic processes of the Earth. Citizens, managers, and planners regularly use USGS data, analytical,

and interpretive products to respond to and plan for changes in ecosystems and the environment.


The USGS has over 140 years of experience generating science-based data. In more than 400 science centers across

the United States, the Service employs approximately 10,000 science and science-support staff, who work on locally,

regionally, and nationally scaled studies, on research projects, and at sampling and monitoring sites.

https://www.usgs.gov/about/organization



SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that USGS records have been

assigned to record group 057.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/057.html

Business Opportunities
General information on contracting is available from the Office of Acquisition and Grants. Phone, 703-648-7376.

https://www.usgs.gov/about/organization/science-support/administration/office-acquisition-and-grants
The "Small Business Program" web page has resources to help small-business owners.

https://www.usgs.gov/about/organization/science-support/administration/office-acquisition-and-grants/small-
business?qt-science_support_page_related_con=1#qt-science_support_page_related_con               |                  Email:
gs_smallbusiness@usgs.gov

Career Opportunities
The USGS relies on professionals with a range of expertise and diverse skills to carry out its mission. Many of these

professionals have been educated and trained in various scientific disciplines: biology, cartography, chemistry, ecology,

geology, geography, hydrology, and physics.

https://www.usgs.gov/about/organization/science-support/human-capital/employment-and-information-center                  |
Email: hcweb@usgs.gov
In 2019, the USGS ranked 168th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/IN08

Contact Information
The "Contact USGS" web page has an electronic message form, as well as information on social media and web chat.

Phone, 888-275-8747.

https://answers.usgs.gov

Critical Minerals List
On May 18, 2018, the Department of the Interior's Office of the Secretary published the notice "Final List of Critical

Minerals 2018" in the Federal Register (83 FR 23295). The expertise of USGS staff plays a key role in reducing the

Nation's vulnerability to disruptions in the supply of these minerals. On its website, the USGS posted the

announcement "Interior Releases 2018's Final List of 35 Minerals Deemed Critical to U.S. National Security and the

Economy." Each of the critical minerals is hyperlinked to a web page with statistics and other information on that

particular mineral. Although the list is a final version, it should not be characterized as a permanent, but as a dynamic,

list that will be updated.

https://www.usgs.gov/news/interior-releases-2018-s-final-list-35-minerals-deemed-critical-us-national-security-and

Earthquakes for Kids
Earthquakes for kids provides online resources to help children and adults learn about earthquakes and earthquake

science.
http://earthquake.usgs.gov/learn/kids

Federal Register
Documents that the USGS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/geological-survey

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA electronic reading room contains documents related to the Flow Rate Technical Group in response to the

Deepwater Horizon oil spill. These documents have been cleared for public release, and the USGS expects to publish

additional documents to this collection. Before submitting a FOIA request for agency records, an information seeker

should search this reading room and other Federal Government Deepwater Horizon electronic reading rooms for

documents and information.

https://www.usgs.gov/about/organization/science-support/foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The USGS posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.usgs.gov/faq

Glossaries
A landslides glossary is available on the USGS website.

https://www.usgs.gov/natural-hazards/landslide-hazards/science/landslides-glossary?qt-science_center_objects=0#qt-
science_center_objects
The earthquake hazards program includes an online glossary.

http://earthquake.usgs.gov/learn/glossary
The Office of Budget, Planning, and Integration maintains an online glossary of common terms and financial terms.

https://www.usgs.gov/about/organization/science-support/budget/glossary
A glossary of collections management terms is available online.

https://www.usgs.gov/products/scientific-collections/glossary-terms
A Landsat glossary and list of acronyms are available online.

https://www.usgs.gov/core-science-systems/nli/landsat/landsat-glossary
The USGS published a glossary of glacier-related terms.

https://pubs.usgs.gov/of/2004/1216/a/a.html
A list of water-related terms and their definitions are available online.

https://www.usgs.gov/special-topic/water-science-school/science/dictionary-water-terms?qt-
science_center_objects=0#qt-science_center_objects

History
Mary C. Rabbitt's "The United States Geological Survey: 1879–1989" is available in electronic form on the USGS website.

It is a 110-year history of the relation of geology to the development of policies for public land, Federal science, and

mapping, and to the development of mineral resources in the United States.

http://pubs.usgs.gov/circ/c1050
Landsat Satellite Missions
In 1966, former Secretary of the Interior Stewart Udall announced the launching of the Earth Resources Observation

Satellites (EROS) project. His vision was to observe the Earth for the benefit of all. One of the purposes of the ongoing

project is to collect valuable resource data and use them to improve the environmental quality of the biosphere.

https://www.usgs.gov/core-science-systems/nli/landsat/landsat-satellite-missions?qt-
science_support_page_related_con=0#qt-science_support_page_related_con

Library
Established in 1879, the USGS library is now the largest library for earth sciences in the world. Professional librarians

develop and maintain USGS library guides to connect users to relevant resources and research strategies.

https://usgs.libguides.com/home | Email: library@usgs.gov

National Map
The National Map website offers Internet users a trove of topographical information.

https://www.usgs.gov/core-science-systems/national-geospatial-program/national-map

Natural Hazards
Information on the programs and activities of the natural hazards mission—including information on earthquakes,

flooding, landslides, volcanoes, and wildfires—is available online.

https://www.usgs.gov/mission-areas/natural-hazards

News
The USGS posts national and State news items.

https://www.usgs.gov/news/news-releases

Publications
The USGS publications warehouse provides access to over 130,000 publications written by USGS scientists throughout

the agency's history.

https://pubs.er.usgs.gov

Science Snippets
The USGS posts fun facts and interesting snippets of science.

https://www.usgs.gov/news/science-snippets

Site Map
The Website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.usgs.gov/sitemap

USGS Store
Educational materials, Federal recreation passes, maps, scientific reports, and more are available from the online USGS

Store.

https://store.usgs.gov
     Social Media
     The USGS maintains a presence on social media.

     https://www.usgs.gov/connect/social-media

     Volcanic Activity Alerts
     Information on U.S. volcanoes and current activity alerts are available on the "Volcano Hazards" web page.

     https://www.usgs.gov/volcano

     Water Resources
     Reliable, impartial, and timely information on the Nation's water resources is available on the "Water Resources" web

     page. Phone, 888-275-8747.

     http://www.usgs.gov/water
     A nationwide list of all of the USGS water resources mission area science centers and regions and hubs for critical

     water science that Federal, State, and other partners and stakeholders fund is available online.

     https://www.usgs.gov/mission-areas/water-resources/about/water-resources-mission-area-science-centers-and-
     regions

     Wetlands and Aquatics Research
     The Wetlands and Aquatics Research Center conducts research, develops new approaches and technologies, and

     disseminates scientific information that is needed for understanding, managing, conserving, and restoring wetlands

     and other aquatic and coastal ecosystems and their associated plant and animal communities throughout the Nation

     and the world.

     https://www.usgs.gov/centers/wetland-and-aquatic-research-center-warc

        The Sources of Information were updated 12–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                 Department of the Treasury
                                         Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau
                                              Bureau of Engraving and Printing
                                                 Bureau of the Fiscal Service
                                                   Internal Revenue Service
                                          Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
                                                      United States Mint




The United States Government Manual




     DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
    1500 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20220


    202-622-2000

    http://www.treasury.gov
 SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY                                                    Scott Bessent


 Deputy Secretary of the Treasury                                             Adewale O. Adeyemo




 Chief of Staff                                                               Didem Nisanci


https://home.treasury.gov/about/general-information/officials/scott-bessent



UNDER SECRETARIES


 Domestic Finance                                                             (vacancy)


 International Affairs                                                        (vacancy)


 Terrorism and Financial Intelligence                                         (vacancy)

https://home.treasury.gov/about/general-information/organizational-chart

 Treasurer of the United States                                               Jovita Carranza


https://www.moneyfactory.gov/treasureroftheunitedstates.html



ASSISTANT SECRETARIES


 Economic Policy                                                              (vacancy)


 Legislative Affairs                                                          Brad Bailey, Acting


 Management                                                                   (vacancy)


 Public Affairs                                                               Calvin Mitchell


 Tax Policy                                                                   (vacancy)




 DOMESTIC FINANCE


 Financial Institutions Policy                                                Kipp Kranbuhl, Acting


 Financial Markets                                                            (vacancy)


 Financial Stability                                                          (vacancy)
 Fiscal Service                                                 David A. Lebryk




 INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS


 International Finance                                          Geoffrey Okamoto, Acting


 International Markets                                          (vacancy)




 TERRORISM AND FINANCIAL INTELLIGENCE


 Foreign Asset Control                                          (vacancy)


 Intelligence and Analysis                                      (vacancy)


 Terrorist Financing and Financial Crimes                       (vacancy)

https://home.treasury.gov/about/general-information/officials



CHIEF OFFICERS


 Information                                                    (vacancy)


 Risk                                                           Kenneth J. Phelan




 General Counsel                                                (vacancy)

https://home.treasury.gov/about/offices



INSPECTOR GENERAL


 Deputy                                                         Richard K. Delmar

https://oig.treasury.gov/about



SPECIAL INSPECTORS GENERAL


 Pandemic Recovery                                              Brian D. Miller
https://www.sigpr.gov/about-sigpr/meet-special-inspector-general

  Troubled Asset Relief Program                                                        Christy G. Romero


https://www.sigtarp.gov/about-us



TREASURY INSPECTOR GENERAL


  Tax Administration                                                                   J. Russell George

https://www.treasury.gov/tigta/about_ig.shtml



  The above list of key personnel was updated 4–2021.



The Department of the Treasury enforces financial laws, manufactures coins and currency, and recommends economic,

fiscal, and tax policies.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On September 2, 1789, a few months after taking his oath of office as the Nation's first President, George Washington

signed into law an act establishing a Department of Treasury. Subsequent acts have figured in the development of the

Department, delegating new duties to its charge and establishing the numerous bureaus and divisions that constitute

today's Department of the Treasury.

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/1st-congress/session-1/c1s1ch12.pdf
The Department of the Treasury's organizational structure has two major components: departmental offices and

operating bureaus. Departmental offices are primarily responsible for the formulation of policy and management of

the Department as a whole. Operating bureaus carry out the specific operations that have been assigned to the

Department.

https://home.treasury.gov/about/general-information/role-of-the-treasury
The Department's organizational chart is posted on the "Organizational Structure" web page.

https://home.treasury.gov/about/general-information/organizational-chart

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Codified statutory material affecting the Department of the Treasury has been assigned to Chapter 3 of 31 U.S.C. That

chapter of Title 31 is divided into two subchapters: "Subchapter I—Organization" runs from section 301 to 315;

"Subchapter II—Administrative" runs from section 321 to 333.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title31/subtitle1/chapter3&edition=prelim
Codified rules and regulations that affect money and finance and that are associated with the Department of the

Treasury have been assigned to "Subtitle A—Office of the Secretary of the Treasury" and "Subtitle B—Regulations

Relating to Money and Finance" of 31 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=f0074465e4c35d4ec9ff9754831610dd&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title31/31tab_02.tpl

ACTIVITIES
As a major policy adviser to the President, the Secretary recommends domestic and international financial, economic,

and tax policy; formulates broad fiscal policies that have general significance for the economy; and manages the public

debt. The Secretary oversees the activities of the Department in carrying out its major law enforcement responsibility;

in serving as the financial agent for the U.S. Government; and in manufacturing coins, currency, and other products for

customer agencies. The Secretary also acts as the Government's chief financial officer.


Domestic Finance
The Office of Domestic Finance maintains confidence in the U.S. Treasury market, manages Federal fiscal operations,

and strengthens financial institutions and markets; promotes access to credit; and improves financial access and

education in service of America’s long-term economic strength and stability.

https://home.treasury.gov/about/offices/domestic-finance

Economic Policy
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy helps policymakers determine economic policies. The Office

analyzes domestic and international economic issues and developments in the financial markets, assists in forming

official economic projections, and works closely with Federal Government agencies to make economic forecasts

supporting the yearly budget process.

https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/economic-policy

Enforcement
The Department's law enforcement activities are carried out by its offices and bureaus, including the Alcohol and

Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, the Internal Revenue Service, and the Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence

(TFI). The Office of Foreign Assets Control, which is part of the TFI, plays a key role in controlling the assets of

"blocked" countries in the United States and restricting the flow of funds and trade with them.


Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau

https://www.ttb.gov/enforcement
Internal Revenue Service

https://www.irs.gov/compliance/criminal-investigation
Office of Terrorism and Financial Intelligence

https://home.treasury.gov/about/offices/terrorism-and-financial-intelligence

Financial Institutions
The Office of Financial Institutions coordinates the Department’s efforts regarding financial institutions legislation and

regulation, legislation affecting Federal agencies that regulate or insure financial institutions, and securities markets

legislation and regulation. The Office also coordinates the Department’s financial education policy efforts and ensures

the resiliency of the financial services sector.

https://home.treasury.gov/about/offices/domestic-finance/financial-institutions
Financial Markets
The Office of Financial Markets serves to formulate policy on Federal debt management, State and local finance

(including the Federal debt), Federal Government credit policies, and lending and privatization. This Office also

oversees the Federal Financing Bank, and the Assistant Secretary serves as the senior member of the Treasury

Financing Group and coordinates the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets.

https://home.treasury.gov/about/offices/domestic-finance/financial-markets

Financial Stability
The Office of Financial Stability within the U.S. Treasury was created by the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of

2008 (12 U.S.C. 5201 et seq.) to administer the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). The purpose of the TARP was to

help restore liquidity and stability to the U.S. financial system following the 2008 financial crisis. The Treasury's authority

to make financial commitments under TARP ended on October 3, 2010. The Office continues to wind down the TARP

investments in a manner that balances exit speed with maximizing taxpayer returns. It also helps homeowners prevent

avoidable foreclosures.

https://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/financial-stability/Pages/about-ofs.aspx

Fiscal Affairs
The Office of the Fiscal Assistant Secretary provides policy oversight of the Fiscal Service bureaus and develops policy

on payments, collections, debt financing operations, electronic commerce, Governmentwide accounting, Government

investment fund management, and other related issues. The Office also performs two critical functions for the

Department: It manages the daily cash position of the Government, and it produces the cash and debt forecasts used

to determine the size and timing of the Government’s financing operations.

https://home.treasury.gov/about/offices/domestic-finance/fiscal-service

International Finance
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for International Finance conducts macroeconomic analyses to advise the Under

Secretary for International Affairs and other policymakers. The Office also helps them formulate and execute financial

and economic policy affecting or involving the International Monetary Fund, the U.S.-China Strategic and Economic

Dialogue, the G–20, and other major multilateral and bilateral engagements.

https://home.treasury.gov/about/offices/international-affairs

International Markets and Development
The Office of the Assistant Secretary of International Markets and Development manages the work of the Committee

on Foreign Investment in the United States and the Treasury's Office of Technical Assistance. The Office also advises

the Under Secretary for International Affairs and other policymakers on financial and economic policies relevant to

major bilateral and multilateral engagements, and it assists them with these engagements. The Office plays a similar

role in the formulation and execution of policies affecting export finance, financial services, trade, and multilateral

development, including the World Bank, the regional development banks, and emerging global issues like food

security and climate finance.


Committee on Foreign Investment in the United States
https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/international/the-committee-on-foreign-investment-in-the-united-states-cfius
Office of Technical Assistance

https://home.treasury.gov/about/offices/international-affairs/technical-assistance

Tax Policy
The Office of the Assistant Secretary for Tax Policy advises and assists the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary in the

formulation and execution of domestic and international tax policies and programs. These functions include analysis of

proposed tax legislation and tax programs; projections of economic trends affecting tax bases; studies of effects of

alternative tax measures; preparation of official estimates of Government receipts for the President's annual budget

messages; legal advice and analysis on domestic and international tax matters; assistance in the development and

review of tax legislation and domestic and international tax regulations and rulings; and participation in international

tax treaty negotiations and in maintenance of relations with international organizations on tax matters.

https://home.treasury.gov/about/offices/tax-policy

Treasurer of the United States
The Office of the Treasurer of the United States was established on September 6, 1777. The Treasurer was originally

charged with the receipt and custody of Government funds, but many of these functions have been assumed by

different bureaus of the Department. In 1981, the Treasurer was assigned responsibility for oversight of the Bureau of

Engraving and Printing and the United States Mint. The Treasurer reports to the Secretary through the Assistant

Secretary for Management.

https://home.treasury.gov/about/offices/treasurer

Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration
The Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration (TIGTA), in accordance with the Internal Revenue Service

Restructuring and Reform Act of 1998 (26 U.S.C. 1 note), independently oversees Internal Revenue Service programs

and activities. TIGTA monitors the Nation's tax laws to ensure that the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) acts with

efficiency, economy, and effectiveness; ensures compliance with applicable laws and regulations; prevents, detects,

and deters fraud, waste, and abuse; investigates activities or allegations related to fraud, waste, and abuse by IRS

personnel; and protects the IRS against attempts to corrupt or threaten its employees.

https://www.treasury.gov/tigta



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Department of the Treasury

records have been assigned to record group 056.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/056.html?_ga=2.232359263.1725271782.1604688789-
1741997824.1566513831

Assistance for Small Businesses
The paycheck protection program provides small businesses with resources for maintaining payroll, hiring back
employees who may have been laid off, and covering overhead that is applicable.

https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/cares/assistance-for-small-businesses
For information on small and disadvantaged business activities, visit the Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business

Utilization's web pages. Phone, 202-622-5666.

https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/small-business-programs/small-and-disadvantaged-business-utilization-0

Bureaus
The Bureaus carry out specific operations assigned to the Department of the Treasury. Bureau employees constitute

98% of its workforce. The Department's website has a "Bureaus" web page that provides easy access to the websites of

each of them.

https://home.treasury.gov/about/bureaus

Careers Opportunities
The Department of the Treasury employs over 100,000 professionals nationwide and around the world.

https://home.treasury.gov/about/careers-at-treasury
In 2019, the Department of the Treasury ranked number 9 among 17 large Government agencies in the Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/TR00

Contact Information
The "Contact" web page contains information for contacting bureaus, offices, programs, services, and for making

inquiries, providing feedback, reporting concerns, and replacing damaged currency.

https://home.treasury.gov/utility/contact
Members of the media may contact the Department of the Treasury by phone or email. Phone, 202-622-2960.

https://home.treasury.gov/contacts-for-members-of-the-media | Email: press@treasury.gov

Data / Charts
A trove of economic information—charts, data, and tables—is available online.

https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/data-chart-center/Pages/index.aspx

Educational Resources
The Department of the Treasury's website has learning resources that are suitable for children and parents, for

students and teachers, as well as college students and other curious adults.

https://home.treasury.gov/services/education

Environment
The "Office of Management and Budget Scorecard on Sustainability/Energy" (2016) for the Department of the Treasury

is accessible online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.treasury.gov/about/budget-performance/annual-performance-
plan/Documents/TREASURY%20Final%20Jan%202016%20OMB%20Scorecard.public%20version.pdf
On October 5, 2009, President Barack Obama signed Executive Order 13514, "Federal Leadership in Environmental,
Energy, and Economic Performance," which required scorecards to provide "periodic evaluation of Federal agency

performance in implementing" the order and publication of the evaluation results on a public website to support

transparency and accountability.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2009-10-08/pdf/E9-24518.pdf

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the Department of the Treasury recently published in the Federal Register

are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/treasury-department

Financing Government
The Department of the Treasury's debt management policy prioritizes financing the Government at the lowest cost,

over time. To learn more about policymaking for financing the Government, explore the debt management resources

that the Department has posted.

https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/financing-the-government

Forms
The "Forms" web page contains links to Government forms that are accessible online.

https://home.treasury.gov/services/forms

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives a right to request access to records of the U.S. Government's executive branch to any person. The

records must be disclosed unless they are shielded from request by one or more of the exempt categories of

information found in the statute.

https://home.treasury.gov/footer/freedom-of-information-act
The Department of the Treasury maintains an electronic reading room whose holdings are governed by the FOIA.

https://home.treasury.gov/footer/freedom-of-information-act/electronic-reading-room
A FOIA request may be submitted electronically. An information seeker who wants to submit his or her request

electronically may choose one of two options: using the governmentwide national FOIA portal or submitting a request

directly to the appropriate departmental bureau.

https://home.treasury.gov/footer/freedom-of-information-act/submit-a-request

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Department of the Treasury posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/faqs/Pages/default.aspx

General Property Auctions
Information on upcoming sales of aircraft, vehicles, vessels, and general property is posted online.

https://www.treasury.gov/auctions/treasury/gp/

Glossary
The Department of the Treasury maintains a list of acronyms and terms that recur on its website.
https://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/financial-stability/glossary/pages/default.aspx

History
A trove of historical information on the Department of the Treasury and its building is available online.

https://home.treasury.gov/about/history
A visual and audio tour of the Treasury Building's points of interest is available online. The points of interest on the

map are hyperlinked to brief audio descriptions.

https://m.treasury.gov/about/history/m/m.html#map
Nero was purchased in 1793 to serve as "a Dog for the Yard." He—and his successor watchdogs—accompanied the

night watchman, whose duties required him to visit all sectors of the Mint premises every hour. To learn more about

these early and faithful Treasury employees, see the "Watchdogs of the Treasury" web page.

https://www.treasury.gov/about/history/Pages/watchdogs.aspx

Library
The Treasury Library is housed in the Freedman's Bank Building, room 1020. The entrance to the building is located at

720 Madison Place NW., Washington, DC. Members of the public may access the library's holdings by appointment.

Visitors must receive clearance from the Secret Service to enter the library. A clearance request must be made at least

one business day before a scheduled visit. Consulting with a Treasury librarian in advance of a visit can save time

because it helps ensure that relevant materials are readily accessible and available for use. Phone, 202-622-0990.

https://home.treasury.gov/services/tours-and-library/library

Press Releases
The Department of the Treasury posts press releases online.

https://home.treasury.gov/news/press-releases

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.treasury.gov/Pages/site-map.aspx

Slam the Scam
The Treasury Inspector General for Tax Administration has produced a flyer that explains a scam involving the

impersonation of an Internal Revenue Service employee. The flyer is available in English or Spanish. Phone, 800-366-

4484.

https://www.treasury.gov/tigta/docs/Slam%20the%20Scam%20Flyer.pdf | Email: complaints@tigta.treas.gov

Social Media
The Department of the Treasury maintains a social media presence on Facebook, Flickr, Twitter, and YouTube.

https://www.treasury.gov/connect/Pages/default.aspx

Social Security / Medicare
The Secretary of the Treasury chairs the Boards of Trustees of the Social Security and Medicare trust funds. He or she
serves with five other trustees: three trustees from the Federal Government and two public trustees whom the

President appoints and the Senate confirms. Each year the trustees provide the U.S. Congress with an accounting of

the current and projected financial status of the Social Security and Medicare trust funds. Two reports are issued: One

is for Social Security; the other is for Medicare; and both reports are posted on the "Social Security and Medicare

Trustee Reports" web page.

https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/economic-policy/social-security-and-medicare-trustee-reports

Tax Analysis
The staff of the Office of Tax Analysis (OTA) posts original research online in its working papers series. The OTA staff

also develops datasets, methods, and models that its uses for policy analysis and estimates. The technical papers

series, which is also posted online, presents documentation of these datasets, methods, and models.

https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/tax-policy/office-of-tax-analysis

Tribal Affairs
The "Tribal Affairs" web page contains links to the "Tribal Consultations" and "Treasury Tribal Advisory Committee" web

pages.

https://home.treasury.gov/policy-issues/tribal-affairs

Works Progress Administration (WPA) Artwork
A serendipitous consequence of the economic hardship that was caused by the Great Depression, which followed the

1929 stock market collapse, was that Americans started visiting public museums in droves. Having little money for

anything other than necessities, they took advantage of free museum admissions, and many were, for the first time,

exposed to works of art and responded with appreciation for them. In a cultural moment that the New Deal initiatives

of President Franklin D. Roosevelt were shaping, the confluence of a heightened awareness of public art, employment-

relief needs of artists, and creation of artwork for new Federal buildings stimulated the establishment of three public

arts programs that the Treasury Department administered.

https://home.treasury.gov/about/history/collection/paintings/wpa-art-collection

Yield Curves
Information on Treasury Yield Curves for nominal and real coupon issues and its breakeven inflation curve and on the

corporate bond yield curve and its relationship to the Pension Protection Act is available on the "Treasury Coupon

Issues and Corporate Bond Yield Curves" web page.

https://home.treasury.gov/data/treasury-coupon-issues-and-corporate-bond-yield-curves

  The above Sources of Information were updated 4–2021.




Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau
1310 G Street NW., Box 12, Washington, DC 20005


202-453-2000

http://www.ttb.gov
  ADMINISTRATOR                                             Mary G. Ryan


  Deputy Administrator                                      David M. Wulf


https://www.ttb.gov/offices/executive-offices



  The above list of key personnel was updated 4–2021.



The Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau enforces the laws regulating alcohol production, importation, and

wholesale businesses; tobacco manufacturing and importing businesses; and alcohol labeling and advertising.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On November 25, 2002, President George W. Bush approved Public Law 107–296, which is also cited as the

Homeland Security Act of 2002 (116 Stat. 2135). Title XI—Department of Justice Divisions contains a subtitle (116

Stat. 2274–2280) that transferred the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms to the Department of Justice,

while providing that the tax collection functions were to remain with the Department of the Treasury and be

administered by a newly established Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-116/pdf/STATUTE-116-Pg2135.pdf
The statute became effective 60 days after the President signed it (116 Stat. 2142) thereby establishing the TTB on

January 24, 2003.

https://www.ttb.gov/about-ttb/history
The TTB posts an organizational chart on its website.

https://www.ttb.gov/about-ttb/organizational-chart-for-ttb

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Codified material from Public Law 107–296 has been assigned to section 531 of 6 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title6/chapter1/subchapter11&edition=prelim
Codified statutory material affecting taxation of distilled spirits, wines, and beer has been assigned to chapter 51

of 26 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title26/subtitleE/chapter51&edition=prelim
Codified statutory material affecting taxation of tobacco products and cigarette papers and tubes has been

assigned to chapter 52 of 26 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title26/subtitleE/chapter52&edition=prelim
Codified rules and regulations that are associated with the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB)

have been assigned to chapter 1 of 27 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
gp=&SID=f00ed00e5660d6413f0783a84be97e50&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title27/27chapterI.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The TTB collects Federal alcohol, tobacco, firearms, and ammunition excise taxes; regulates the production,

labeling, and advertising of alcohol beverages; and investigates unfair or unlawful trade in alcohol and tobacco

products. The Bureau regulates alcohol and tobacco producers, importers, and wholesalers. Regulation of

retailers takes place on State and local levels.

https://www.ttb.gov/consumer/about-us-what-we-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that records of the TTB

have been assigned to record group 564. The TTB was created when the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and

Firearms was split into two new bureaus and its functions were reassigned and distributed between them. The

new Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATFE) and its functions became part of the

Department of Justice. The new TTB and its function remained within the Department of the Treasury. Record

group 564 does not have a description that currently is associated with it. Records of the ATFE have been

assigned to record group 436.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/501-to-600.html

Advertising, Labeling, and Formulation
For information on the advertising, labeling, and formulation of alcohol beverages, contact the Advertising,

Labeling and Formulation Division. Phone, 202-453-2250 or 866-927-2533.

http://www.ttb.gov/advertising/alfd.shtml | Email: alfd@ttb.treas.gov

Business Opportunities
The Bureau procures a variety of commercial goods and services each year, using appropriated and

nonappropriated funds. The "Contracting with TTB" web page has more information.

https://www.ttb.gov/public-information/contracting

Career Opportunities
The TTB has offices nationwide, including in Puerto Rico. Many TTB employees telework full time. To carry out its

mission, the Bureau relies on alcohol and tobacco tax specialists, analysts, attorneys, auditors, chemists,

investigators,labeling specialists, writers, and other professionals.

https://www.ttb.gov/careers
Among 420 agency subcomponents, the TTB placed 4th in the Partnership for Public Service's 2019 Best Places

To Work rankings!

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/TR40

Consumer Protection
The TTB protects the public by promulgating rules and regulations, collecting information on suspicious

activities, and helping to create and enforce laws that promote industry compliance.
https://www.ttb.gov/consumer | Email: Market.Compliance@ttb.gov

Contact Information
The "Contact the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau" web page contains phone numbers and links to

relevant online resources.

https://www.ttb.gov/about-ttb/contact-us

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the TTB recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/alcohol-and-tobacco-tax-and-trade-bureau

Fraud Tipline
To report fraud, diversion, and illegal activity by producers, importers, or wholesalers of alcohol and tobacco,

contact the Bureau's tipline. Phone, 855-882-8477. TTD, 202-882-9914.

https://www.ttb.gov/contact-id | Email: tips@ttb.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The TTB adheres to the policy and disclosure regulations of the Department of the Treasury for implementing

the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) consistently and uniformly and for providing maximum allowable

disclosure of agency records upon request. Requests are processed within the time limits defined by the FOIA.

https://www.ttb.gov/foia
The TTB's website has an electronic reading room containing materials that the FOIA requires the Bureau to

maintain. Some records are accessible, by appointment, in the public reading room located at 1310 G Street

NW., Washington, DC 20005. Phone, 202-882-9904.

https://www.ttb.gov/foia/electronic-reading-room

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The TTB posts answers to FAQs.

http://www.ttb.gov/faqs | Email: TTBInternetQuestions@ttb.gov

Glossary
The TTB maintains a glossary on its website.

https://www.ttb.gov/glossary/glossary-a

Language Links
Information is available on the TTB website in Chinese, Spanish, and French.


In Chinese

https://www.ttb.gov/itd-chinese-index/welcome
En Español

https://www.ttb.gov/itd-spanish-index/enespanol
En Français

https://www.ttb.gov/itd-french/welome

Name that Grape
Using a grape variety name on an American wine label is optional. Nevertheless, many wineries and bottlers

show this information on their labels. The TTB designed its "Grape Variety Designations on American Wine

Labels" web page to help explain the rules.

https://www.ttb.gov/wine/grape-variety-designations-on-american-wine-labels
The TTB Administrator has approved a list of grape variety names for use as American wine type designations.

This list has been assigned to "Subpart J—American Grape Variety Names" of part 4 in 27 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=58ae6192e0aa4245e7ebe64227e4d126&mc=true&node=pt27.1.4&rgn=div5#sp27.1.4.j

National Revenue Center
The National Revenue Center operates a call center that is open on weekdays, 8 a.m.–11:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m.–

5 p.m., eastern standard time. It can provide information on applications, claims, filing excise tax returns, permits,

and other tax collection topics. Phone, 877-882-3277.

https://www.ttb.gov/offices/national-revenue-center

News / Events
The TTB posts newsletters, press releases, and other newsworthy items on its website.

https://www.ttb.gov/press-room/news-and-events

Online Help Center
The "Online Help Center" web page has links to information that is relevant for TTB online applications and tools

for making certain transactions with TTB easier to complete online.

https://www.ttb.gov/about-ttb/online-help-center

Publications
The "Publications" web page provides convenient access to TTB publications that are found on various pages of

the website.

https://www.ttb.gov/publications

Resources for Research
The "Research Resources" web page provides convenient access to information on the regulatory process, the

laws and regulations that the TTB enforces, and on other subjects. It also has industry statistics and historical

information.

https://www.ttb.gov/researcher-resources

Startup Tutorial
The TTB posted a tutorial on its website to help entrepreneurs get started in the beer, distilled spirits, tobacco,

and wind industries.
https://www.ttb.gov/industry-startup-tutorial

Statistics / Data
The "TTB Statistics and Data" web page provides convenient access to accurate and timely statistics and data.

The page has statistics on industry production and operations, TTB tax collections, and processing times for

applications, labeling approval, permits, and requests for information. It also has tax rates and analysis tools like

conversion charts and the Bureau's formula approval tool.

https://www.ttb.gov/statistics

  The above Sources of Information were updated 4–2021.




Bureau of Engraving and Printing
Fourteenth and C Streets SW., Washington, DC 20228


202-874-4000

http://www.moneyfactory.com


  DIRECTOR                                                   Leonard R. Olijar


  Deputy Director                                            (vacancy)


http://www.moneyfactory.com/about/officeofthedirector.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 04–2021.



The Bureau of Engraving and Printing operates on basic authorities conferred by act of July 11, 1862 (31 U.S.C.

303), and on additional authorities contained in past appropriations made to the Bureau that are still in force. A

revolving fund established in 1950, in accordance with Public Law 81–656, finances the Bureau's operations. The
Secretary of the Treasury selects the Director who heads the Bureau.


The Bureau designs, prints, and finishes all of the Nation's paper currency and many other security documents,

including White House invitations and military identification cards. It also is responsible for advising and assisting

Federal agencies in the design and production of other Government documents that, because of their innate

value or for other reasons, require security or counterfeit-deterrence characteristics.


The Bureau also operates a second currency manufacturing plant at 9000 Blue Mound Road, Fort Worth, TX.

Phone, 817-231-4000.

https://www.moneyfactory.gov/about.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that BEP records have

been assigned to record group 318.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/318.html?_ga=2.91357530.1147691139.1619118271-
898747230.1618953560

Business Opportunities
For information on contracts and small business activities, visit the "Doing Business with the BEP" Web page or

contact the Office of Acquisition. Phone, 202-874-2065.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/about/dobusinesswithbep.html

Career Opportunities
The BEP relies on acquisition specialists, administrative staff, attorneys, chemists, engineers, police officers,

security specialists, and other professionals to carry out its mission.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/about/careers.html
Among 420 agency subcomponents, the BEP placed 113th in the Partnership for Public Service's 2019 Best Places

To Work rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/TRAI

Contact Information
Email and postal addresses and phone numbers for the BEP facilities in Washington, DC, and Fort Worth, TX, are

posted on the "Contact Us" web page.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/contactus.html

Currency Production
The production of U.S. currency involves highly trained and skilled craftspeople, specialized equipment, and a

combination of traditional old world printing techniques merged with sophisticated, cutting edge technology. To

learn more about the process, visit the "How Money is Made" Web page.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/uscurrency/howmoneyismade.html

Educational Resources
The U.S. currency education program offers free educational and training resources online.

https://uscurrency.gov/resource-center

Federal Register
Documents that the BEP recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/engraving-and-printing-bureau

Federal Reserve
The BEP provides answers to some common questions about the Federal Reserve.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/about-the-fed.htm
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
All Federal agencies, including the BEP, create and receive records when carrying out their missions. The FOIA

gives the right to access executive branch agency records to the public. The BEP makes available, upon written

request, records or extracts of records in accordance with the FOIA, the Privacy Act, and certain regulations of

the Department of the Treasury. The FOIA contains, however, exemptions that shield some records from request

and disclosure. Phone, 202-874-2500. Fax, 202-874-2951.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/foia.html
The BEP maintains an electronic FOIA library.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/bepfoialibrary.html

History
The BEP posted a 11-page booklet in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading. "About

BEP" contains a section on the Bureau's history and has images illustrating the activities, history, and products of

the Bureau.

https://moneyfactory.gov/images/about_bep_S508_web.pdf
The "Image Gallery" web page contains four sections: artwork, engravings, photographs, and products.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/resources/imagegallery.html

Lifespan of Paper Money
The estimated lifespans of one, five, ten, twenty, fifty and one hundred dollar notes are posted in an online table.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/how-long-is-the-life-span-of-us-paper-money.htm

Mail Order Sales
Uncut sheets of currency, engraved Presidential portraits, historical engravings of national landmarks, and other

souvenirs and mementos are available for purchase by phone and online. Phone, 800-456-3408.

https://catalog.usmint.gov

News
The BEP posts press releases online.

https://www.moneyfactory.gov/presscenter/pressreleases.html

Serial Numbers
A short explanation of the serial numbers that are printed on notes is available in the "Resources" section.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/resources/serialnumbers.html

Tours
BEP public tours have been suspended as a precaution to limit the spread of COVID–19.

https://moneyfactory.gov/services/takeatour.html

  The above Sources of Information were updated 4–2021.
Bureau of the Fiscal Service
401 Fourteenth Street SW., Washington, DC 20227


202-874-6950

http://www.fiscal.treasury.gov


  COMMISSIONER                                              Matthew J. Miller, Acting




Deputy Commissioners


  Accounting and Shared Services                            Dara Seaman, Acting


  Finance and Administration                                Dara Seaman, Acting


  Financial Services and Operations                         Jeffrey J. Schramek

https://www.fiscal.treasury.gov/about.html



The above list of key personnel was updated 4–2021.

The Bureau of the Fiscal Service provides central payment services to Federal program agencies, operates the

Federal Government's collections and deposit systems, provides Governmentwide accounting and reporting

services, manages the collection of delinquent debt owed to the Federal Government, borrows the money

needed to operate the Federal Government, accounts for the resulting public debt, and gives reimbursable

support to Federal agencies.


Accounting
The Fiscal Service gathers and publishes Governmentwide financial information that is used by the public and

private sectors to monitor the Government's financial status and establish fiscal and monetary policies. These

publications include the "Daily Treasury Statement," "Monthly Treasury Statement," "Treasury Bulletin," "U.S.

Government Annual Report," and "Financial Report of the U.S. Government."


Collections
The Fiscal Service administers the world's largest collection system, processing more than 400 million

transactions through the support of six Federal Reserve Banks and a network of over 100 financial institutions. In

Fiscal Year 2012, the Fiscal Service collected over $3.16 trillion in Federal revenues from individual and corporate

income tax deposits, customs duties, loan repayments, fines, proceeds from leases, as well as from other

revenue sources.
The Fiscal Service and Internal Revenue Service manage the Electronic Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS),

which allows individuals and businesses to pay Federal taxes online. The EFTPS website has printable

acknowledgment features for documenting transactions, advance payment scheduling, and payment history

access.


The Treasury Offset Program is one of the methods used to collect delinquent debt. The Fiscal Service uses the

program to withhold Federal payments, such as Federal income tax refunds, Federal salary payments, and Social

Security benefits, to recipients with delinquent debts, including past-due child support obligations and State and

Federal income tax debt.


Debt Financing
The Bureau auctions and issues Treasury bills, notes, and bonds and manages the sales and redemption of

savings bonds. It provides daily and other periodic reports to account for the composition and size of the debt.

In addition, the Bureau implements the regulations for the Government securities market. These regulations

provide for investor protection while maintaining a fair and liquid market for Government securities.


Do Not Pay
The Do Not Pay Business Center has a two-part vision for programs administered or funded by the Federal

Government: to help prevent and stop improper payments from being made and to identify and mitigate fraud,

waste, and abuse. The goal of the program is to integrate Do Not Pay into existing business processes by

providing agencies with access to current data that are relevant for making an award or payment decision.


Electronic Commerce
Through its electronic money programs, the Fiscal Service offers new payment and collection technologies to

help Federal agencies modernize their cash management activities. Examples include stored-value cards used on

military bases, point-of-sale check conversion, and online credit card collection programs.


Payments
Each year, the Fiscal Service disburses more than one billion non-Defense payments to a wide variety of

recipients, such as those individuals who receive Social Security, IRS tax refunds, and veterans' benefits. In Fiscal

Year 2012, the Fiscal Service issued more than $2.4 trillion in payments, 88 percent of which were issued

electronically.


Shared Services
The Administrative Resource Center delivers franchise services on a reimbursable basis to more than 85 Treasury

and Federal Government agencies. The Center provides services in six areas: financial management, investment

accounting, human resources, information technology, procurement, and travel.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION
A–Z Index
The Fiscal Service's website has an alphabetical and comprehensive list of links to the Bureau's major programs

and services.

https://fiscal.treasury.gov/all-programs-services.html

Career Opportunities
The Fiscal Service relies on accountants, administrators, business and finance experts, information technology

specialists, and others to carry out mission.

https://www.fiscal.treasury.gov/careers
Among 411 agency subcomponents, the Fiscal Service placed 50th in the Partnership for Public Service's 2020

Best Places To Work rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/TRFD

Do Not Pay
The Do Not Pay Business Center supports Federal agencies in their efforts to reduce the number of improper

payments. Data, information, and resources are available on its website.

https://fiscal.treasury.gov/DNP

Electronic Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS)
The EFTPS professionals post answers to frequently asked questions (FAQs) online.

https://www.eftps.gov/eftps/direct/FAQGeneral.page

Federal Register
Documents that the Fiscal Service recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/bureau-of-the-fiscal-service

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives the right to request information from the Federal Government's executive branch agencies to

any person. It is sometimes referred to as the law that keeps citizens in the know about their Government. The

Fiscal Service posts a lot of information on its website for the public's benefit and convenience. Before submitting

a FOIA request in writing, information seekers should search the website for the desired information. It may be

accessible immediately and free of charge.

https://www.fiscal.treasury.gov/foia.html
The Fiscal Service maintains an electronic reading room to support the FOIA.

https://www.fiscal.treasury.gov/foia-readingroom.html

Glossaries
A governmentwide treasury account symbol glossary is available online.

https://fiscal.treasury.gov/gtas/glossary.html
The EFTPS website has a glossary of terms and common acronyms.

https://www.eftps.gov/eftps/direct/HelpGlossary.page
The Treasury Direct website has a glossary of terms.

http://www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/research/res_glossary/glossary.htm

Government-to-Government Shared Services
The Administrative Resource Center provides Federal agencies with cost-effective, customer-focused, responsive

administrative support.

https://arc.fiscal.treasury.gov

History
A short history of the Fiscal Service is available at the bottom of the "About Us" webpage.

https://www.fiscal.treasury.gov/about.html
The Treasury Direct website uses historical images to tell the story of U.S. Savings Bonds from their introduction

in 1935 to the second decade of the 21st century.

https://www.treasurydirect.gov/timeline.htm?src=td&med=banner&loc=consumer

News
The Fiscal Service posts news items and press releases online.

https://www.fiscal.treasury.gov/fsnews/fs_news.htm

Public Debt Outstanding
The Treasury Direct website has monthly statements of the public debt. For example, on October 31, 2021, the

total public debt outstanding was approximately $28,908,765,000,000.

https://www.treasurydirect.gov/govt/reports/pd/mspd/mspd.htm

Reports / Publications
The monthly "Statement of the Public Debt of the United States" and "Treasury Statement of Receipts and

Outlays of the U.S. Government," as well as the annual "Financial Report of the U.S. Government," and other

publications are available on the Fiscal Service's website.

https://fiscal.treasury.gov/reports-statements

Savings Bonds
Savings bonds may be purchased and held in an online account. Current rate information is available online or

by calling 800-487-2663. Requests for information on all series of savings bonds, savings notes, and retirement

plans or individual retirement bonds should be addressed to the Bureau of the Fiscal Service, Division of

Customer Assistance, PO Box 7012, Parkersburg, WV 26106-7012. Phone, 304-480-7711.

https://www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/products/prod_eebonds_glance.htm

Treasury Securities
For information on the purchase of Treasury bills, bonds, and notes, contact the Bureau of the Fiscal Service,

Division of Customer Assistance, PO Box 7015, Parkersburg, WV 26106-7015. Phone, 800-722-2678.

http://www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/products/products.htm
  The Sources of Information were updated 11–2021.




Internal Revenue Service
1111 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20224


202-622-5000

http://www.irs.gov


  COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE                           Charles P. Rettig


  Chief of Staff                                             Kevin Q. McIver


https://www.irs.gov/about-irs/todays-irs-organization



Deputy Commissioners


  Operations Support                                         Jeffrey Tribiano


  Services and Enforcement                                   Sunita Lough




  The above list of key personnel was updated 7–2021.



The Office of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue was established by act of July 1, 1862 (26 U.S.C. 7802). The

Internal Revenue Service (IRS) administers and enforces the internal revenue laws and related statutes, except

those relating to alcohol, tobacco, firearms, and explosives. It collects the proper amount of tax revenue, at the

least cost to the public, by efficiently applying the tax law with integrity and fairness. The IRS aims for the highest
possible degree of voluntary compliance in accordance with the tax laws and regulations; advises the public of

their rights and responsibilities; determines the extent of compliance and the causes of noncompliance; properly

administers and enforces the tax laws; and continually searches for and implements new, more efficient ways of

accomplishing its mission. The IRS ensures satisfactory resolution of taxpayer complaints; provides taxpayer

service and education; determines, assesses, and collects internal revenue taxes; determines pension plan

qualifications and exempt organization status; and prepares and issues rulings and regulations to supplement

the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code.


Most of the collected revenues depend on the individual income tax and the social insurance and retirement

taxes. Other major revenue sources are corporate income, excise, estate, and gift taxes. The 16th Amendment of

the Constitution, ratified on February 3, 1913, gave Congress the authority to levy taxes on the income of

individuals and corporations.
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
Information on and resources for doing business with the IRS are available on its "Procurement" Web page.

https://www.irs.gov/about-irs/procurement | Email: AWSSPROCCustomerService@irs.gov

Career Opportunities
To carry out its mission, the IRS relies on accountants, appeals officers, artificial intelligence analysts, attorneys,

budget analysts, computer research analysts, contact representatives, data transcribers, engineers, human

resources specialists, information technology specialists, internal revenue agents and officers, mathematical

statisticians, operations research analysts, policy analysts, program analysts, risk analysts, special agents, tax

compliance officers, tax examiners, tax law specialists, and other professionals.

https://jobs.irs.gov
In 2020, the IRS ranked 223d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TR93

Charities / Nonprofits
Tax information for charities and nonprofit organizations is available online.

https://www.irs.gov/charities-and-nonprofits

Contact Information
At the bottom of its "Let Us Help You" web page, the IRS posts phone numbers for those who seek assistance.

https://www.irs.gov/help/telephone-assistance

Forms / Publications
Current forms, instructions, and publications may be downloaded from the IRS's website.

https://www.irs.gov/forms-instructions

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
In 1966, President Lyndon B. Johnson's approval of the FOIA gave the right to access documents or records

belonging to the executive branch of the Federal Government to any person. The statute is based on the

presumption that the Government and its information belong to the public. The IRS may withhold, however,

documents or records shielded from disclosure by one of the statute's nine exemptions, and it must withhold

them when disclosure is prohibited by law.

https://www.irs.gov/uac/irs-freedom-of-information
The IRS maintains an online library whose contents are arranged by subject category.

https://www.irs.gov/privacy-disclosure/foia-library

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The IRS posts answers to FAQs.
https://www.irs.gov/faqs

Identity Theft
The IRS responds to tax-related identity theft with an aggressive strategy of prevention, detection, and victim

assistance. The IRS continues to make progress against this crime, and it remains one of the agency's highest

priorities. The IRS is committed to helping victims of identity theft resolve their cases as quickly as possible.

https://www.irs.gov/identity-theft-central

Language Resources
Assistance in additional languages is available on the "Languages" web page.

https://www.irs.gov/help/languages

News
The IRS posts news items online.

https://www.irs.gov/newsroom

Reading Rooms
Public reading rooms are located in the national office and in each territory office.


Retirement Plans
The IRS website has resources for and a trove of information on retirement plans.

https://www.irs.gov/retirement-plans

Tax Assistance
The IRS provides taxpayers with year-round tax information and assistance, primarily through its website and

toll-free telephone system. Answers to many tax-related questions can be found on the IRS's website. The toll-

free telephone numbers are listed in local telephone directories and in the annual tax form packages. The

telephone system can accommodate the needs of taxpayers who are deaf or hearing-impaired. Taxpayers may

also visit IRS offices to find answers to their tax questions. Individual preparation is available for handicapped or

other individuals unable to use the group preparation method. Tax assistance in a foreign language is also

available at many locations.

https://www.irs.gov/help/telephone-assistance
To find the nearest taxpayer assistance center, type a ZIP Code in the text box of the online locator tool. Before

going to a taxpayer assistance center for help, call and schedule an appointment.

https://apps.irs.gov/app/officeLocator/index.jsp

Taxpayer Advocate Service
Each district has problem resolution personnel to address taxpayer complaints that cannot be resolved through

regular channels.

https://www.irs.gov/advocate

Taxpayer Rights
The taxpayer bill of rights is available on the IRS's website.

https://www.irs.gov/taxpayer-bill-of-rights

Tax Statistics
The IRS posts articles, data, and tables that describe and measure elements of the U.S. tax system.

https://www.irs.gov/statistics

Tax Tools
Tax tools are available for individual taxpayers, businesses, and tax professionals on the "Tools" web page.

https://www.irs.gov/help/tools

Where's My Refund?
Once the IRS processes a tax filer's return and approves a refund, he or she can check the refund date online.

The IRS usually issues a refund in fewer than 21 days after receiving a tax filer's return. Some returns, however,

require additional review and, therefore, additional time to process.

https://www.irs.gov/refunds

  The above Sources of Information were updated 7–2021.




Office of the Comptroller of the Currency
400 7th Street SW., Washington, DC 20219


202-649-6800

http://www.occ.gov


  COMPTROLLER                                                    Rodney E. Hood, Acting


https://www.occ.gov/about/who-we-are/leadership/bio-michael-hsu.html

  Senior Deputy Comptrollers                                     Beverly Cole


                                                                 Gregory J. Coleman


                                                                 Jay Gallagher


                                                                 Grovetta N. Gardineer


                                                                 Larry L. Hattix


                                                                 Minh-Hai Tan-Lam


                                                                 (vacancy)


https://www.occ.gov/about/who-we-are/leadership/index-leadership.html
  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) was created on February 25, 1863 (12 Stat. 665), as a

bureau of the Department of the Treasury. In 1929, with the issuance of the last national bank notes, the OCC

essentially became an organization of national bank examiners with a singular mission: to maintain the safety

and soundness of the banks under its supervision. In 2011, when the Office of Thrift Supervision integrated into

the OCC, the bureau also assumed responsibility for regulating Federal savings associations, also referred to as

Federal thrifts.

https://www.loc.gov/collections/united-states-statutes-at-large/about-this-collection/73rd-congress/session-
2/c73s2ch668.pdf
The Comptroller of the Currency, whom the President appoints to a 5-year term by the advice of the Senate and

with its consent, administers the Federal banking system and serves as the chief officer of the OCC and as a

director of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.


The OCC's statement of organization has been codified in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) and assigned

to part 4 of 12 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=7c57a800de8e85e36874c72aa364ac10&mc=true&node=pt12.1.4&rgn=div5
A number of departments and offices that are under the leadership of the Comptroller and senior deputy

comptrollers provide the organizational structure for carrying out the OCC's mission.

https://occ.gov/about/who-we-are/organizations/index-organization.html

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material affecting the Comptroller of the Currency has been consolidated and codified in the United

States Code (U.S.C.). This material has been assigned to the first chapter, sections 1–16, of 12 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title12/chapter1&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that are associated with the Comptroller of the Currency have been consolidated and

codified in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). These rules and regulations have been assigned to the first

chapter, parts 1–199, of 12CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=9239dee7caf69de5910e02babdd4547c&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title12/12chapterI.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The OCC regulates national banks and Federal thrifts by examining them; approving or denying applications for

new charters, branches, capital, and other changes in corporate or banking structure; taking enforcement

actions—removing officers and directors, negotiating agreements to change practices, and issuing cease and

desist orders and civil monetary penalties—when national banks and Federal thrifts fail to comply with laws and

regulations or when they engage in unsound practices; and issuing rules, regulations, interpretations, and

corporate decisions that govern investments, lending, and other practices.
The bureau supervises over 1,100 national banks, Federal savings associations, and Federal branches, including

their trust activities and overseas operations. A nationwide team of bank examiners works under the supervision

of four district offices. National banks and Federal thrifts pay for their examinations, as well as for the processing

of their corporate applications.


Assessments on national banks and Federal savings associations cover most OCC operating expenses. The OCC

also benefits from some investment income, primarily from U.S. Treasury securities.

https://occ.gov/about/what-we-do/index-what-we-do.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Alphabetical Topics List
Online visitors may browse the contents of the "Topics" web page by using an alphabetized list or by subject

area.


Annual Reports
OCC Annual Reports provide Congress with an overview of the condition of the federal banking system as well

as the OCC's priorities and initiatives. Each annual report is available online in the Portable Document Format

(PDF) for downloading, starting with the year 2003. Earlier annual reports are also available.


Answers / Solutions
OCC's "HelpWithMyBank" website has information and resources to help customers of national banks and

Federal savings associations find answers to questions and solutions for problems.


Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that OCC records have

been assigned to record group 101.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/101.html?
_ga=2.154427440.926928378.1628716780-2085205018.1628716780

Bulletins
Starting with the year 1994 and continuing to the present, OCC bulletins are accessible online. Rescinded and

some pre-1994 bulletins are also included in the collection.

https://occ.gov/news-events/newsroom/index.html?nr=Bulletin

Business Opportunities
Procurement awards typically fall within the following service categories: computer-related services; computer

facilities management services; computer systems design services; data processing, hosting, and related services;

real estate agent and broker services; insurance agency and brokerage services; and administrative management

and general management consulting services.
https://occ.gov/about/connect-with-us/doing-business-with-the-occ/index-doing-business-with-the-occ.html         |
Email: OCCAcquisitionManagement@occ.treas.gov

Career Opportunities
The OCC relies on accountants, attorneys, economists, financial analysts, human resources specialists,

information technology specialists, project management analysts, and other professionals, particularly bank

examiners, to carry out its mission. For more information, contact the Director for Human Resources Operations.

Phone, 202-649-6590. Fax, 202-649-5998.

https://careers.occ.gov/index.html
National bank examiners work to ensure the safety and soundness of America's national banking system, to

provide fair access to financial services and equal treatment, and to establish and maintain a flexible regulatory

framework that allows the Nation's banks to be competitive. The OCC generally hires examiners at the entry

level through college recruitment.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RPrQmlcF0s0
In 2020, the OCC ranked 87th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TRAJ

Consumer Protection
The OCC posts information and resources on its website to protect consumers.

https://occ.gov/topics/consumers-and-communities/consumer-protection/index-consumer-protection.html

Contact Information
The "Contact the OCC" web page has informational resources for contacting the agency.

https://occ.gov/about/connect-with-us/contact-the-occ/index-contact-the-occ.html

Customer Complaints
An online form is available for submitting a complaint against a national bank or Federal savings association.

https://appsec.helpwithmybank.gov/olcc_form/intro.aspx

District and Field Offices
Contact information for district and field offices is available online.

https://occ.gov/about/who-we-are/locations/index-locations.html

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the OCC recently published in the Federal Register are accessible

online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/comptroller-of-the-currency

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA serves as the vehicle for obtaining Federal agency documents and records. The statute does contain,

however, nine exemptions and three special law enforcement exclusions that shield some documents and
records, or parts of them, from disclosure.

https://www.occ.gov/about/connect-with-us/foia/index-foia.html
The electronic reading room contains documents that attract public interest and have been the subject of FOIA

requests in the past.

https://foia-pal.occ.gov/app/ReadingRoom.aspx

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
Answers to FAQs on checking accounts, credit cards, credit reports, mortgages, overdraft fees, and more are

posted on the "HelpWithMyBank" website.

https://www.helpwithmybank.gov/help-topics/index-help-topics.html

Glossary
A dictionary of banking terms and phrases is available on the "HelpWithMyBank" website.

https://www.helpwithmybank.gov/dictionary/index-dictionary.html
A list of abbreviations and acronyms is available on the OCC's website in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.occ.gov/annual-report/download-the-full-report/abbreviations.pdf

History
The OCC's role in the Federal banking system started in a tumultuous year, near the midpoint of the American

Civil War. On January 1, 1863, President Abraham Lincoln emancipated over 3 million men, women, and children

by signing the Emancipation Proclamation. Fifty-five days later, he added his signature to the National Currency

Act, which established the OCC and charged it with responsibility for organizing and administering a system of

nationally chartered banks and a uniform national currency. After 1913, its mission increasingly centered on the

safety and soundness of national banks. To learn more about the agency's development over the past 155 years,

see the "Founding of the OCC and the National Banking System" web page.

https://occ.gov/about/who-we-are/history/founding-occ-national-bank-system/index-founding-occ-national-
banking-system.html
On March 3, 1865, Congress enacted legislation to establish the Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen and Abandoned

Lands, which came to be known as the Freedmen's Bureau. On that same day, it chartered the Freedman's

Savings and Trust Company, or Freedman's Savings Bank (FSB), to meet a growing need for financial services

among African Americans. To learn more about the intertwining histories of the OCC and FSB, read the online

article by former OCC historian Jesse Stiller.

https://www.occ.gov/about/what-we-do/history/freedman-savings-bank.html

Minority Outreach
The OCC's External Outreach and Minority Affairs division maintains a "Minority Outreach" web page.

https://www.occ.gov/topics/consumers-and-communities/minority-outreach/index-minority-outreach.html

News
The OCC posts news releases on its website.

https://occ.gov/news-issuances/news-releases/index.html
Publications
The "Publications" web page allows visitors to browse OCC publications by collection, subject area, or recent

dates of publication.

https://occ.gov/publications-and-resources/publications/index-publications.html

Public Information on Banks
Federal bank regulators post public information on individual banks. The OCC's website provides convenient

access to the websites of these regulators.

https://occ.gov/about/contact-us/public-information/public-information.html
The Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council's website has a searchable database for identifying the

Federal bank regulatory agency that oversees a particular bank or financial institution.

https://www.ffiec.gov/consumercenter/default.aspx

Site Map
The careers section has a site map of its web pages.

https://careers.occ.gov/sitemap/sitemap-page.html
The "HelpWithMyBank" website has its own site map.

https://www.helpwithmybank.gov/site-map/index-sitemap.html

Social Media
The OCC tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/usocc
The OCC has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/US-Comptroller-of-the-Currency-213254918823/
The OCC posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/OCCChannel#p/c/2BAA3C3A20C2630E

Tools
The "Tools" web page brings together in one place all of the tools that are available on the OCC website.

https://occ.gov/publications-and-resources/tools/index-tools.html

  The above Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




United States Mint
801 Ninth Street NW., Washington, DC 20220


202-354-7200

http://www.usmint.gov


  DIRECTOR                                                  David J. Ryder
  Deputy Director                                           Francis O'Hearn, Acting


https://www.usmint.gov/about/directors-office



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The establishment of a mint was authorized by act of April 2, 1792 (1 Stat. 246). The Bureau of the Mint was

established by act of February 12, 1873 (17 Stat. 424), and recodified on September 13, 1982 (31 U.S.C. 304, 5131).

The name was changed to United States Mint by Secretarial order on January 9, 1984.


The primary mission of the Mint is to produce an adequate volume of circulating coinage for the Nation to

conduct its trade and commerce. The Mint also produces and sells numismatic coins, American Eagle gold and

silver bullion coins, and national medals. The Fort Knox Bullion Depository is the primary storage facility for the

Nation's gold bullion.


The U.S. Mint maintains sales centers at the Philadelphia and Denver Mints and at its headquarters on 9th Street

in Washington, DC. Public tours are conducted, with free admission, at the Philadelphia and Denver Mints.

https://www.usmint.gov/about_the_mint/index.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Mint records have

been assigned to record group 104.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/104.html

Artists
The artistic infusion program enriches and invigorates coin and medal designs by contracting with a pool of

American artists from diverse backgrounds and having a variety of interests. These artists collaborate with the

Mint's sculptor-engravers to create and submit new designs for U.S. coins and medals.

https://www.usmint.gov/learn/artists

Bullion Dealers
The Mint's website has a locator tool for finding U.S. Mint bullion sellers by city and State or by ZIP Code.

http://catalog.usmint.gov/bullion-dealer-locator

Career Opportunities
The Mint offers a wide range of career opportunities. An innovative, progressive bureau in the Department of

the Treasury, it operates six facilities nationwide and employees professionals with backgrounds in financial

management, information technology, manufacturing, protection, sales and marketing, workforce solutions, and

other fields.
https://www.usmint.gov/about/careers
Among 411 agency subcomponents, the Mint placed 148th in the Partnership for Public Service's 2020 Best

Places To Work rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TRAD

Coin of the Year
The Mint celebrated its 225th anniversary in 2017. To mark the occasion, it created the 2017 American Liberty

225th Anniversary Gold Coin, which features a modern rendition of Lady Liberty. Emblematic figures of liberty

have graced American coins since the Mint's founding in 1792. The newest Lady Liberty is a modern rendition of

this iconic figure, who embodies equality and freedom, ideals that the Nation's Declaration of Independence

enshrined.

https://catalog.usmint.gov/american-liberty-225th-anniversary-gold-coin-17XA.html?
cgid=null&q=coin%2520of%2520the%2520year&navid=search#q=coin%2520of%2520the%2520year&start=1

Contact Information
The Mint's "Contact Us" web page has phone numbers and postal addresses. It also provides convenient access

to an electronic "Contact Us" form that has a comment box.

https://catalog.usmint.gov/customer-service/contact-us.html | Email: usmint-support@usmcatalog.com

Customer Service
Mint employees work hard to provide exceptional customer service. To contact the Mint, with questions or

concerns about shopping, an order, or another matter, please use the "Live Chat" feature or call customer

service. Answers to questions also are provided on the "Frequently Asked Questions" web page. Phone, 800-

872-6468.

https://catalog.usmint.gov/customerservice | Email: usmint-support@usmcatalog.com

Educational Resources
The Mint's website offers learning resources for children, educators, and parents.

https://www.usmint.gov/learn/educators

Facilities
The U.S. Mint operates four mints (CA, CO, NY, PA), one depository (KY), and maintains its headquarters in

Washington, DC.

https://www.usmint.gov/about/mint-tours-facilities

Federal Register
Documents that the Mint recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/united-states-mint

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded
from disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute.

https://www.usmint.gov/foia
The Mint's electronic reading room contains records that are frequently requested under the FOIA.

https://www.usmint.gov/foia/reading-room

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Mint posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://catalog.usmint.gov/customer-service/faqs/?_ga=2.162013182.373647902.1628186014-
2053548025.1628186014

Glossary
The H.I.P. Pocket Change website features a coin glossary.

https://www.usmint.gov/learn/kids/collecting/coin-glossary

History
On April 2, 1792, the U.S. Congress passed the Coinage Act, establishing the first national mint in the United

States. Over two centuries later, one of the Federal Government's oldest agencies continues to serve the

American public. To learn more about the U.S. Mint, visit its "History" web page.

https://www.usmint.gov/learn/history
A timeline of the Mint that stretches from the 18th to 21st century is available online.

https://www.usmint.gov/learn/history/timeline-of-the-united-states-mint

How Are Coins Made?
An animated overview of the six-step coin manufacturing process—blanking, annealing, upsetting, striking,

inspecting, and counting and bagging—is available on the "Coins" web page..

https://www.usmint.gov/learn/kids/coins

Image Library
High-resolution images of coins and medals are available on the Mint's website. For information on the use of

these images, contact the Office of Licensing. Phone, 202-354-7350. Fax, 202-756-6585.

https://www.usmint.gov/news/image-library | Email: licensing@usmint.treas.gov

Medals
National medals commemorate significant historical events or sites and honor individuals whose superior deeds

and achievements have enriched American history or the world. Some national medals are bronze duplicates of

Congressional Gold Medals that Congress authorizes under separate Public Laws, and others are produced

under the Secretary of the Treasury's authority to strike them.

https://www.usmint.gov/learn/coin-and-medal-programs/medals

News
The Mint posts articles and press releases online. The Mint maintains a public inquiry phone line for its Office of

Corporate Communications. Phone, 202-354-7227.
    https://www.usmint.gov/news | Email: inquiries@usmint.treas.gov

    Online Resources
    The "Website Resources" web page has a collection of helpful internal and external links.

    https://www.usmint.gov/policies/website-resources

    Production / Sales
    The Mint produces circulating coins for commerce, numismatic coins for collectors, and bullion coins for

    investors. Quantities are measured in terms of production figures when referring to circulating coins, sales

    figures when referring to numismatic products, and sales and mintage figures when referring to bullion.

    https://www.usmint.gov/about/production-sales-figures

    Reports
    Annual and special reports are available online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

    https://www.usmint.gov/about/reports

    Seigniorage
    The Mint returned nearly $550 million in seigniorage—the difference between the face value and the

    manufacturing cost of a circulating coin—to the Department of the Treasury's general fund in 2020. The Mint

    publishes seigniorage information each year in its annual report.

    https://www.usmint.gov/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/2020-Annual-Report.pdf

    Site Map
    The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

    https://www.usmint.gov/about/site-map

    Social Media
    The Mint maintains a Facebook account.

    https://www.facebook.com/UnitedStatesMint
    The Mint tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on its Twitter account.

    https://twitter.com/usmint
    The Mint posts videos on its YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/user/USMINT

        The above Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About
Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                         Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau




The United States Government Manual




     ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO TAX AND TRADE BUREAU
    1310 G Street NW., Box 12, Washington, DC 20005


    202-453-2000

    http://www.ttb.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         Mary G. Ryan


      Deputy Administrator                                                                  David M. Wulf
https://www.ttb.gov/offices/executive-offices



  The above list of key personnel was updated 4–2021.



The Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau enforces the laws regulating alcohol production, importation, and

wholesale businesses; tobacco manufacturing and importing businesses; and alcohol labeling and advertising.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On November 25, 2002, President George W. Bush approved Public Law 107–296, which is also cited as the Homeland

Security Act of 2002 (116 Stat. 2135). Title XI—Department of Justice Divisions contains a subtitle (116 Stat. 2274–2280)

that transferred the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms to the Department of Justice, while providing that the

tax collection functions were to remain with the Department of the Treasury and be administered by a newly

established Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-116/pdf/STATUTE-116-Pg2135.pdf
The statute became effective 60 days after the President signed it (116 Stat. 2142) thereby establishing the TTB on

January 24, 2003.

https://www.ttb.gov/about-ttb/history
The TTB posts an organizational chart on its website.

https://www.ttb.gov/about-ttb/organizational-chart-for-ttb

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Codified material from Public Law 107–296 has been assigned to section 531 of 6 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title6/chapter1/subchapter11&edition=prelim
Codified statutory material affecting taxation of distilled spirits, wines, and beer has been assigned to chapter 51 of 26

U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title26/subtitleE/chapter51&edition=prelim
Codified statutory material affecting taxation of tobacco products and cigarette papers and tubes has been assigned

to chapter 52 of 26 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title26/subtitleE/chapter52&edition=prelim
Codified rules and regulations that are associated with the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau (TTB) have

been assigned to chapter 1 of 27 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
gp=&SID=f00ed00e5660d6413f0783a84be97e50&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title27/27chapterI.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The TTB collects Federal alcohol, tobacco, firearms, and ammunition excise taxes; regulates the production, labeling,

and advertising of alcohol beverages; and investigates unfair or unlawful trade in alcohol and tobacco products. The

Bureau regulates alcohol and tobacco producers, importers, and wholesalers. Regulation of retailers takes place on

State and local levels.
https://www.ttb.gov/consumer/about-us-what-we-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that records of the TTB have

been assigned to record group 564. The TTB was created when the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms was split

into two new bureaus and its functions were reassigned and distributed between them. The new Bureau of Alcohol,

Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATFE) and its functions became part of the Department of Justice. The new TTB

and its function remained within the Department of the Treasury. Record group 564 does not have a description that

currently is associated with it. Records of the ATFE have been assigned to record group 436.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/501-to-600.html

Advertising, Labeling, and Formulation
For information on the advertising, labeling, and formulation of alcohol beverages, contact the Advertising, Labeling

and Formulation Division. Phone, 202-453-2250 or 866-927-2533.

http://www.ttb.gov/advertising/alfd.shtml | Email: alfd@ttb.treas.gov

Business Opportunities
The Bureau procures a variety of commercial goods and services each year, using appropriated and nonappropriated

funds. The "Contracting with TTB" web page has more information.

https://www.ttb.gov/public-information/contracting

Career Opportunities
The TTB has offices nationwide, including in Puerto Rico. Many TTB employees telework full time. To carry out its

mission, the Bureau relies on alcohol and tobacco tax specialists, analysts, attorneys, auditors, chemists,

investigators,labeling specialists, writers, and other professionals.

https://www.ttb.gov/careers
Among 420 agency subcomponents, the TTB placed 4th in the Partnership for Public Service's 2019 Best Places To

Work rankings!

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/TR40

Consumer Protection
The TTB protects the public by promulgating rules and regulations, collecting information on suspicious activities, and

helping to create and enforce laws that promote industry compliance.

https://www.ttb.gov/consumer | Email: Market.Compliance@ttb.gov

Contact Information
The "Contact the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau" web page contains phone numbers and links to

relevant online resources.

https://www.ttb.gov/about-ttb/contact-us
Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the TTB recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/alcohol-and-tobacco-tax-and-trade-bureau

Fraud Tipline
To report fraud, diversion, and illegal activity by producers, importers, or wholesalers of alcohol and tobacco, contact

the Bureau's tipline. Phone, 855-882-8477. TTD, 202-882-9914.

https://www.ttb.gov/contact-id | Email: tips@ttb.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The TTB adheres to the policy and disclosure regulations of the Department of the Treasury for implementing the

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) consistently and uniformly and for providing maximum allowable disclosure of

agency records upon request. Requests are processed within the time limits defined by the FOIA.

https://www.ttb.gov/foia
The TTB's website has an electronic reading room containing materials that the FOIA requires the Bureau to maintain.

Some records are accessible, by appointment, in the public reading room located at 1310 G Street NW., Washington,

DC 20005. Phone, 202-882-9904.

https://www.ttb.gov/foia/electronic-reading-room

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The TTB posts answers to FAQs.

http://www.ttb.gov/faqs | Email: TTBInternetQuestions@ttb.gov

Glossary
The TTB maintains a glossary on its website.

https://www.ttb.gov/glossary/glossary-a

Language Links
Information is available on the TTB website in Chinese, Spanish, and French.


In Chinese

https://www.ttb.gov/itd-chinese-index/welcome
En Español

https://www.ttb.gov/itd-spanish-index/enespanol
En Français

https://www.ttb.gov/itd-french/welome

Name that Grape
Using a grape variety name on an American wine label is optional. Nevertheless, many wineries and bottlers show this

information on their labels. The TTB designed its "Grape Variety Designations on American Wine Labels" web page to

help explain the rules.
https://www.ttb.gov/wine/grape-variety-designations-on-american-wine-labels
The TTB Administrator has approved a list of grape variety names for use as American wine type designations. This list

has been assigned to "Subpart J—American Grape Variety Names" of part 4 in 27 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=58ae6192e0aa4245e7ebe64227e4d126&mc=true&node=pt27.1.4&rgn=div5#sp27.1.4.j

National Revenue Center
The National Revenue Center operates a call center that is open on weekdays, 8 a.m.–11:30 a.m. and 12:30 p.m.–5

p.m., eastern standard time. It can provide information on applications, claims, filing excise tax returns, permits, and

other tax collection topics. Phone, 877-882-3277.

https://www.ttb.gov/offices/national-revenue-center

News / Events
The TTB posts newsletters, press releases, and other newsworthy items on its website.

https://www.ttb.gov/press-room/news-and-events

Online Help Center
The "Online Help Center" web page has links to information that is relevant for TTB online applications and tools for

making certain transactions with TTB easier to complete online.

https://www.ttb.gov/about-ttb/online-help-center

Publications
The "Publications" web page provides convenient access to TTB publications that are found on various pages of the

website.

https://www.ttb.gov/publications

Resources for Research
The "Research Resources" web page provides convenient access to information on the regulatory process, the laws

and regulations that the TTB enforces, and on other subjects. It also has industry statistics and historical information.

https://www.ttb.gov/researcher-resources

Startup Tutorial
The TTB posted a tutorial on its website to help entrepreneurs get started in the beer, distilled spirits, tobacco, and

wind industries.

https://www.ttb.gov/industry-startup-tutorial

Statistics / Data
The "TTB Statistics and Data" web page provides convenient access to accurate and timely statistics and data. The

page has statistics on industry production and operations, TTB tax collections, and processing times for applications,

labeling approval, permits, and requests for information. It also has tax rates and analysis tools like conversion charts

and the Bureau's formula approval tool.

https://www.ttb.gov/statistics
        The above Sources of Information were updated 4–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                             Bureau of Engraving and Printing




The United States Government Manual




     BUREAU OF ENGRAVING AND PRINTING
    Fourteenth and C Streets SW., Washington, DC 20228


    202-874-4000

    http://www.moneyfactory.com


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Leonard R. Olijar


      Deputy Director                                                                       (vacancy)
http://www.moneyfactory.com/about/officeofthedirector.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 04–2021.



The Bureau of Engraving and Printing operates on basic authorities conferred by act of July 11, 1862 (31 U.S.C. 303),

and on additional authorities contained in past appropriations made to the Bureau that are still in force. A revolving
fund established in 1950, in accordance with Public Law 81–656, finances the Bureau's operations. The Secretary of the

Treasury selects the Director who heads the Bureau.


The Bureau designs, prints, and finishes all of the Nation's paper currency and many other security documents,

including White House invitations and military identification cards. It also is responsible for advising and assisting

Federal agencies in the design and production of other Government documents that, because of their innate value or

for other reasons, require security or counterfeit-deterrence characteristics.


The Bureau also operates a second currency manufacturing plant at 9000 Blue Mound Road, Fort Worth, TX. Phone,

817-231-4000.

https://www.moneyfactory.gov/about.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that BEP records have been

assigned to record group 318.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/318.html?_ga=2.91357530.1147691139.1619118271-
898747230.1618953560

Business Opportunities
For information on contracts and small business activities, visit the "Doing Business with the BEP" Web page or contact

the Office of Acquisition. Phone, 202-874-2065.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/about/dobusinesswithbep.html

Career Opportunities
The BEP relies on acquisition specialists, administrative staff, attorneys, chemists, engineers, police officers, security

specialists, and other professionals to carry out its mission.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/about/careers.html
Among 420 agency subcomponents, the BEP placed 113th in the Partnership for Public Service's 2019 Best Places To

Work rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/TRAI

Contact Information
Email and postal addresses and phone numbers for the BEP facilities in Washington, DC, and Fort Worth, TX, are
posted on the "Contact Us" web page.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/contactus.html

Currency Production
The production of U.S. currency involves highly trained and skilled craftspeople, specialized equipment, and a

combination of traditional old world printing techniques merged with sophisticated, cutting edge technology. To learn

more about the process, visit the "How Money is Made" Web page.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/uscurrency/howmoneyismade.html

Educational Resources
The U.S. currency education program offers free educational and training resources online.

https://uscurrency.gov/resource-center

Federal Register
Documents that the BEP recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/engraving-and-printing-bureau

Federal Reserve
The BEP provides answers to some common questions about the Federal Reserve.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/about-the-fed.htm

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
All Federal agencies, including the BEP, create and receive records when carrying out their missions. The FOIA gives

the right to access executive branch agency records to the public. The BEP makes available, upon written request,

records or extracts of records in accordance with the FOIA, the Privacy Act, and certain regulations of the Department

of the Treasury. The FOIA contains, however, exemptions that shield some records from request and disclosure.

Phone, 202-874-2500. Fax, 202-874-2951.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/foia.html
The BEP maintains an electronic FOIA library.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/bepfoialibrary.html

History
The BEP posted a 11-page booklet in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading. "About BEP"

contains a section on the Bureau's history and has images illustrating the activities, history, and products of the Bureau.

https://moneyfactory.gov/images/about_bep_S508_web.pdf
The "Image Gallery" web page contains four sections: artwork, engravings, photographs, and products.

http://www.moneyfactory.com/resources/imagegallery.html

Lifespan of Paper Money
The estimated lifespans of one, five, ten, twenty, fifty and one hundred dollar notes are posted in an online table.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/how-long-is-the-life-span-of-us-paper-money.htm
     Mail Order Sales
     Uncut sheets of currency, engraved Presidential portraits, historical engravings of national landmarks, and other

     souvenirs and mementos are available for purchase by phone and online. Phone, 800-456-3408.

     https://catalog.usmint.gov

     News
     The BEP posts press releases online.

     https://www.moneyfactory.gov/presscenter/pressreleases.html

     Serial Numbers
     A short explanation of the serial numbers that are printed on notes is available in the "Resources" section.

     http://www.moneyfactory.com/resources/serialnumbers.html

     Tours
     BEP public tours have been suspended as a precaution to limit the spread of COVID–19.

     https://moneyfactory.gov/services/takeatour.html

        The above Sources of Information were updated 4–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                                  Bureau of the Fiscal Service




The United States Government Manual




     BUREAU OF THE FISCAL SERVICE
    401 Fourteenth Street SW., Washington, DC 20227


    202-874-6950

    http://www.fiscal.treasury.gov


      COMMISSIONER                                                                           Matthew J. Miller, Acting
Deputy Commissioners


  Accounting and Shared Services                                                          Dara Seaman, Acting


  Finance and Administration                                                              Dara Seaman, Acting


  Financial Services and Operations                                                       Jeffrey J. Schramek

https://www.fiscal.treasury.gov/about.html



The above list of key personnel was updated 4–2021.

The Bureau of the Fiscal Service provides central payment services to Federal program agencies, operates the Federal

Government's collections and deposit systems, provides Governmentwide accounting and reporting services, manages

the collection of delinquent debt owed to the Federal Government, borrows the money needed to operate the Federal

Government, accounts for the resulting public debt, and gives reimbursable support to Federal agencies.


Accounting
The Fiscal Service gathers and publishes Governmentwide financial information that is used by the public and private

sectors to monitor the Government's financial status and establish fiscal and monetary policies. These publications

include the "Daily Treasury Statement," "Monthly Treasury Statement," "Treasury Bulletin," "U.S. Government Annual

Report," and "Financial Report of the U.S. Government."


Collections
The Fiscal Service administers the world's largest collection system, processing more than 400 million transactions

through the support of six Federal Reserve Banks and a network of over 100 financial institutions. In Fiscal Year 2012,

the Fiscal Service collected over $3.16 trillion in Federal revenues from individual and corporate income tax deposits,

customs duties, loan repayments, fines, proceeds from leases, as well as from other revenue sources.


The Fiscal Service and Internal Revenue Service manage the Electronic Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS), which

allows individuals and businesses to pay Federal taxes online. The EFTPS website has printable acknowledgment

features for documenting transactions, advance payment scheduling, and payment history access.


The Treasury Offset Program is one of the methods used to collect delinquent debt. The Fiscal Service uses the

program to withhold Federal payments, such as Federal income tax refunds, Federal salary payments, and Social

Security benefits, to recipients with delinquent debts, including past-due child support obligations and State and

Federal income tax debt.


Debt Financing
The Bureau auctions and issues Treasury bills, notes, and bonds and manages the sales and redemption of savings

bonds. It provides daily and other periodic reports to account for the composition and size of the debt. In addition, the

Bureau implements the regulations for the Government securities market. These regulations provide for investor
protection while maintaining a fair and liquid market for Government securities.


Do Not Pay
The Do Not Pay Business Center has a two-part vision for programs administered or funded by the Federal

Government: to help prevent and stop improper payments from being made and to identify and mitigate fraud, waste,

and abuse. The goal of the program is to integrate Do Not Pay into existing business processes by providing agencies

with access to current data that are relevant for making an award or payment decision.


Electronic Commerce
Through its electronic money programs, the Fiscal Service offers new payment and collection technologies to help

Federal agencies modernize their cash management activities. Examples include stored-value cards used on military

bases, point-of-sale check conversion, and online credit card collection programs.


Payments
Each year, the Fiscal Service disburses more than one billion non-Defense payments to a wide variety of recipients,

such as those individuals who receive Social Security, IRS tax refunds, and veterans' benefits. In Fiscal Year 2012, the

Fiscal Service issued more than $2.4 trillion in payments, 88 percent of which were issued electronically.


Shared Services
The Administrative Resource Center delivers franchise services on a reimbursable basis to more than 85 Treasury and

Federal Government agencies. The Center provides services in six areas: financial management, investment

accounting, human resources, information technology, procurement, and travel.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The Fiscal Service's website has an alphabetical and comprehensive list of links to the Bureau's major programs and

services.

https://fiscal.treasury.gov/all-programs-services.html

Career Opportunities
The Fiscal Service relies on accountants, administrators, business and finance experts, information technology

specialists, and others to carry out mission.

https://www.fiscal.treasury.gov/careers
Among 411 agency subcomponents, the Fiscal Service placed 50th in the Partnership for Public Service's 2020 Best

Places To Work rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/TRFD

Do Not Pay
The Do Not Pay Business Center supports Federal agencies in their efforts to reduce the number of improper

payments. Data, information, and resources are available on its website.

https://fiscal.treasury.gov/DNP

Electronic Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS)
The EFTPS professionals post answers to frequently asked questions (FAQs) online.

https://www.eftps.gov/eftps/direct/FAQGeneral.page

Federal Register
Documents that the Fiscal Service recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/bureau-of-the-fiscal-service

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives the right to request information from the Federal Government's executive branch agencies to any

person. It is sometimes referred to as the law that keeps citizens in the know about their Government. The Fiscal

Service posts a lot of information on its website for the public's benefit and convenience. Before submitting a FOIA

request in writing, information seekers should search the website for the desired information. It may be accessible

immediately and free of charge.

https://www.fiscal.treasury.gov/foia.html
The Fiscal Service maintains an electronic reading room to support the FOIA.

https://www.fiscal.treasury.gov/foia-readingroom.html

Glossaries
A governmentwide treasury account symbol glossary is available online.

https://fiscal.treasury.gov/gtas/glossary.html
The EFTPS website has a glossary of terms and common acronyms.

https://www.eftps.gov/eftps/direct/HelpGlossary.page
The Treasury Direct website has a glossary of terms.

http://www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/research/res_glossary/glossary.htm

Government-to-Government Shared Services
The Administrative Resource Center provides Federal agencies with cost-effective, customer-focused, responsive

administrative support.

https://arc.fiscal.treasury.gov

History
A short history of the Fiscal Service is available at the bottom of the "About Us" webpage.

https://www.fiscal.treasury.gov/about.html
The Treasury Direct website uses historical images to tell the story of U.S. Savings Bonds from their introduction in

1935 to the second decade of the 21st century.

https://www.treasurydirect.gov/timeline.htm?src=td&med=banner&loc=consumer
     News
     The Fiscal Service posts news items and press releases online.

     https://www.fiscal.treasury.gov/fsnews/fs_news.htm

     Public Debt Outstanding
     The Treasury Direct website has monthly statements of the public debt. For example, on October 31, 2021, the total

     public debt outstanding was approximately $28,908,765,000,000.

     https://www.treasurydirect.gov/govt/reports/pd/mspd/mspd.htm

     Reports / Publications
     The monthly "Statement of the Public Debt of the United States" and "Treasury Statement of Receipts and Outlays of

     the U.S. Government," as well as the annual "Financial Report of the U.S. Government," and other publications are

     available on the Fiscal Service's website.

     https://fiscal.treasury.gov/reports-statements

     Savings Bonds
     Savings bonds may be purchased and held in an online account. Current rate information is available online or by

     calling 800-487-2663. Requests for information on all series of savings bonds, savings notes, and retirement plans or

     individual retirement bonds should be addressed to the Bureau of the Fiscal Service, Division of Customer Assistance,

     PO Box 7012, Parkersburg, WV 26106-7012. Phone, 304-480-7711.

     https://www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/products/prod_eebonds_glance.htm

     Treasury Securities
     For information on the purchase of Treasury bills, bonds, and notes, contact the Bureau of the Fiscal Service, Division

     of Customer Assistance, PO Box 7015, Parkersburg, WV 26106-7015. Phone, 800-722-2678.

     http://www.treasurydirect.gov/indiv/products/products.htm

        The Sources of Information were updated 11–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act
No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                  Internal Revenue Service




The United States Government Manual




     INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE
    1111 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20224


    202-622-5000

    http://www.irs.gov


      COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE                                                      Charles P. Rettig


      Chief of Staff                                                                        Kevin Q. McIver
https://www.irs.gov/about-irs/todays-irs-organization



Deputy Commissioners


  Operations Support                                                                          Jeffrey Tribiano


  Services and Enforcement                                                                    Sunita Lough




  The above list of key personnel was updated 7–2021.



The Office of the Commissioner of Internal Revenue was established by act of July 1, 1862 (26 U.S.C. 7802). The Internal

Revenue Service (IRS) administers and enforces the internal revenue laws and related statutes, except those relating to

alcohol, tobacco, firearms, and explosives. It collects the proper amount of tax revenue, at the least cost to the public,

by efficiently applying the tax law with integrity and fairness. The IRS aims for the highest possible degree of voluntary

compliance in accordance with the tax laws and regulations; advises the public of their rights and responsibilities;

determines the extent of compliance and the causes of noncompliance; properly administers and enforces the tax

laws; and continually searches for and implements new, more efficient ways of accomplishing its mission. The IRS

ensures satisfactory resolution of taxpayer complaints; provides taxpayer service and education; determines, assesses,

and collects internal revenue taxes; determines pension plan qualifications and exempt organization status; and

prepares and issues rulings and regulations to supplement the provisions of the Internal Revenue Code.


Most of the collected revenues depend on the individual income tax and the social insurance and retirement taxes.

Other major revenue sources are corporate income, excise, estate, and gift taxes. The 16th Amendment of the

Constitution, ratified on February 3, 1913, gave Congress the authority to levy taxes on the income of individuals and

corporations.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
Information on and resources for doing business with the IRS are available on its "Procurement" Web page.

https://www.irs.gov/about-irs/procurement | Email: AWSSPROCCustomerService@irs.gov

Career Opportunities
To carry out its mission, the IRS relies on accountants, appeals officers, artificial intelligence analysts, attorneys, budget

analysts, computer research analysts, contact representatives, data transcribers, engineers, human resources

specialists, information technology specialists, internal revenue agents and officers, mathematical statisticians,

operations research analysts, policy analysts, program analysts, risk analysts, special agents, tax compliance officers, tax

examiners, tax law specialists, and other professionals.
https://jobs.irs.gov
In 2020, the IRS ranked 223d among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TR93

Charities / Nonprofits
Tax information for charities and nonprofit organizations is available online.

https://www.irs.gov/charities-and-nonprofits

Contact Information
At the bottom of its "Let Us Help You" web page, the IRS posts phone numbers for those who seek assistance.

https://www.irs.gov/help/telephone-assistance

Forms / Publications
Current forms, instructions, and publications may be downloaded from the IRS's website.

https://www.irs.gov/forms-instructions

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
In 1966, President Lyndon B. Johnson's approval of the FOIA gave the right to access documents or records belonging

to the executive branch of the Federal Government to any person. The statute is based on the presumption that the

Government and its information belong to the public. The IRS may withhold, however, documents or records shielded

from disclosure by one of the statute's nine exemptions, and it must withhold them when disclosure is prohibited by

law.

https://www.irs.gov/uac/irs-freedom-of-information
The IRS maintains an online library whose contents are arranged by subject category.

https://www.irs.gov/privacy-disclosure/foia-library

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The IRS posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.irs.gov/faqs

Identity Theft
The IRS responds to tax-related identity theft with an aggressive strategy of prevention, detection, and victim

assistance. The IRS continues to make progress against this crime, and it remains one of the agency's highest priorities.

The IRS is committed to helping victims of identity theft resolve their cases as quickly as possible.

https://www.irs.gov/identity-theft-central

Language Resources
Assistance in additional languages is available on the "Languages" web page.

https://www.irs.gov/help/languages

News
The IRS posts news items online.

https://www.irs.gov/newsroom

Reading Rooms
Public reading rooms are located in the national office and in each territory office.


Retirement Plans
The IRS website has resources for and a trove of information on retirement plans.

https://www.irs.gov/retirement-plans

Tax Assistance
The IRS provides taxpayers with year-round tax information and assistance, primarily through its website and toll-free

telephone system. Answers to many tax-related questions can be found on the IRS's website. The toll-free telephone

numbers are listed in local telephone directories and in the annual tax form packages. The telephone system can

accommodate the needs of taxpayers who are deaf or hearing-impaired. Taxpayers may also visit IRS offices to find

answers to their tax questions. Individual preparation is available for handicapped or other individuals unable to use

the group preparation method. Tax assistance in a foreign language is also available at many locations.

https://www.irs.gov/help/telephone-assistance
To find the nearest taxpayer assistance center, type a ZIP Code in the text box of the online locator tool. Before going

to a taxpayer assistance center for help, call and schedule an appointment.

https://apps.irs.gov/app/officeLocator/index.jsp

Taxpayer Advocate Service
Each district has problem resolution personnel to address taxpayer complaints that cannot be resolved through

regular channels.

https://www.irs.gov/advocate

Taxpayer Rights
The taxpayer bill of rights is available on the IRS's website.

https://www.irs.gov/taxpayer-bill-of-rights

Tax Statistics
The IRS posts articles, data, and tables that describe and measure elements of the U.S. tax system.

https://www.irs.gov/statistics

Tax Tools
Tax tools are available for individual taxpayers, businesses, and tax professionals on the "Tools" web page.

https://www.irs.gov/help/tools

Where's My Refund?
Once the IRS processes a tax filer's return and approves a refund, he or she can check the refund date online. The IRS

usually issues a refund in fewer than 21 days after receiving a tax filer's return. Some returns, however, require
     additional review and, therefore, additional time to process.

     https://www.irs.gov/refunds

        The above Sources of Information were updated 7–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                         Office of the Comptroller of the Currency




The United States Government Manual




     OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER OF THE CURRENCY
    400 7th Street SW., Washington, DC 20219


    202-649-6800

    http://www.occ.gov


      COMPTROLLER                                                                           Rodney E. Hood, Acting


    https://www.occ.gov/about/who-we-are/leadership/bio-michael-hsu.html

      Senior Deputy Comptrollers                                                            Beverly Cole
                                                                                              Gregory J. Coleman


                                                                                              Jay Gallagher


                                                                                              Grovetta N. Gardineer


                                                                                              Larry L. Hattix


                                                                                              Minh-Hai Tan-Lam


                                                                                              (vacancy)


https://www.occ.gov/about/who-we-are/leadership/index-leadership.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) was created on February 25, 1863 (12 Stat. 665), as a bureau of

the Department of the Treasury. In 1929, with the issuance of the last national bank notes, the OCC essentially became

an organization of national bank examiners with a singular mission: to maintain the safety and soundness of the banks

under its supervision. In 2011, when the Office of Thrift Supervision integrated into the OCC, the bureau also assumed

responsibility for regulating Federal savings associations, also referred to as Federal thrifts.

https://www.loc.gov/collections/united-states-statutes-at-large/about-this-collection/73rd-congress/session-
2/c73s2ch668.pdf
The Comptroller of the Currency, whom the President appoints to a 5-year term by the advice of the Senate and with

its consent, administers the Federal banking system and serves as the chief officer of the OCC and as a director of the

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.


The OCC's statement of organization has been codified in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) and assigned to part

4 of 12 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=7c57a800de8e85e36874c72aa364ac10&mc=true&node=pt12.1.4&rgn=div5
A number of departments and offices that are under the leadership of the Comptroller and senior deputy comptrollers

provide the organizational structure for carrying out the OCC's mission.

https://occ.gov/about/who-we-are/organizations/index-organization.html

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material affecting the Comptroller of the Currency has been consolidated and codified in the United States

Code (U.S.C.). This material has been assigned to the first chapter, sections 1–16, of 12 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title12/chapter1&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that are associated with the Comptroller of the Currency have been consolidated and codified in

the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). These rules and regulations have been assigned to the first chapter, parts 1–
199, of 12CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=9239dee7caf69de5910e02babdd4547c&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title12/12chapterI.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The OCC regulates national banks and Federal thrifts by examining them; approving or denying applications for new

charters, branches, capital, and other changes in corporate or banking structure; taking enforcement actions—

removing officers and directors, negotiating agreements to change practices, and issuing cease and desist orders and

civil monetary penalties—when national banks and Federal thrifts fail to comply with laws and regulations or when

they engage in unsound practices; and issuing rules, regulations, interpretations, and corporate decisions that govern

investments, lending, and other practices.


The bureau supervises over 1,100 national banks, Federal savings associations, and Federal branches, including their

trust activities and overseas operations. A nationwide team of bank examiners works under the supervision of four

district offices. National banks and Federal thrifts pay for their examinations, as well as for the processing of their

corporate applications.


Assessments on national banks and Federal savings associations cover most OCC operating expenses. The OCC also

benefits from some investment income, primarily from U.S. Treasury securities.

https://occ.gov/about/what-we-do/index-what-we-do.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Alphabetical Topics List
Online visitors may browse the contents of the "Topics" web page by using an alphabetized list or by subject area.


Annual Reports
OCC Annual Reports provide Congress with an overview of the condition of the federal banking system as well as the

OCC's priorities and initiatives. Each annual report is available online in the Portable Document Format (PDF) for

downloading, starting with the year 2003. Earlier annual reports are also available.


Answers / Solutions
OCC's "HelpWithMyBank" website has information and resources to help customers of national banks and Federal

savings associations find answers to questions and solutions for problems.


Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that OCC records have been

assigned to record group 101.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/101.html?_ga=2.154427440.926928378.1628716780-
2085205018.1628716780

Bulletins
Starting with the year 1994 and continuing to the present, OCC bulletins are accessible online. Rescinded and some

pre-1994 bulletins are also included in the collection.

https://occ.gov/news-events/newsroom/index.html?nr=Bulletin

Business Opportunities
Procurement awards typically fall within the following service categories: computer-related services; computer facilities

management services; computer systems design services; data processing, hosting, and related services; real estate

agent and broker services; insurance agency and brokerage services; and administrative management and general

management consulting services.

https://occ.gov/about/connect-with-us/doing-business-with-the-occ/index-doing-business-with-the-occ.html | Email:
OCCAcquisitionManagement@occ.treas.gov

Career Opportunities
The OCC relies on accountants, attorneys, economists, financial analysts, human resources specialists, information

technology specialists, project management analysts, and other professionals, particularly bank examiners, to carry out

its mission. For more information, contact the Director for Human Resources Operations. Phone, 202-649-6590. Fax,

202-649-5998.

https://careers.occ.gov/index.html
National bank examiners work to ensure the safety and soundness of America's national banking system, to provide

fair access to financial services and equal treatment, and to establish and maintain a flexible regulatory framework that

allows the Nation's banks to be competitive. The OCC generally hires examiners at the entry level through college

recruitment.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RPrQmlcF0s0
In 2020, the OCC ranked 87th among 411 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TRAJ

Consumer Protection
The OCC posts information and resources on its website to protect consumers.

https://occ.gov/topics/consumers-and-communities/consumer-protection/index-consumer-protection.html

Contact Information
The "Contact the OCC" web page has informational resources for contacting the agency.

https://occ.gov/about/connect-with-us/contact-the-occ/index-contact-the-occ.html

Customer Complaints
An online form is available for submitting a complaint against a national bank or Federal savings association.

https://appsec.helpwithmybank.gov/olcc_form/intro.aspx

District and Field Offices
Contact information for district and field offices is available online.
https://occ.gov/about/who-we-are/locations/index-locations.html

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the OCC recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/comptroller-of-the-currency

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA serves as the vehicle for obtaining Federal agency documents and records. The statute does contain,

however, nine exemptions and three special law enforcement exclusions that shield some documents and records, or

parts of them, from disclosure.

https://www.occ.gov/about/connect-with-us/foia/index-foia.html
The electronic reading room contains documents that attract public interest and have been the subject of FOIA

requests in the past.

https://foia-pal.occ.gov/app/ReadingRoom.aspx

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
Answers to FAQs on checking accounts, credit cards, credit reports, mortgages, overdraft fees, and more are posted

on the "HelpWithMyBank" website.

https://www.helpwithmybank.gov/help-topics/index-help-topics.html

Glossary
A dictionary of banking terms and phrases is available on the "HelpWithMyBank" website.

https://www.helpwithmybank.gov/dictionary/index-dictionary.html
A list of abbreviations and acronyms is available on the OCC's website in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.occ.gov/annual-report/download-the-full-report/abbreviations.pdf

History
The OCC's role in the Federal banking system started in a tumultuous year, near the midpoint of the American Civil

War. On January 1, 1863, President Abraham Lincoln emancipated over 3 million men, women, and children by signing

the Emancipation Proclamation. Fifty-five days later, he added his signature to the National Currency Act, which

established the OCC and charged it with responsibility for organizing and administering a system of nationally

chartered banks and a uniform national currency. After 1913, its mission increasingly centered on the safety and

soundness of national banks. To learn more about the agency's development over the past 155 years, see the

"Founding of the OCC and the National Banking System" web page.

https://occ.gov/about/who-we-are/history/founding-occ-national-bank-system/index-founding-occ-national-
banking-system.html
On March 3, 1865, Congress enacted legislation to establish the Bureau of Refugees, Freedmen and Abandoned

Lands, which came to be known as the Freedmen's Bureau. On that same day, it chartered the Freedman's Savings

and Trust Company, or Freedman's Savings Bank (FSB), to meet a growing need for financial services among African

Americans. To learn more about the intertwining histories of the OCC and FSB, read the online article by former OCC

historian Jesse Stiller.
https://www.occ.gov/about/what-we-do/history/freedman-savings-bank.html

Minority Outreach
The OCC's External Outreach and Minority Affairs division maintains a "Minority Outreach" web page.

https://www.occ.gov/topics/consumers-and-communities/minority-outreach/index-minority-outreach.html

News
The OCC posts news releases on its website.

https://occ.gov/news-issuances/news-releases/index.html

Publications
The "Publications" web page allows visitors to browse OCC publications by collection, subject area, or recent dates of

publication.

https://occ.gov/publications-and-resources/publications/index-publications.html

Public Information on Banks
Federal bank regulators post public information on individual banks. The OCC's website provides convenient access to

the websites of these regulators.

https://occ.gov/about/contact-us/public-information/public-information.html
The Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council's website has a searchable database for identifying the Federal

bank regulatory agency that oversees a particular bank or financial institution.

https://www.ffiec.gov/consumercenter/default.aspx

Site Map
The careers section has a site map of its web pages.

https://careers.occ.gov/sitemap/sitemap-page.html
The "HelpWithMyBank" website has its own site map.

https://www.helpwithmybank.gov/site-map/index-sitemap.html

Social Media
The OCC tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/usocc
The OCC has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/US-Comptroller-of-the-Currency-213254918823/
The OCC posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/OCCChannel#p/c/2BAA3C3A20C2630E

Tools
The "Tools" web page brings together in one place all of the tools that are available on the OCC website.

https://occ.gov/publications-and-resources/tools/index-tools.html

  The above Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                     United States Mint




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES MINT
    801 Ninth Street NW., Washington, DC 20220


    202-354-7200

    http://www.usmint.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              David J. Ryder


      Deputy Director                                                                       Francis O'Hearn, Acting
https://www.usmint.gov/about/directors-office



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2021.



The establishment of a mint was authorized by act of April 2, 1792 (1 Stat. 246). The Bureau of the Mint was established

by act of February 12, 1873 (17 Stat. 424), and recodified on September 13, 1982 (31 U.S.C. 304, 5131). The name was
changed to United States Mint by Secretarial order on January 9, 1984.


The primary mission of the Mint is to produce an adequate volume of circulating coinage for the Nation to conduct its

trade and commerce. The Mint also produces and sells numismatic coins, American Eagle gold and silver bullion coins,

and national medals. The Fort Knox Bullion Depository is the primary storage facility for the Nation's gold bullion.


The U.S. Mint maintains sales centers at the Philadelphia and Denver Mints and at its headquarters on 9th Street in

Washington, DC. Public tours are conducted, with free admission, at the Philadelphia and Denver Mints.

https://www.usmint.gov/about_the_mint/index.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Mint records have been

assigned to record group 104.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/104.html

Artists
The artistic infusion program enriches and invigorates coin and medal designs by contracting with a pool of American

artists from diverse backgrounds and having a variety of interests. These artists collaborate with the Mint's sculptor-

engravers to create and submit new designs for U.S. coins and medals.

https://www.usmint.gov/learn/artists

Bullion Dealers
The Mint's website has a locator tool for finding U.S. Mint bullion sellers by city and State or by ZIP Code.

http://catalog.usmint.gov/bullion-dealer-locator

Career Opportunities
The Mint offers a wide range of career opportunities. An innovative, progressive bureau in the Department of the

Treasury, it operates six facilities nationwide and employees professionals with backgrounds in financial management,

information technology, manufacturing, protection, sales and marketing, workforce solutions, and other fields.

https://www.usmint.gov/about/careers
Among 411 agency subcomponents, the Mint placed 148th in the Partnership for Public Service's 2020 Best Places To

Work rankings.
https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=TRAD

Coin of the Year
The Mint celebrated its 225th anniversary in 2017. To mark the occasion, it created the 2017 American Liberty 225th

Anniversary Gold Coin, which features a modern rendition of Lady Liberty. Emblematic figures of liberty have graced

American coins since the Mint's founding in 1792. The newest Lady Liberty is a modern rendition of this iconic figure,

who embodies equality and freedom, ideals that the Nation's Declaration of Independence enshrined.

https://catalog.usmint.gov/american-liberty-225th-anniversary-gold-coin-17XA.html?
cgid=null&q=coin%2520of%2520the%2520year&navid=search#q=coin%2520of%2520the%2520year&start=1

Contact Information
The Mint's "Contact Us" web page has phone numbers and postal addresses. It also provides convenient access to an

electronic "Contact Us" form that has a comment box.

https://catalog.usmint.gov/customer-service/contact-us.html | Email: usmint-support@usmcatalog.com

Customer Service
Mint employees work hard to provide exceptional customer service. To contact the Mint, with questions or concerns

about shopping, an order, or another matter, please use the "Live Chat" feature or call customer service. Answers to

questions also are provided on the "Frequently Asked Questions" web page. Phone, 800-872-6468.

https://catalog.usmint.gov/customerservice | Email: usmint-support@usmcatalog.com

Educational Resources
The Mint's website offers learning resources for children, educators, and parents.

https://www.usmint.gov/learn/educators

Facilities
The U.S. Mint operates four mints (CA, CO, NY, PA), one depository (KY), and maintains its headquarters in

Washington, DC.

https://www.usmint.gov/about/mint-tours-facilities

Federal Register
Documents that the Mint recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/united-states-mint

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded from

disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute.

https://www.usmint.gov/foia
The Mint's electronic reading room contains records that are frequently requested under the FOIA.

https://www.usmint.gov/foia/reading-room

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Mint posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://catalog.usmint.gov/customer-service/faqs/?_ga=2.162013182.373647902.1628186014-2053548025.1628186014

Glossary
The H.I.P. Pocket Change website features a coin glossary.

https://www.usmint.gov/learn/kids/collecting/coin-glossary

History
On April 2, 1792, the U.S. Congress passed the Coinage Act, establishing the first national mint in the United States.

Over two centuries later, one of the Federal Government's oldest agencies continues to serve the American public. To

learn more about the U.S. Mint, visit its "History" web page.

https://www.usmint.gov/learn/history
A timeline of the Mint that stretches from the 18th to 21st century is available online.

https://www.usmint.gov/learn/history/timeline-of-the-united-states-mint

How Are Coins Made?
An animated overview of the six-step coin manufacturing process—blanking, annealing, upsetting, striking, inspecting,

and counting and bagging—is available on the "Coins" web page..

https://www.usmint.gov/learn/kids/coins

Image Library
High-resolution images of coins and medals are available on the Mint's website. For information on the use of these

images, contact the Office of Licensing. Phone, 202-354-7350. Fax, 202-756-6585.

https://www.usmint.gov/news/image-library | Email: licensing@usmint.treas.gov

Medals
National medals commemorate significant historical events or sites and honor individuals whose superior deeds and

achievements have enriched American history or the world. Some national medals are bronze duplicates of

Congressional Gold Medals that Congress authorizes under separate Public Laws, and others are produced under the

Secretary of the Treasury's authority to strike them.

https://www.usmint.gov/learn/coin-and-medal-programs/medals

News
The Mint posts articles and press releases online. The Mint maintains a public inquiry phone line for its Office of

Corporate Communications. Phone, 202-354-7227.

https://www.usmint.gov/news | Email: inquiries@usmint.treas.gov

Online Resources
The "Website Resources" web page has a collection of helpful internal and external links.

https://www.usmint.gov/policies/website-resources

Production / Sales
     The Mint produces circulating coins for commerce, numismatic coins for collectors, and bullion coins for investors.

     Quantities are measured in terms of production figures when referring to circulating coins, sales figures when referring

     to numismatic products, and sales and mintage figures when referring to bullion.

     https://www.usmint.gov/about/production-sales-figures

     Reports
     Annual and special reports are available online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

     https://www.usmint.gov/about/reports

     Seigniorage
     The Mint returned nearly $550 million in seigniorage—the difference between the face value and the manufacturing

     cost of a circulating coin—to the Department of the Treasury's general fund in 2020. The Mint publishes seigniorage

     information each year in its annual report.

     https://www.usmint.gov/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/2020-Annual-Report.pdf

     Site Map
     The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

     https://www.usmint.gov/about/site-map

     Social Media
     The Mint maintains a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/UnitedStatesMint
     The Mint tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on its Twitter account.

     https://twitter.com/usmint
     The Mint posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/USMINT

        The above Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act
No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                    Administrative Conference of the United States




The United States Government Manual




     ADMINISTRATIVE CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES
    1120 Twentieth Street NW., Suite 706 South, Washington, DC 20036


    202-480-2080

    202-386-7190

    http://www.acus.gov | Email: info@acus.gov




    STAFF
 CHAIRMAN                                        Matthew L. Wiener, Acting

https://www.acus.gov/staff

 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR                              Matthew L. Wiener


 Research Director                               Reeve T. Bull


https://www.acus.gov/contacts/matthew-l-wiener

 CHIEF FINANCIAL AND OPERATIONS OFFICER          Harry M. Seidman


https://www.acus.gov/contacts/harry-m-seidman

 GENERAL COUNSEL                                 Shawne C. McGibbon


https://www.acus.gov/contacts/shawne-mcgibbon



COUNCIL


 CHAIR                                           Matthew L. Wiener, Acting


 Vice Chair                                      Matthew L. Wiener




 GOVERNMENT OFFICIAL                             Nicholas T. Matich IV




 PRIVATE CITIZENS                                Ronald A. Cass


                                                 Jeffrey M. Harris


                                                 Donald F. McGahn II


                                                 Michael H. McGinley


                                                 Theodore B. Olson


                                                 Jane C. Sherburne


                                                 Geovette E. Washington




                                                 (vacancy)
https://www.acus.gov/directory/council



The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2019.

The Administrative Conference of the United States develops recommendations for improving the fairness and

effectiveness of procedures by which Federal agencies administer regulatory, benefit, and other Government programs.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Administrative Conference of the United States (ACUS) was established as a permanent independent agency by

the Administrative Conference Act (PL 88–499) enacted in 1964. The Conference is the successor to two temporary

Administrative Conferences during the Eisenhower and Kennedy administrations.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-78/pdf/STATUTE-78-Pg615.pdf
The Conference ceased operations on October 31, 1995, due to termination of funding by Congress. From its

beginning in 1968 until its defunding in 1995, the ACUS adopted approximately 200 recommendations, based on

research and the deliberations of its members in an open process that encouraged public input. The ACUS published

a complete list of these recommendations in the "Federal Register" (60 FR 56312).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1995-11-08/pdf/95-27473.pdf#page=1
Congress reauthorized the Conference in 2004 and again in 2008. The 2004 legislation expanded its responsibilities to

include specific attention to achieving more effective public participation and efficiency, reducing unnecessary

litigation, and improving the use of science in the rulemaking process (5 U.S.C. 591–596). Funding was approved in

2009, and the Conference was officially reestablished in March 2010.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title5/part1/chapter5/subchapter5&edition=prelim
By statute, the Administrative Conference has no fewer than 75 and no more than 101 members, a majority of whom

are Government officials. The President appoints the Chairman of the Conference with the advice and consent of the

Senate for a 5-year term. The Council, which acts as an executive board, comprises the Chairman and 10 other

members whom the President appoints for 3-year terms. Federal officials named to the Council may not constitute

more than half of the total Council membership. The Chairman, the only full-time, compensated member of the

Conference, appoints members representing the private sector with the approval of the Council for 2-year terms.


The entire membership is divided into committees. Each committee is assigned a broad area of interest such as

adjudication, administration and management, judicial review, regulation, or rulemaking. The membership meeting in

plenary session constitutes the Assembly of the Conference, which by statute must meet at least once, and customarily

meets twice, each year.

https://www.acus.gov/history
The agency's organizational chart is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading on the

"Staff" web page.

https://www.acus.gov/sites/default/files/documents/ACUS%20Organization%20Chart_Oct%202019.pdf
  The Establishment and Organization paragraphs were updated 12–2019.




ACTIVITIES
The Chairman develops subjects for inquiry, and the Council approves them. Government and nongovernment

experts in administrative procedure often contribute to the development and approval process. The committees

conduct thorough reviews of these subjects for inquiry and propose draft recommendations, which are based on

supporting reports that expert consultants typically prepare for the ACUS.


Following the proposal process of the committees, the Council considers the supporting reports and the draft

recommendations. The Council may then place them on the agenda for an upcoming plenary session of the

Assembly. Members of the Assembly debate draft recommendations that the Council has placed on the agenda, and

the Assembly's voting members then vote on their final adoption. The general public may attend deliberations of the

committees and Assembly.


Recommendations adopted by the Conference may be addressed to administrative agencies, Congress, the President,

or the Judicial Conference. Most recommendations call for action on the part of affected agencies or for new

legislation. While a substantial number of recommendations have been implemented, implementation activities are

continually ongoing.


The Chairman may make independent inquiries into procedural matters, including matters proposed by individuals

inside or outside the Government. These inquiries help determine whether the problems should be made the subject

of Conference study in the interest of developing fairer or more effective or efficient procedures.


Upon the request of a department or agency head, the Chairman is authorized to advise and assist on matters of

administrative procedure. The Conference may collect information and statistics from departments and agencies and

publish reports and sourcebooks that it considers useful for evaluating and improving administrative processes. The

Conference also serves as a forum for the interchange among departments and agencies of information that may be

useful for improving administrative practices and procedures.


  The Activities were updated 12–2019.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that ACUS records have been

assigned to record group 451. The Guide is accessible online, but no description is associated with this record group.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/000.html

Assembly Membership
When the 101 statutory voting members of the ACUS meet in plenary session, they are referred to as the Assembly.

The Assembly comprises three types of voting members: Council members, Government members, and public

members. Nonvoting members—liaison representatives, special counsels, and senior fellows—may not make motions

during plenary sessions and are not reckoned as part of the Assembly.

https://www.acus.gov/members

Blog
"Administrative Fix" is the agency's official blog.

https://www.acus.gov/administrative-fix-blog

Calendar
A calendar of meetings and events is available online.

https://www.acus.gov/meetings-and-events/calendar

Career Opportunities
Current job openings and information on internships and the research fellow program are accessible on the

"Opportunities" web page.

https://www.acus.gov/opportunities

Committees
The ACUS currently has standing committees on adjudication, administration and management, judicial review,

regulation, and rulemaking.

https://www.acus.gov/committees

Documents
The ACUS maintains a database of electronic documents that are accessible and searchable.

https://www.acus.gov/documents/advanced-search

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA generally provides that any person has the right to obtain access to Federal agency records, except to the

extent that those records are shielded from disclosure by the FOIA or another statute. Formal FOIA requests are

unnecessary when seeking information that is publicly available. Before filing a formal FOIA request, an information

seeker should search the ACUS website for relevant documents that are already accessible in the public domain and

without charge. If the desired document cannot be found on the ACUS website, consider contacting the FOIA liaison.

Getting assistance prior to filing a formal request may shorten the response time. Phone, 202-480-2080.

https://www.acus.gov/foia

News
The ACUS posts news items on its "Latest News" web page.

https://www.acus.gov/newsroom

Press Kit
     The ACUS posted a press kit on its website.

     https://www.acus.gov/press-kit

     Publications
     Articles, books, papers, reports, and bibliographies are accessible online.

     https://www.acus.gov/publications

     Recommendations
     The ACUS maintains an online searchable database of recommendations. The 19 statements that the ACUS has

     adopted are also included in the database. A statement is adopted when the ACUS seeks to express its views on a

     matter without making a formal recommendation on the subject.

     https://www.acus.gov/recommendations

     Site Map
     The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

     https://www.acus.gov/sitemap

     Social Media
     The ACUS maintains a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/ACUSgov
     The ACUS tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/ACUSgov

     Staff Directory
     The ACUS maintains a staff directory on its website.

     https://www.acus.gov/directory/staff

        The Sources of Information were updated 12–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act
No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                 Central Intelligence Agency




The United States Government Manual




     CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
    Washington, DC 20505


    703-482-0623

    http://www.cia.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              John Ratcliffe


      Deputy Director                                                                       David S. Cohen
https://www.cia.gov/about/director-of-cia



Office of Inspector General


  Inspector General                                                                        Robin C. Ashton

https://www.ignet.gov/content/central-intelligence-agency



  The above list of key personnel was updated 3–2022.



The Central Intelligence Agency collects, evaluates, and disseminates vital information on economic, military, political,

scientific, and other developments abroad to safeguard national security.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On July 26, 1947, President Harry S. Truman approved Public Law 80–253, which is commonly cited as the National

Security Act of 1947 (61 Stat. 495). The Act established the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA).

https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/llsl//llsl-c80s1/llsl-c80s1.pdf
The President appoints the Director by the advice and with the consent of the Senate. The Director serves as the head

of the CIA and reports to the Director of National Intelligence (DNI) regarding the activities of the Agency.

https://www.cia.gov/about/director-of-cia
The "Organization" web page describes the Agency's structure.

https://www.cia.gov/about/organization

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
The National Security Act has been amended since its enactment in 1947 (50 U.S.C. 3001 et seq.). The CIA now

functions under the original Act, as amended; Executive Order 12333 of December 4, 1981; the Intelligence Reform and

Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004; and other laws, Executive orders, regulations, and directives.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2017-title50/pdf/USCODE-2017-title50-chap44.pdf
Rules and regulations that are relevant for accessing CIA records are found in 32 CFR 1900.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2018-title32-vol6/pdf/CFR-2018-title32-vol6-subtitleB-chapXIX.pdf

ACTIVITIES
The CIA uses human source collection and other means to gather intelligence; however, it neither carries out internal

security functions nor exercises police, subpoena, or other law enforcement powers. The Agency correlates, evaluates,

and disseminates national security intelligence. Outside the United States, beyond the Nation's borders, the CIA directs

and coordinates intelligence collecting by U.S. intelligence community elements that are authorized to engage in

human source collection.

https://www.cia.gov/about/mission-vision
In coordination with other departments, agencies, and authorized elements of the U.S. Government, the CIA ensures
that resources are used effectively and that adequate consideration is given to the risks, both to the United States and

to those involved in collecting intelligence abroad. The Agency carries out other intelligence-related tasks that are

necessary for safeguarding national security, as the President or the DNI may indicate. Under the direction of the DNI

and consistent with section 207 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980, the CIA coordinates relationships between elements

of the U.S. intelligence community and the security or intelligence services of foreign governments or international

organizations in matters of national security and clandestine intelligence.

https://www.cia.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that CIA records have been

assigned to record group 263.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/263.html

Arctic Ocean
From the "Transnational Issues" section, one learns that "record summer melting of sea ice in the Arctic has renewed

interest in maritime shipping lanes and sea floor exploration." Growth in maritime traffic and exploration make

international disputes over Arctic resources and access to them more likely. For example, Canada and the United

States cooperate in their efforts to survey the Arctic continental shelf, but have disagreements over the Beaufort Sea

and the Northwest Passage.

https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/oceans/arctic-ocean

Career Opportunities
To carry out its mission, the CIA relies on analysts, attorneys, engineers, graphic designers, foreign language

instructors, mechanics and truck drivers, physicians and psychiatrists, and other professionals.

https://www.cia.gov/careers

Contact Information
The CIA posts contact information on its website.

https://www.cia.gov/contact-cia

Environment
The "Environment—current issues" web page lists the most pressing and important environmental problems from

around the world.

https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/field/environment-current-issues

Federal Register
Documents that the CIA has published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/central-intelligence-agency
Flags
The "Flags of the World" web page has 249 images and descriptions of flags.

https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/references/flags-of-the-world/

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives a right to obtain access to Federal agency records to any person, except to a fugitive from the law.

Some records, or portions of them, are, however, shielded from disclosure by one or more of nine statutory

exemptions or by specific harm that disclosure may cause. The CIA shields classified national security information,

information relating to intelligence sources and methods, and organizational information from release under the FOIA.

An information seeker may submit a FOIA request for records by sending it to the FOIA Requester Service Center,

Central Intelligence Agency, Washington, DC 20505. A request also may be submitted by facsimile. Fax, 703-613-3007.

https://www.cia.gov/readingroom/foia_request
The CIA maintains an electronic reading room.

https://www.cia.gov/readingroom

History
President Harry S. Truman approved the National Security Act of 1947, creating a permanent central agency for

intelligence. His approval was not the beginning of the story: 6 years prior to the formal establishment of the CIA,

various renditions of an intelligence agency had occurred. To learn more of the story that underlies today's CIA, visit

the "History of the CIA" web page.

https://www.cia.gov/legacy/cia-history
The "Intelligence Events Timeline" web page provides convenient access to the leading national archive of declassified

intelligence artifacts, culture, and history.

https://www.cia.gov/legacy/intelligence-events-timeline

Labs
The CIA Labs program conducts multidisciplinary research, development, testing, and engineering to address new

challenges; to adapt, improve, or accelerate the production of existing solutions; and to solve scientific and

technological problems through innovation.

https://www.cia.gov/cia-labs

Language Skills
The Intelligence Language Institute is the premier language school in the U.S. Intelligence Community.

https://www.cia.gov/careers/language-opportunities/intelligence-language-institute

Maps
The CIA has posted a collection of 104 country maps on its website.

https://www.cia.gov/resources/cia-maps/explore-all-locations

Museum
The CIA Museum's online collection allows visitors to learn more about the Agency through an interactive timeline,
historical artifacts, and stories.

https://www.cia.gov/legacy/museum

News
The CIA posts press releases, recent events, speeches, and the Ask Molly column on its website.

https://www.cia.gov/stories/news | Email: media@ucia.gov

Publications
The "Publications" web page provides convenient access to material on intelligence history, international relations, the

Cold War, and other topics.

https://www.cia.gov/resources/publications

Political Parties
The "Political Parties and Leaders" web page provides a listing of significant political parties, coalitions, and electoral

lists.

https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook/field/political-parties-and-leaders

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse for content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.cia.gov/sitemap

Social Media
The CIA has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/Central.Intelligence.Agency
The CIA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/CIA
The CIA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/ciagov

Spy Kids
The "Spy Kids" website has materials that are suitable for K–5th grade, 6–12th grade, and parents and teachers. The

website's main sections are "Games," "Spy Dogs," and "Stories." A spy dog is a member of the CIA's K9 Corps, whose

dogs sniff out explosives and protect CIA officers and buildings from bombs and other explosive threats.

https://www.cia.gov/spy-kids

Study of Intelligence
The Center for the Study of Intelligence serves as a repository of unclassified intelligence articles, publications, and

scholarship.

https://www.cia.gov/resources/csi

World Factbook
For over 260 world entities, the CIA posts information on their histories, peoples and societies, governments,
     economies, energy sources, geographies, communications, modes of transportation, militaries, and transnational

     issues.

     https://www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook

        The Sources of Information were updated 3–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                         Commodity Futures Trading Commission




The United States Government Manual




     COMMODITY FUTURES TRADING COMMISSION
    1155 Twenty-first Street NW, Washington, DC 20581


    202-418-5000

    202-418-5514 (TTY)

    202-418-5521

    http://www.cftc.gov/index.htm




    Commissioners
 CHAIR                                                  Heath P. Tarbert




                                                        Rostin Behnam


                                                        Daniel M. Berkovitz


                                                        Dawn DeBerry Stump


                                                        Brian D. Quintenz

https://www.cftc.gov/About/Commissioners/index.htm



Divisions


 DIRECTORS


 Clearing and Risk                                      M. Clark Hutchison III


 Enforcement                                            James M. McDonald


 Market Oversight                                       Amir R. Zaidi


 Swap Dealer and Intermediary Oversight                 Joshua B. Sterling

https://www.cftc.gov/About/CFTCOrganization/index.htm



Offices


 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR                                     Anthony C. Thompson




 Chief Economist                                        Bruce Tuckman


 Chief Information Officer                              John L. Rogers


 General Counsel                                        Daniel J. Davis




 DIRECTORS
  External Affairs                                                                       Michael C. Short


  International Affairs                                                                  Mauricio Melara, Acting


  Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs                                              Ann Wright, Acting


  Minority and Women Inclusion                                                           Sarah J. Summerville

https://www.cftc.gov/Contact/index.htm



Office of Inspector General


  Inspector General                                                                      A. Roy Lavik

https://www.cftc.gov/About/OfficeoftheInspectorGeneral/index.htm



  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2019.



The Commodity Futures Trading Commission avoids systemic risk; fosters open, transparent, competitive, and financially

sound markets; and protects the market users and their funds, consumers, and the public from fraud, manipulation, and

abusive practices related to derivatives and other products that are subject to the Commodity Exchange Act.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATIONAL
On October 23, 1974, President Gerald R. Ford approved Public Law 93–463, which is commonly cited as the

Commodity Futures Trading Commission Act of 1974 (7 U.S.C. 2). The Act established the Commodity Futures Trading

Commission (CFTC), which became operational in April of 1975. The U.S. Congress renewed the CFTC's authority to

regulate futures trading in 1978, 1982, 1986, 1992, 1995, 2000, and 2008.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-88/pdf/STATUTE-88-Pg1389.pdf
In 2010, Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Public Law 111–203) gave the

CFTC new and expanded responsibilities and authorities for regulating the swaps marketplace.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-124/pdf/STATUTE-124-Pg1376.pdf
The President appoints the CFTC's five Commissioners by the advice and with the consent of the Senate. The President

designates one Commissioner, also by the Senate's advice and with its consent, to serve as the Chair. The

Commissioners serve staggered 5-year terms, and no more than three of them may belong to the same political party.

https://www.cftc.gov/About/Commissioners/index.htm
The Commission has nine major operating components: the Divisions of Market Oversight, Clearing and Risk, Swap

Dealer and Intermediary Oversight, Enforcement, and the Offices of the Executive Director, the General Counsel, the

Chief Economist, International Affairs, and Data and Technology. The Office of Inspector General is an independent

organizational unit at the CFTC.
The CFTC's statement of organization is found in 17 CFR 140.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/retrieveECFR?
gp=&SID=ad2cd54a43272e3456dfc1088505c4e4&mc=true&n=pt17.2.140&r=PART&ty=HTML
The CFTC posts it organizational chart online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.cftc.gov/media/2261/cftcorgchart071519/download



ACTIVITIES
The CFTC regulates trading on the U.S. futures and options markets that offer commodity futures and options

contracts, as well as the swaps marketplace in the United States. Oversight of the derivatives marketplace is

accomplished through various CFTC activities.


The CFTC oversees derivatives clearing organizations and other market participants in the clearing process, including

futures commission merchants, swap dealers, major swap participants, and large traders. The CFTC oversees the

registration and compliance of intermediaries and futures industry self-regulatory organizations, including U.S.

derivatives exchanges and the National Futures Association. It also oversees trade execution facilities and data

repositories, conducts surveillance, reviews new exchange applications, and examines existing exchanges to ensure

compliance with applicable core principles.

https://www.cftc.gov/About/MissionResponsibilities/index.htm
Exercising the agency's authority, its staff also investigates and prosecutes alleged violations of the Commodity

Exchange Act and CFTC regulations. Potential violations include fraud, manipulation, and other abuses concerning

commodity derivatives and swaps that threaten market integrity, market participants, and the general public.

https://www.cftc.gov/LawRegulation/CommodityExchangeAct/index.htm
Under the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, the CFTC develops and monitors compliance

with regulations addressing registration, business conduct standards, capital adequacy, and margin requirements for

swap dealers and major swap participants.

https://www.cftc.gov/LawRegulation/DoddFrankAct/index.htm



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
The Commission has recurring requirements for the following goods: furniture, office equipment and supplies, and

telecommunications equipment and supplies. It also has recurring requirements for copying and printing services and

minor construction.

http://www.cftc.gov/About/ProcurementOpportunities/index.htm

Career Opportunities
The Commission hires professionals with strong academic records and superior analytical and problem solving skills.

http://www.cftc.gov/About/Careers/index.htm
In 2018, the CFTC ranked 23d among 29 small Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places
To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/CT00

Climate-Related Market Risk
The CFTC has established a subcommittee to prepare a report that identifies and examines climate change-related

financial and market risks for the agency's Market Risk Advisory Committee. The climate-related market risk

subcommittee will bring experts from academia, industry, and the public sector together to identify and examine the

risks that climate change poses to the stability of the U.S. financial system. The subcommittee will propose future

actions for policymakers and market participants to consider for mitigating these risks.

https://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/PressReleases/7963-19

Cotton Futures
The "Cotton On-Call Report" shows the quantity of bought or sold call cotton on which the price has not been fixed,

together with the respective futures on which the purchase or sale is based. Call cotton refers to physical cotton

bought or sold, or contracted for purchase or sale at a price to be fixed later based upon a specified delivery month

future’s price.

https://www.cftc.gov/MarketReports/CottonOnCall/index.htm

Disciplinary History
Making the CFTC's disciplinary history accessible is part of the agency's ongoing effort to protect market participants

and the public from fraud, manipulation, and abusive practices.

https://www.cftc.gov/ConsumerProtection/DisciplinaryHistory/index.htm

Forms / Submissions
Forms and submissions information for designated contract markets, filing tips and complaints, future commissions

merchants, and ownership and control reporting are available online.

https://www.cftc.gov/Forms/index.htm

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives the right to request access to Federal agency records or information to any person. All agencies of the

U.S. Government must disclose records upon receiving a written request for them, except for records that the FOIA's

nine exemptions and three exclusions shield from disclosure. This right of access is enforceable in court.

http://www.cftc.gov/FOI/index.htm | Email: FOIAsubmissions@cftc.gov
In addition to maintaining a physical, onsite reading room in Washington, DC, the CFTC also has an electronic reading

room. Information seekers should see if the records that they seek are immediately available and accessible free of

charge in the electronic reading room before submitting a FOIA request.

https://www.cftc.gov/FOI/foiareadingrooms.html

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The "Ask CFTC" web page provides answers to some basic questions regarding the futures markets and how they

work, where to go for help, as well as answers to other FAQs.
https://www.cftc.gov/ConsumerProtection/EducationCenter/index.htm

Glossary
The online glossary defines specialized words and phrases that are used in the futures industry. Standard reference

works do not include some of them.

http://www.cftc.gov/ConsumerProtection/EducationCenter/CFTCGlossary/index.htm

History
Futures contracts for agricultural commodities have been traded in the country for more than 150 years. The Federal

Government has regulated them since the 1920s. When the CFTC was created in 1974, most futures trading took place

in the agricultural sector. Over the years, the futures industry has become increasingly varied and complex. To learn

more of the history of the futures trading industry and the Federal Government's role in regulating it, visit the "History

of the CFTC" web page.

https://www.cftc.gov/About/HistoryoftheCFTC/index.htm

LabCFTC
LabCFTC is the hub for the CFTC's engagement with financial technology innovators.

https://www.cftc.gov/LabCFTC/index.htm

Learning Resources
The Office of Consumer Outreach makes information and tools available to help consumers avoid fraud. The "Learning

Resources" web page has brochures, reports, videos, and a book to educate consumers on this topic.

https://www.cftc.gov/ConsumerProtection/Resources/index.htm | Email: consumers@cftc.gov
The "Avoid Fraud" web page has additional resources.

https://www.cftc.gov/ConsumerProtection/FraudAwarenessPrevention/index.htm

Money Laundering
A general outline of important anti-money laundering topics with links to general information and resources is

available on the CFTC website.

https://www.cftc.gov/IndustryOversight/AntiMoneyLaundering/index.htm

Press Room
The press room provides convenient access to news, podcasts, press releases, remarks, statements, testimonies,

webcasts, and information on public events.

http://www.cftc.gov/PressRoom/index.htm

Regional Offices
The Commission maintains regional offices in Chicago, IL, and New York, NY, where many of the Nation's designated

contract markets are located. Phone, 312-596-0700 (IL); Phone, 646-746-9700 (NY). A third regional office is located in

Kansas City, MO. Phone, 816-960-7700.


Site Map
     The Web site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

     http://www.cftc.gov/SiteMap/index.htm

     Swaps Report
     The "CFTC Swaps Report" is published every Wednesday at 3:30 p.m., unless otherwise noted.

     https://www.cftc.gov/MarketReports/SwapsReports/index.htm | Email: swapsreport@cftc.gov

     Virtual Currencies
     One of the most recent marketplace developments driving a lot of interest is the rise in prominence of virtual

     currencies, specifically bitcoin. The "Bitcoin and Other Virtual Currencies" web page has resources for market

     participants and customers on virtual currency and on the CFTC's role in overseeing this emerging innovation.

     https://www.cftc.gov/Bitcoin/index.htm

     Whistleblower Program
     The Commission gives monetary incentives to whistleblowers who report possible Commodity Exchange Act violations

     that lead to a successful enforcement action. The Commission also provides antiretaliation protections, confidentiality,

     and privacy.

     https://www.whistleblower.gov

        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                           Consumer Financial Protection Bureau




The United States Government Manual




     CONSUMER FINANCIAL PROTECTION BUREAU
    1700 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20552


    202-435-7000

    http://www.consumerfinance.gov




    Office of the Director
 DIRECTOR                                                             Kathleen L. Kraninger


 Deputy Director                                                      Brian Johnson, Acting




 Chief Communications Officer / Spokesperson                          John Czwartacki


 Chief of Staff                                                       Kirsten Sutton


 Principal Policy Director                                            Brian Johnson




 ASSOCIATE DIRECTOR




 ASSISTANT DIRECTORS




 {%blankline}

https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/the-bureau/about-director/

 Administrative Law Judge                                             Christine Kirby


 Ombudsman                                                            Wendy Kamenshine




Consumer Education and Engagement Division


 Policy Associate Director                                            Sheila Greenwood


 Associate Director                                                   Gail Hillebrand




 ASSISTANT DIRECTORS


 Community Affairs                                                    Daniel Dodd-Ramirez


 Consumer Engagement                                                  Gene Koo


 Consumer Response                                                    Christopher Johnson


 Financial Education                                                  Janneke Ratcliffe
 Financial Education—Students and Young Consumers                                   (vacancy)


 Older Americans                                                                    Stacy Canan


 Servicemember Affairs                                                              Patrick Campbell, Acting

https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/the-bureau/bureau-structure/consumer-education-engagement



External Affairs Division


 Policy Associate Director                                                          Anthony Welcher


 Associate Director                                                                 Zixta Martinez




 ASSISTANT DIRECTORS


 Advisory Board and Councils                                                        Delicia Hand


 Financial Institutions and Business Liaison                                        Daniel Smith


 Intergovernmental Affairs                                                          Cheryl Parker Rose


 Legislative Affairs                                                                Catherine Galicia


 Public Engagement and Community Liaison                                            Keo Chea

https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/the-bureau/bureau-structure/external-affairs



Legal Division


 General Counsel                                                                    Mary McLeod


 Principal Deputy General Counsel                                                   Richard Lepley




 DEPUTY GENERAL COUNSELS


 General Law and Ethics                                                             Sonya White


 Law and Policy                                                                     Stephen Van Meter


 Litigation and Oversight                                                           John Coleman
https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/the-bureau/bureau-structure/legal



Operations Division


 Chief Operating Officer                                                          Kate Fulton, Acting




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Administrative Officer                                                           Martin Michalosky


 Human Capital                                                                    Jeffrey Sumberg


 Information                                                                      Jerry Horton


 Financial                                                                        Elizabeth Reilly


 Procurement                                                                      David Gragan

https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/the-bureau/bureau-structure/operations



Research, Markets, and Regulations Division


 Policy Associate Director                                                        Thomas Pahl


 Associate Director                                                               David Silberman




 ASSISTANT DIRECTORS


 Card, Payment and Deposit Markets                                                William Wade-Gery


 Consumer Lending, Reporting and Collection Markets                               John McNamara


 Mortgage Markets                                                                 Mark McArdle


 Small Business Lending Markets                                                   Grady Hedgespeth


 Regulations                                                                      Kelly Cochran


 Research                                                                         Ron Borzekowski

https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/the-bureau/bureau-structure/research-markets-regulation

 Policy Associate Director                                                        Eric Blankenstein
  Associate Director                                                                    Christopher D'Angelo




  ASSISTANT DIRECTORS


  Enforcement                                                                           Kristen Donoghue




  Supervision Examinations                                                              Paul Sanford


  Supervision Policy                                                                    Peggy Twohig




  REGIONAL DIRECTORS


  Midwest region                                                                        John Schroeder


  Northeast region                                                                      Mitchell Kent


  Southeast region                                                                      James L. Carley


  West region                                                                           Edwin Chow




Office of Inspector General


  Inspector General                                                                     Mark Bialek

https://oig.federalreserve.gov/the-inspector-general.htm



The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2018.

The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) helps consumer finance markets work by making rules more effective,

by consistently and fairly enforcing those rules, and by empowering consumers to take more control over their economic

lives.


The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) is an independent Federal agency established by title X of the

Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2012 (12 U.S.C. 5491). The CFPB is headed by a

Director whom the President appoints and the Senate confirms.


Activities
The Bureau regulates the offering and provision of consumer financial products and services under Federal consumer

financial laws. It gives consumers the information they need to understand the terms of their agreements with financial

companies. It also makes regulations and guidance as clear and streamlined as possible so providers of consumer

financial products and services can understand and follow the rules without assistance.


The CFPB's principal activities center on writing rules, supervising companies, and enforcing Federal consumer financial

protection laws; restricting unfair, deceptive, or abusive acts or practices; taking consumer complaints; promoting

financial education; researching consumer behavior; monitoring financial markets for new risks to consumers; and

enforcing laws that prohibit discrimination and other unfair treatment in consumer finance.

http://www.consumerfinance.gov/the-bureau



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Blog
The CFPB maintains a blog on its website.

https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/blog/?
filter_blog_category=At+the+CFPB&filter_range_date_gte=&filter_range_date_lte=

Bureau Structure / Organizational Chart
The "Bureau Structure" web page offers visitors a two-dimensional representation of the CFPB's organizational

structure, which also includes the names of officials filling key leadership positions.

https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/the-bureau/bureau-structure

Business Opportunities
Information on doing business with the CFPB is available online.

http://www.consumerfinance.gov/doing-business-with-us

Career Opportunities
The CFPB posts new job openings online, as well as information on the application process and opportunities for

students and recent graduates.

http://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/careers | Email: jobs@consumerfinance.gov
In 2018, the CFPB ranked 26th among 27 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/FRFT

Consumer Help
The CFPB forwards financial product or service complaints to the company offering the product or service and then

works to get an appropriate response. A form for filing a complaint and a searchable complaint database are

accessible online. Assistance by phone is available on weekdays, excluding Federal holidays, 8 a.m.–8 p.m., eastern

standard time. Phone, 855-411-2372. TTY/TDD, 855-729-2372.

http://www.consumerfinance.gov/complaint
Data
The CFPB publishes research and posts consumer financial marketplace information online.

http://www.consumerfinance.gov/data-research

Educational Resources
Resources for educators, librarians, parents, and those who manage someone else's money are available online.

http://www.consumerfinance.gov/adult-financial-education

Fraud / Scams
The CFPB's online resources can help consumers prevent, recognize, and report scams and fraud.

https://www.consumerfinance.gov/consumer-tools/fraud

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
A FOIA request may be submitted by email, fax, or letter. The CFPB recommends using email for making a submission.

http://www.consumerfinance.gov/foia-requests/submit-request | Email: CFPB_FOIA@consumerfinance.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The CFPB website has clear and impartial answers to hundreds of financial questions. The topics covered include auto

loans, bank accounts and services, credit cards, credit reports and scores, debt collection, families and money, money

transfers, mortgages, payday loans, prepaid cards, and student loans.

https://www.consumerfinance.gov/ask-cfpb | Email: info@consumerfinance.gov

Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)
The CFPB's website features a 3-minute video that explains the purpose of the HMDA.

https://www.consumerfinance.gov/data-research/hmda

Invite the CFPB
Send an email to invite a CFPB employee to contribute to a publication or participate in a discussion, forum, or other

event.

Email: invitations2cfpb@consumerfinance.gov

Newsroom
Blog posts, press releases, and speeches are accessible online. An online subscription form is available to receive press

releases via email.

http://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/newsroom

Open Government
The CFPB supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

http://www.consumerfinance.gov/open-government

Organizational Chart
     The CFPB is currently revising its organizational chart.

     https://www.consumerfinance.gov/about-us/the-bureau/bureau-structure/

     Plain Writing
     CFPB editors and writers apply plain language principles in all of their consumer-oriented materials. They want to

     know if something on the CFPB website or in its printed materials is unclear.

     http://www.consumerfinance.gov/plain-writing | Email: CFPB_Plain_Writing_Act@consumerfinance.gov

     Publications
     CFPB publications, in English and Spanish, may be ordered in bulk online.

     http://promotions.usa.gov/cfpbpubs.html

     Social Media
     The CFPB maintains a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/CFPB
     The CFPB posts announcements and other newsworthy items on X.com.

     https://x.com/cfpb
     The CFPB posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/cfpbvideo

     Whistleblowers
     The CFPB wants to know about companies that may be breaking Federal consumer financial laws. A current or former

     employee of such a company, an industry insider who knows of such a company, or a competitor being unfairly

     undercut by such a company—people like these should report alleged violations to the CFPB. Phone, 855-695-7974.

     http://www.consumerfinance.gov/blog/the-cfpb-wants-you-to-blow-the-whistle-on-lawbreakers           |       Email:
     whistleblower@cfpb.gov
     http://www.consumerfinance.gov/contact-us | Email: info@consumerfinance.gov

        For further information, contact the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, 1700 G Street NW.,
        Washington, DC 20552. Phone, 202-435-7000.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility
Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                           Consumer Product Safety Commission




The United States Government Manual




     CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION
    4330 East-West Highway, Bethesda, MD 20814


    301-504-7923

    http://www.cpsc.gov




    COMMISSIONERS
 CHAIR                                                  Robert S. Adler, Acting

https://www.cpsc.gov/About-CPSC/Chairman/Robert-Adler

                                                        Dana Baiocco


                                                        Ann Marie Buerkle


                                                        Peter A. Feldman


                                                        Elliot F. Kaye


https://www.cpsc.gov/About-CPSC/Commissioners



INDEPENDENT OFFICES


 Directors


 Communications                                         Joseph Martyak


 Equal Employment Opportunity and Minority Enterprise   Brittany Woolfolk


 Legislative Affairs                                    Christopher Hudgins




 General Counsel                                        Patricia Hanz


 Secretary                                              Alberta Mills




OFFICES OF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR


 Executive Director                                     Mary T. Boyle




Operations Support


 Deputy Executive Director                              Monica Summitt




 Assistant Executive Director


 Information and Technology Services                    James C. Rolfes
 Chief Officers


 Financial                                                                     Jay Hoffman


 Information                                                                   James C. Rolfes




 Directors


 Facilities Services                                                           Mark Oemler


 Financial Management, Planning, and Evaluation                                Jay Hoffman


 Human Resources Management                                                    Donna M. Simpson




Safety Operations


 Deputy Executive Director                                                     DeWane Ray




 Assistant Executive Directors


 Compliance and Field Operations                                               Robert Kaye


 Hazard Identification and Reduction                                           Duane Boniface




 Directors


 International Programs                                                        Richard O'Brien


 Import Surveillance                                                           James Joholske




 Small Business Ombudsman                                                      Shelby Mathis

https://www.cpsc.gov/s3fs-public/cpscorgchartMM_081919_0.pdf?o.qIdWd.ny4Xw2xhWhRJT7Ju.5KEsS_5

 Inspector General                                                             Christopher W. Dentel


https://www.cpsc.gov/About-CPSC/Inspector-General
  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2019.



The Consumer Product Safety Commission protects the public by reducing the risk of injury and death from consumer

products.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On October 27, 1972, President Richard M. Nixon approved Public Law 92–573, which is commonly cited as the

Consumer Product Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 2051 et seq.). The Act established the Consumer Product Safety Commission

(CPSC) as an independent regulatory agency. The CPSC became operational on May 14, 1973.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-86/pdf/STATUTE-86-Pg1207.pdf
Thirty six years later, President George W. Bush approved the reauthorization and modernization of the CPSC by

signing the Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act of 2008 (PL 110–314) on August 14.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-122/pdf/STATUTE-122-Pg3016.pdf
The Commission comprises a maximum of five commissioners. The President appoints each commissioner by the

advice and with the consent of the Senate for a term of 7 years. The President also designates one commissioner to

serve as Chair. No more than three of the commissioners may be affiliated with the same political party (15 USC 2053).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title15/chapter47&edition=prelim
The CPSC implements provisions of the Flammable Fabrics Act (15 U.S.C. 1191), Poison Prevention Packaging Act of

1970 (15 U.S.C. 1471), Federal Hazardous Substances Act (15 U.S.C. 1261), Children's Gasoline Burn Prevention Act (15

U.S.C. 2056 note), Virginia Graeme Baker Pool and Spa Safety Act (15 U.S.C. 8001 et seq.), and an act of 2 August 1956

(15 U.S.C. 1211) prohibiting the transportation of refrigerators without door safety devices.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title15&edition=prelim
The CPSC's organization and functions are found in 16 CFR 1000.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
gp=&SID=09442eace6033ddfb202786dac3646bf&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title16/16CIIsubchapA.tpl
The agency's organizational chart is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading on the

"About CPSC" web page.

https://www.cpsc.gov/About-CPSC



ACTIVITIES
To protect the public from risk of injury, the CPSC requires manufacturers to report defects in products presenting

substantial hazards; conducts outreach programs for consumers, industry, and local governments; collects information

on consumer product-related injuries and maintains the National Injury Information Clearinghouse; conducts research

on consumer product hazards; and encourages and assists in the development of voluntary standards affecting the

safety of consumer products. When appropriate, the CPSC requires manufacturers to correct hazards associated with
specific consumer products already in circulation, establishes mandatory consumer product standards, and bans

hazardous products.

http://www.cpsc.gov/en/about-cpsc/national-injury-information-clearinghouse
The Commission also has a special project to reach as many Americans as possible with lifesaving safety information.

The Neighborhood Safety Network disseminates safety information to hard-to-reach populations by partnering with

other organizations already active within their communities.

http://www.cpsc.gov/en/safety-education/neighborhood-safety-network



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

All-Terrain Vehicles (ATVs)
ATVs are powerful, fast, and potentially dangerous. The CPSC posts ATV safety information online.

http://www.cpsc.gov/en/Safety-Education/Safety-Education-Centers/ATV-Safety-Information-Center

Annual Reports
The CPSC posts its annual reports online.

https://www.cpsc.gov/About-CPSC/Agency-Reports/Annual-Reports

Archived Records
The records of the CPSC are referenced in the "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United

States." The Guide is accessible online, and CPSC records have been assigned to Record Group 424.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/424.html

Blog
The CPSC maintains a blog on its "OnSafety" website.

https://onsafety.cpsc.gov

Career Opportunities
To carry out its mission, the CPSC relies on attorneys and paralegal specialists, compliance officers, economists,

engineers, IT specialists, product safety investigators, program analysts, statisticians, toxicologists and pharmacologists

and chemists, and other skilled professionals.

http://www.cpsc.gov/en/About-CPSC/Job
In 2018, the CPSC ranked 14th among 29 small agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/SK00

Contact Information
Contact information for specific offices and other public information are available on the CPSC's website.

https://www.cpsc.gov/About-CPSC/Contact-Information/Contact-Specific-Offices-and-Public-Information

Data
The CPSC makes it data, deliberations, and decisions accessible to consumers, developers, and stakeholders.

https://www.cpsc.gov/Data

Fire Safety
Several generations living in a home increases the need for fire safe practices. To learn more, download the

multigenerational fire safety toolkit from the "Neighborhood Safety Network Toolkit" web page.

https://www.cpsc.gov/safety-education/neighborhood-safety-network/toolkits/fire-safety

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The Electronic Freedom of Information Act Amendments of 1996 require Federal agencies to use electronic

information technology to foster access to and availability of FOIA documents.

https://www.cpsc.gov/Newsroom/FOIA | Email: cpsc-foia@cpsc.gov
The CPSC informs the public by using various means: local and national media coverage, publication of booklets and

product alerts, responses to FOIA requests, and the National Injury Information Clearinghouse. The agency also

maintains its public information center, website, and telephone hotline for the same purpose.

http://www.cpsc.gov/newsroom/foia/guide-to-public-information

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The CPSC posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.cpsc.gov/About-CPSC/Contact-Information

Hotline
The Commission operates a toll-free consumer product safety hotline in English and Spanish, on weekdays from 8 a.m.

to 5:30 p.m. Phone, 800-638-2772. TTY, 301-595-7054.


Injury Statistics
The CPSC posts injury statistics and technical reports by product category and by hazard category on its website.

https://www.cpsc.gov/Research--Statistics

Language Assistance
Read Spanish more easily than English? Visit the en Español version of the CPSC website.

https://www.cpsc.gov/es/SeguridadConsumidor
Read Vietnamese more easily than English? Visit the Tiếng Việt web pages of the CPSC website.

https://www.cpsc.gov/vi-VN/business-and-manufacturing-landing

Newsroom
The online newsroom features CPSC data, Freedom of Information Act documents, press statements, recent news

releases, videos, and a public calendar.

http://www.cpsc.gov/en/Newsroom

Open Government
The CPSC supports the Open Government initiative by promoting collaboration, participation, and transparency.
    https://www.cpsc.gov/About-CPSC/Agency-Reports/open | Email: feedback@cpsc.gov

    Recalls
    Six Federal agencies with different jurisdictions are collaborating to make the American people more aware of

    defective, hazardous, and unsafe products.

    http://www.recalls.gov

    Safety Publications
    Safety guides, safety alerts, and Neighborhood Safety Network posters are available online to download.

    https://www.cpsc.gov/Safety-Education/Safety-Guides/General-Information/Publications-Listing

    Site Map
    The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

    https://www.cpsc.gov/sitemap

    Social Media
    The CPSC has a Facebook account.

    https://www.facebook.com/USCPSC
    The CPSC tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/USCPSC
    The CPSC posts videos on its YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/uscpsc

    Swimming Pools / Spas
    Pool and spas safety information is available online.

    http://www.poolsafely.gov

    Toolkits
    The Neighborhood Safety Network has toolkits for all-terrain vehicle (ATV) safety, carbon monoxide (CO) awareness,

    child safety, multigenerational fire safety, and older adults, who are the fastest growing segment of the U.S.

    population.

    https://www.cpsc.gov/Safety-Education/Neighborhood-Safety-Network/Neighborhood-Safety-Network-Toolkits

        The Sources of Information were updated 10–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                     Corporation for National and Community Service




The United States Government Manual




     CORPORATION FOR NATIONAL AND COMMUNITY SERVICE
    250 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20525


    202-606-5000

    http://www.nationalservice.gov


      CHAIR                                                                                 Shamina Singh


      Vice Chair                                                                            Dean A. Reuter
Member                                              Richard Christman


Member                                              Romonia S. Dixon


Member                                              Victoria A. Hughes


Member                                              Eric P. Liu


Member                                              (vacancy)


Member                                              (vacancy)


Member                                              (vacancy)


Member                                              (vacancy)


Member                                              (vacancy)


Member                                              (vacancy)


Member                                              (vacancy)


Member                                              (vacancy)


Member                                              (vacancy)




Chief Executive Officer                             Wendy Spencer


Chief Operating Officer / Chief Financial Officer   Jeffrey Page


Chief Human Capital Officer                         Susan Bradberry


Chief Information Officer                           Thomas Hanley


Chief of External Affairs                           Theodore S. Miller


Chief of Program Operations                         Kimberly Mansaray


Chief of Staff                                      Asim Mishra


Chief Risk Officer                                  Lori Giblin




Director, AmeriCorps NCCC                           Gina Cross, Acting
  Director, AmeriCorps State and National                                                 William C. Basl


  Director, AmeriCorps VISTA                                                              Max Finberg


  Director, Government Relations                                                          Kimberly L. Allman


  Director, Office of Field Liaison                                                       Mikel Herrington


  Director, Office of Research and Evaluation                                             Mary Hyde


  Director, Senior Corps                                                                  Mikel Herrington, Acting


  Director, Social Innovation Fund                                                        Damian Thorman




  General Counsel                                                                         Jeremy Joseph


  Inspector General                                                                       Deborah J. Jeffrey



The Corporation for National and Community Service improves lives, strengthens communities, and fosters civic

engagement through service and volunteering.

Organizational Chart
The Corporation for National and Community Service (CNCS) was established on October 1, 1993, by the National and

Community Service Trust Act of 1993 (42 U.S.C. 12651 et seq.). The CNCS is a Federal corporation governed by a

bipartisan board of directors whom the President appoints with the advice and consent of the Senate. The Board sets

policies and direction for the Corporation and is responsible for all actions taken by the Chief Executive Officer with

respect to standards, policies, procedures, programs, and initiatives as necessary to carry out the CNCS's mission.


As the Nation's largest grantmaker for service and volunteering, the CNCS engages millions of Americans in service

through its core programs—AmeriCorps, Senior Corps, the Social Innovation Fund, and the Volunteer Generation

Fund—and leads President Obama's nationwide service initiative, United We Serve. The CNCS harnesses America's

most powerful resource: the energy and talents of its citizens. From grade school through retirement, the CNCS

empowers Americans and fosters a lifetime of service to improve lives, strengthen communities, and foster civic

engagement.

http://www.nationalservice.gov/about

AmeriCorps
AmeriCorps provides opportunities for more than 75,000 Americans each year to serve their communities. AmeriCorps

members recruit, train, and supervise community volunteers; tutor and mentor youth; build affordable housing; teach

computer skills; clean parks and streams; run afterschool programs; help nonprofit groups become self-sustaining; and

assist communities responding to disasters. In exchange for a year of full-time service, AmeriCorps members earn an

education award that can be used for college or graduate school tuition or for repaying qualified student loans. Since
1994 nearly 1 million Americans have served in AmeriCorps, which includes AmeriCorps State and National,

AmeriCorps NCCC, and AmeriCorps VISTA.


AmeriCorps State and National supports a wide range of local service programs that engage thousands of Americans

in community service each year, providing grants to a network of local and national organizations and agencies

committed to using national service to address critical community needs in education, public safety, health, and the

environment. Each of these organizations and agencies, in turn, uses its AmeriCorps funding to recruit, place, and

supervise AmeriCorps members nationwide.


AmeriCorps State and National operates through national and local nonprofit organizations, public agencies, and

faith-based and community groups. More than three-quarters of AmeriCorps grant funding goes to Governor-

appointed State service commissions, which in turn award grants to nonprofit groups to respond to local needs.

AmeriCorps NCCC (National Civilian Community Corps) is a team-based, residential program for men and women

from age 18 to 24 that combines the best practices of civilian service, including leadership and team building.

AmeriCorps VISTA (Volunteers in Service to America) members serve full-time for 1 year in nonprofit and faith-based

organizations and public agencies to fight poverty, improve health services, increase housing opportunities, and

bridge the digital divide.

http://www.nationalservice.gov/programs/americorps

Senior Corps
Senior Corps taps the skills, talents, and experience of more than 270,000 Americans age 55 and older to meet a wide

range of community challenges through three programs: Retired and Senior Volunteers Program (RSVP), Foster

Grandparents, and Senior Companions. RSVP volunteers help local police departments conduct safety patrols,

participate in environmental projects, provide educational services to children and adults, respond to natural disasters,

and recruit other volunteers. Foster Grandparents serve as tutors and mentors to young people with special needs.

Senior Companions help homebound seniors and other adults maintain independence in their own homes. Senior

Corps volunteers have served 1.5 million Americans, including 560,000 veterans and 300,000 children.

http://www.nationalservice.gov/programs/senior-corps

Social Innovation Fund
The Social Innovation Fund is an approach to transforming lives and communities that allows the Federal Government

to serve as a catalyst for promoting community solutions with evidence of strong results. A key White House initiative

and CNCS program, the Fund identifies solutions that work and makes them work for more people. It combines public

and private resources to foster innovative community-based solutions that have produced results in low-income

communities in three priority areas: economic opportunity, health, and youth development.

http://www.nationalservice.gov/programs/social-innovation-fund | Email: innovation@cns.gov

Other Initiatives
As the Federal agency for service and volunteerism, the CNCS carries out the Call to Service authority in multiple ways.

CNCS initiatives include the Martin Luther King, Jr., National Day of Service; September 11th National Day of Service

and Remembrance; President's Higher Education Community Service Honor Roll; National Mentoring Month; and

United We Serve, a nationwide effort launched with the White House in 2009 to engage Americans in service to meet
community needs. As a result of United We Serve, hundreds of thousands of Americans have joined with friends and

neighbors to replenish food banks, provide health services, support veterans and military families, restore public lands,

and more. The CNCS has also partnered with other agencies and nonprofit organizations on Let's Read! to reduce

summer reading loss and Let's Move! to combat childhood obesity. Other initiatives include the Task Force on

Expanding National Service, Mayors Day of Recognition, County Day of Recognition, and Joining Forces, an effort led

by First Lady Michelle Obama and Dr. Jill Biden to engage Americans in supporting veterans and military families.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Blog
The National Service blog features posts of interest to students, recent graduates, retirees, senior citizens, veterans,

and others. The range of discussion is expansive—conservation, disaster recovery, nonprofit sector career pathways,

voluntarism, and more.

http://nationalservice.tumblr.com

Data
The CNCS posts datasets and other information online to support the principles of open government.

http://www.nationalservice.gov/about/open-government-initiative/transparency/data-sources
Its Open Government Gallery is a demonstration of the CNCS's commitment to collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

http://www.nationalservice.gov/about/open-government-initiative/open-government-gallery

Employment
Most CNCS career opportunities are volunteer AmeriCorps and Senior Corps positions. The agency hires full-time

employees at its Washington, DC, headquarters and at CNCS offices located across the country.

http://www.nationalservice.gov/about/careers | Email: jobs@cns.gov
https://www.usajobs.gov/JobSearch/Search/GetResults?OrganizationID=KS00

Grants
To find discretionary funding opportunities that Federal agencies have posted, visit the "Funding Opportunities" Web

page.

http://www.nationalservice.gov/build-your-capacity/grants/funding-opportunities

Newsroom
The newsroom features media advisories, official statements, press releases, and proclamations.

http://www.nationalservice.gov/newsroom#menu-newsroom-dropdown-area

Online Courses
Self-paced instructional courses that subject matter experts created on topics aligning with CNCS strategic initiatives

are available online.
     http://www.nationalservice.gov/resources/online-courses

     Site Map
     The Web site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

     https://www.nationalservice.gov/sitemap
     http://www.nationalservice.gov/about/contact-us

        For further information, contact the Corporation for National and Community Service, 250 E Street NW.,
        Washington, DC 20525. Phone, 202-606-5000.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                          Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board




The United States Government Manual




     DEFENSE NUCLEAR FACILITIES SAFETY BOARD
    625 Indiana Avenue NW., Suite 700, Washington, DC 20004


    202-694-7000

    202-208-6518

    http://www.dnfsb.gov


      CHAIR                                                                                 Sean P. Sullivan


      Vice Chair                                                                            Bruce Hamilton
  Member                                                                                    Joyce l. Connery


  Member                                                                                    Jessie H. Roberson


  Member                                                                                    Sean P. Sullivan




  General Counsel                                                                           James P. Biggins


  General Manager                                                                           Glenn Sklar




  Technical Director                                                                        Steven Stokes




  Deputy General Counsel                                                                    (vacancy)


  Deputy General Manager                                                                    (vacancy)


  Deputy Technical Director                                                                 Adam Poloski




The above list of key personnel was updated 07–2017.

The Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board identifies the nature and consequences of public health and safety threats at

the Department of Energy's defense nuclear facilities, elevates awareness of and information on such threats to the

highest levels of governmental authority, and keeps the public informed.

Organizational Chart
The Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board was established as an independent agency on September 29, 1988, by the

Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2286 et seq.).


The Board comprises five members whom the President appoints with the advice and consent of the Senate.

Appointees to the Board must be U.S. citizens and experts in the field of nuclear safety.

http://www.dnfsb.gov/about/who-we-are



ACTIVITIES
The Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board reviews and evaluates the content and implementation of standards for

the design, construction, operation, and decommissioning of the Department of Energy's defense nuclear facilities;

investigates any incident or practice at these facilities that may adversely affect public health and safety; and reviews

and monitors their design, construction, and operation. The Board makes recommendations to the Secretary of Energy

to ensure adequate protection of public health and safety. When the Board determines that any aspect of operations,

practices, or occurrences at these Department of Energy defense nuclear facilities presents an imminent or severe

threat to public health and safety, the Board transmits its recommendations directly to the President.

http://www.dnfsb.gov/about/what-we-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
Information on career opportunities is available online.

http://www.dnfsb.gov/careers/opportunities | Email: jobs@dnfsb.gov
http://www.dnfsb.gov/careers/employee-survey-results

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
An information seeker may submit a FOIA request by email, mail, or telephone for records held or believed to be held

by the Board. To make a request by mail, write to the Information / FOIA Officer, Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety

Board, 625 Indiana Avenue NW., Suite 700, Washington, DC 20004. Phone, 202-694-7000.

http://www.dnfsb.gov/foia-reading-room | Email: foia@dnfsb.gov

Open Government
The Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board supports the Open Government initiative to strengthen the principles of

collaboration, participation, and transparency.

http://www.dnfsb.gov/open

Safety Management
The Victor Stello, Jr., Award was established by the Board to recognize Department of Energy employees for

exemplary leadership in promoting safety management in the Department's defense nuclear complex.

http://www.dnfsb.gov/about/what-we-do/victor-stello-jr-award-safety-leadership

Site Representative Offices
Site representatives produce a weekly report summarizing the pertinent activities and events that occurred during that

week at their site. Five Defense Nuclear Facilities locations—Hanford, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Pantex,

Savannah River Site, and Y–12 National Security Complex / Oak Ridge National Laboratory—have at least one site

representative currently assigned to them.

http://www.dnfsb.gov/about/where-we-work/our-site-representative-offices
http://www.dnfsb.gov/website-tools/contact

  For further information, contact the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board, 625 Indiana Avenue NW.,
  Suite 700, Washington, DC 20004. Phone, 202-694-7000.
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                             Environmental Protection Agency




The United States Government Manual




     ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY
    1200 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20460


    202-272-0167

    http://www.epa.gov




    Office of the Administrator
    ADMINISTRATOR                                                        Lee Zeldin


    Deputy Administrator                                                 Janet G. McCabe




    Chief of Staff                                                       Daniel Utech


    Special Assistant to the Administrator                               John Lucey

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/about-office-administrator



*


    Agency Science Advisor                                               Jennifer Orme-Zavaleta

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/about-office-research-and-development-ord

    Chief Financial Officer                                              David A. Bloom, Acting


https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/about-office-chief-financial-officer-ocfo

    General Counsel                                                      Melissa Hoffer, Acting


https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/about-office-general-counsel-ogc



Assistant Administrators


    Air and Radiation                                                    Joseph Goffman, Acting


    Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention                             Michal I. Freedhoff


    Enforcement and Compliance Assurance                                 Lawrence Starfield, Acting


    International and Tribal Affairs                                     Mark Kasman, Acting


    Land and Emergency Management                                        Barry Breen, Acting


    Mission Support                                                      Donna J. Vizian, Acting


                                                                         Jennifer Orme-Zavaleta,
    Research and Development
                                                                         Acting


    Water                                                                Radhika Fox
Regional Administrators


    Region 1—Boston (CT, ME, MA, NH, RI, VT, and Tribal Nations)                         Deborah Szaro, Acting


    Region 2—New York (NJ, NY, and Tribal Nations, as well as Puerto Rico, U.S. Virgin
                                                                                         Walter Mugdan, Acting
    Islands)


    Region 3—Philadelphia (DE, MD, PA, VA, WV, and Tribal Nations, as well as DC)        Diana Esher, Acting


    Region 4—Atlanta (AL, FL, GA, KY, MS, NC, SC, TN, and Tribal Nations)                (vacancy)


    Region 5—Chicago (IL, IN, MI, MN, OH, WI, and Tribal Nations)                        Cheryl Newton, Acting


    Region 6—Dallas (AR, LA, NM, OK, TX, and Tribal Nations)                             ​David W. Gray, Acting


    Region 7—Kansas City (IA, KS, MO, NE, and Tribal Nations)                            Edward H. Chu, Acting


    Region 8—Denver (CO, MT, ND, SD, UT, WY, and Tribal Nations)                         Debra H. Thomas, Acting


    Region 9—San Francisco (AZ, CA, HI, NV, and Tribal Nations, as well as American
    Samoa, Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, Marshall Islands, Northern Mariana      Deborah Jordan, Acting
    Islands, Republic of Palau)


    Region 10—Seattle (AK, ID, OR, WA, and Tribal Nations)                               Michelle Pirzadeh, Acting

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/epa-organization-chart



*


    Inspector General                                                                    Sean W. O'Donnell

https://www.epa.gov/office-inspector-general/about-epas-office-inspector-general#IG_bio



    The above list of key personnel was updated 7–2021.



The Environmental Protection Agency protects human health and safeguards the environment.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On July 9, 1970, Richard M. Nixon signed Reorganization Plan No. 3 of 1970, which became effective on December 2d

of that same year and established the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) as an independent agency in the

executive branch.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title5a-node84-leaf178&num=0&edition=prelim
President Nixon also sent his "Message to the Congress Transmitting Reorganization Plan 3 of 1970: Environmental

Protection Agency" to accompany the plan. The message was published on page 587 of the "Public Papers of the

Presidents of the United States" (1970).

https://www.govinfo.gov/app/collection/ppp/president-
37_Nixon,%20Richard%20M./1970/01%21A%21January%201%20to%20December%2031%2C%201970
The reorganization plan was published in the Federal Register on October 6, 1970 (35 FR 15623–15626).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1970-10-06/pdf/FR-1970-10-06.pdf
The Administrator serves as head of the EPA. The President appoints the Administrator by the advice and with the

consent of the Senate. The Administrator is responsible to the President for providing overall supervision to the EPA.

The Deputy Administrator, whom the President also appoints by the advice and with the consent of the Senate, assists

the Administrator and serves as the Acting Administrator in the absence of the Administrator.


The EPA's statement of organization and general information on the agency has been assigned to first part of 40 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=0bdc970c644f5ea3d05ff15f7f3c8500&mc=true&node=pt40.1.1&rgn=div5
The EPA website includes an "EPA Organizational Chart" web page.

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/epa-organization-chart



REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material on "The Public Health and Welfare" has been assigned to 42 U.S.C. For example, that title contains

chapters on "National Environmental Policy" (Ch. 55) and "Environmental Quality Improvement" (Ch. 56), as well as a

subchapter on the "Safety of Public Water Systems" (Ch. 6A).

https://uscode.house.gov/browse/prelim@title42&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations affecting the protection of the environment have been assigned to 40 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=73131f98295736a6ba65a9e05ee063f4&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title40/40tab_02.tpl
Parts 1–49 of 40 CFR contains rules and regulations that are associated with the EPA.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=73131f98295736a6ba65a9e05ee063f4&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title40/40cfrv1_02.tpl#0



ACTIVITIES
The EPA facilitates coordinated and effective governmental action to protect the environment. It also serves as the

public's advocate for a livable environment.

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/our-mission-and-what-we-do

Air / Radiation
The Office of Air and Radiation develops national programs, policies, and regulations to control air pollution and

radiation exposure. The Office administers the Clean Air Act, the Atomic Energy Act, the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant

Land Withdrawal Act, and other environmental laws. The Office's core concerns include acid rain, climate change,
energy efficiency, indoor and outdoor air quality, industrial air pollution, pollution from engines and vehicles, pollution

prevention, radiation protection, radon, and stratospheric ozone depletion.

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/about-office-air-and-radiation-oar

  Phone, 202-564-7400.



Chemical Safety / Pollution Prevention
The Office of Chemical Safety and Pollution Prevention protects people and the environment from potential risks that

are associated with pesticides and toxic chemicals. The Office administers the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and

Rodenticide Act; Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act; Toxic Substances Control Act; Pollution Prevention Act; and

portions of other statutes. Through innovative partnerships and collaboration, the Office also works to prevent

pollution. Stopping pollution before it is created reduces waste, saves energy and natural resources, and keeps homes,

schools, and workplaces cleaner and safer.

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/about-office-chemical-safety-and-pollution-prevention-ocspp

  Phone, 202-564-2902.



Enforcement / Compliance Assurance
The Office of Enforcement and Compliance Assurance addresses pollution problems that affects American

communities through vigorous civil and criminal enforcement. Its enforcement activities target the most serious water,

air and chemical hazards. The Office works with EPA regional offices; it partners with State and Tribal governments;

and it cooperates with other Federal agencies to enforce the Nation’s environmental laws. These laws include the

Clean Air Act; Clean Water Act; Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act; Emergency

Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act; Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act; Marine Protection,

Research and Sanctuaries Act; National Environmental Policy Act; Oil Pollution Act; Resource Conservation and

Recovery Act; Safe Drinking Water Act; and Toxic Substances Control Act. With States and Tribal partners, the Office

shares a commitment to a clean and healthy environment. By improving transparency, adopting advanced

technologies, and increasing community participation, the Office seeks to further empower the public to play a key

role in assuring compliance with environmental laws nationwide and to make the playing field more level for entities

and organizations that abide by those laws.

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/about-office-enforcement-and-compliance-assurance-oeca

  Phone, 202-564-2440.



International Affairs / Tribal Affairs
The Office of International and Tribal Affairs leads the EPA's international and Tribal engagements. Agencywide and

nationwide in scope, the Office's activities cut across EPA programs and regions as it develops and implements policy

and programs that protect public health and the environment. Pollution does not respect international borders;

therefore, the Office collaborates with other Federal agencies, international organizations, and individual countries to
address bilateral, regional, and global environmental challenges and to advance the Nation's foreign policy objectives.

The Office honors the government-to-government Federal–Tribal relationship and respects Tribal treaty rights as it

guides the agencywide effort to strengthen public health and environmental protection in Indian country. Special

efforts are made to enable federally recognized Tribes administer their own environmental programs.

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/about-office-international-and-tribal-affairs-oita

  Phone, 202-564-6400.



Mission Support
The Office of Mission Support leads the core mission support functions of the EPA to improve efficiency, coordination,

and customer experience for internal customers, stakeholders, and the general public.

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/about-office-mission-support

  Phone, 202-564-4600.



Research / Development
The Office of Research and Development conducts the research that provides the foundation for EPA decision-making

to safeguard human health and ecosystems from environmental pollutants. With input from other EPA offices, external

partners, and stakeholders, the Office's six research programs identify the most pressing environmental health

research needs. Its "Strategic Research Action Plans," which are updated every few years, outline the current activities

of the research programs. The Office also serve as the Agency’s national program manager for regional laboratories.

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/about-office-research-and-development-ord#what

  Phone, 202-564-6620.



Waste Programs / Emergency Response
The Office of Land and Emergency Management makes policy, guides, and directs the EPA's emergency response and

waste programs. More specifically, the Office develops guidelines for the land disposal of hazardous waste and

underground storage tanks; provides technical assistance to all levels of government for establishing safe waste

management practices; supports State and local governments in redeveloping and reusing potentially contaminated

sites; responds to abandoned and active hazardous waste sites, as well as to accidental chemical releases; and

encourages innovative technologies to address contaminated soil and groundwater.

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/about-office-land-and-emergency-management

  Phone, 202-566-0200.



Water Quality
The Office of Water ensures that drinking water is safe. It also protects human health; supports economic and

recreational activities; and provides healthy habitat for fish, plants, and wildlife, by restoring and maintaining oceans,
watersheds, and aquatic ecosystems. The Office administers the Clean Water Act; Safe Drinking Water Act; and

portions of the Coastal Zone Act Reauthorization Amendments of 1990; Resource Conservation and Recovery Act;

Ocean Dumping Ban Act; Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act; Shore Protection Act; Marine Plastics

Pollution Research and Control Act; London Dumping Convention; the International Convention for the Prevention of

Pollution from Ships, and several other statutes. The Office works with the 10 EPA regional offices, other Federal

agencies, State and local governments, American Indian Tribes, the regulated community, organized professional and

interest groups, landowners and managers, and the public-at-large. The Office provides guidance, specifies scientific

methods and data collection requirements, performs oversight, and facilitates communication among participants in its

work. It also helps States and American Indian Tribes build capacity, and, in some cases, water programs can be

delegated to them for implementation.

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/about-office-water

  Phone, 202-564-5700.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The EPA website has an alphabetical topic index on its "Web Topics Published" web page.

https://www.epa.gov/topics-epa-web

Air Quality Forecasts
The EPA's Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards manages the "AirNow" website, which allows visitors to get air

quality data for cities, States, and Zip Codes.

https://www.airnow.gov

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that EPA records have been

assigned to record group 412.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/412.html

Blogs / Discussion Forums
In addition to its official blog, the EPA has several other blogs. These blogs deal with a range of EPA-related and

environmental topics. Two discussion forums center on the topics of data and data sources.

https://www.epa.gov/web-policies-and-procedures/list-social-media-platforms-epa-uses#blogs

Business Opportunities
Acquisition management information, the procurement status of projects across the Agency's procurement divisions,

and an acquisition forecast database of future EPA procurement opportunities are available on the EPA website.

Contact the Office of Acquisition Management for more information. Phone, 202-564-4310.

https://www.epa.gov/contracts
Career Opportunities
The EPA relies on professionals from diverse backgrounds and with a wide range of skill sets to carry out its mission.

The Agency posts current job openings on its website. For more information, contact the Office of Human Resources.

Phone, 202-564-4606.

http://www.epa.gov/careers | Email: recruit_inquiries@epa.gov
In 2020, the EPA ranked 20th among 25 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=EP00

Climate Change Effects
Climate change continues to affect water resources. The "Regional Actions To Address Climate Change Impacts on

Water" web page provides links for information on regional actions that are being taken to address this growing

problem.

https://www.epa.gov/climate-change-water-sector/regional-actions-address-climate-change-impacts-water

Contact Information
Information for accessing libraries; commenting on regulations; connecting on social media; finding mailing addresses;

locating an employee, lab, or office; reporting a problem; submitting a Freedom of Information Act request; and

subscribing to alerts, blogs, newsletters, and news releases, is available on the "Contact EPA" web page.

https://www.epa.gov/home/forms/contact-epa
The EPA maintains a "Mailing Addresses and Phone Numbers" web page.

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/mailing-addresses-and-phone-numbers
The EPA maintains a "Media Contacts" web page for reporters.

https://www.epa.gov/newsroom/media-contacts

Education
Educators and students can access homework resources, lesson plans, and project ideas on the EPA's website.

Environmental education incorporates a multidisciplinary approach to learning, builds critical thinking skills, and helps

students make informed and responsible decisions that sustain Earth's ecosystems.

https://www.epa.gov/students

Energy Efficient Products
The Office of Atmospheric Programs certifies products that help consumers save energy and money through Energy

Star.

https://www.energystar.gov

Environmental Justice
The website provides access to the EPA's Environmental Justice Screening and Mapping Tool (EJSCREEN) that is based

on nationally consistent data and an approach that combines environmental and demographic indicators in maps and

reports. The EPA developed its EJSCREEN Tool to help the Agency become a more effective protector of public health
and the environment.

https://www.epa.gov/ejscreen

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the EPA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/environmental-protection-agency

Fire Tools
The EPA's Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards manages the "AirNow" website, which maintains a fire tools

web page.

https://www.airnow.gov/more-fire-tools

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded from

disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute.

https://www.epa.gov/foia | Email: hq.foia@epa.gov
The FOIA libraries contain frequently requested information. Before making a FOIA request, search the online FOIA

libraries to see if the desired information is immediately available at no cost.

https://www.epa.gov/foia/foia-online-libraries

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
Some EPA offices and programs have their own FAQs web pages. The EPA maintains a list of the most often viewed

questions, which are drawn from those web pages of FAQs.

https://usepa.servicenowservices.com/ecss?id=ecss_kb_home
The EPA maintains a database of FAQs and its answers to them.

https://usepa.servicenowservices.com/ecss?
id=kb_search&kb_knowledge_base=98a9e8ce1b4858104614ddb6bc4bcb03&spa=1

Glossaries
The "Report on the Environment" glossary defines terms that are used in the report or have particular meaning within

the EPA.

https://www.epa.gov/report-environment/roe-glossary
An Environmental Justice Screening and Mapping Tool (EJSCREEN) glossary is available on the EPA's website.

https://www.epa.gov/ejscreen/glossary-ejscreen-terms
The EPA's Terminology Services maintains a "Terms and Acronyms" web page. A search tool is available on the page.

https://sor.epa.gov/sor_internet/registry/termreg/searchandretrieve/termsandacronyms/search.do
The EPA's Terminology Services maintains a "Vocabulary Catalog" web page. A vocabulary search tool is available on

the page.

https://sor.epa.gov/sor_internet/registry/termreg/searchandretrieve/glossariesandkeywordlists/search.do
Grants
Information to apply for, manage, and understand EPA grants is available online. Contact the Office of Grants and

Debarment for more information. Phone, 202-564-5315.

https://www.epa.gov/grants

Greenhouse Gas Emissions
The EPA's Office of Atmospheric Programs has released its "DRAFT Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions and

Sinks, 1990–2019" in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading. The final version will be published

in April of 2021.

https://www.epa.gov/ghgemissions/draft-inventory-us-greenhouse-gas-emissions-and-sinks-1990-2019

Hotlines / Service Lines
Hotline and service line information for specific topics is available on the EPA website.

https://www.epa.gov/home/epa-hotlines
Information on region-specific customer service lines is also available.

https://www.epa.gov/home/epa-hotlines#RegionSpecificCustomerServiceLines

Laws / Executive Orders
As a regulatory agency, the EPA has received authorization from the U.S. Congress to write regulations that explain

environmental laws for proper implementation. A number of Presidential Executive Orders also affect EPA regulatory

activities.

https://www.epa.gov/laws-regulations/laws-and-executive-orders

Newsroom
The EPA posts news releases online.

https://www.epa.gov/newsroom

Non-English Readers
The EPA provides information on its website in Chinese, Korean, Spanish, and Vietnamese. Language tags are visible at

the bottom of the EPA's home page.

https://www.epa.gov

Open Government
The EPA supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

https://www.epa.gov/open

Plain Language
The EPA upholds the Plain Writing Act of 2010 by adhering to Federal plain language guidelines. EPA writers and

editors want to know if a document or web page contains content that was not written clearly.

https://www.epa.gov/home/plain-writing
Protecting Pollinators
The "Protecting Bees and Other Pollinators from Pesticides" web page provides information on helping pollinators stay

healthy. In addition to the EPA, advocates, consumers, growers, pesticide manufacturers, and governments have roles

to play in protecting pollinators like honeybees and monarch butterflies.

https://www.epa.gov/pollinator-protection

Regional Offices
Ten regional offices help develop local programs for pollution abatement.

https://www.epa.gov/aboutepa/visiting-regional-office

Regulatory Information
EPA regulations address a host of environmental issues that range from acid rain to wetlands ecosystems. The

"Regulatory Information By Topic" web page provides convenient access to laws and regulations, to compliance and

enforcement information, and to policies and guidance, that are associated with or relevant to the topics listed on it.

https://www.epa.gov/regulatory-information-topic

Social Media
The EPA has Facebook, Flickr, Instagram, Twitter, and YouTube accounts. Links to these accounts may be found on the

"List of Social Media Platforms that EPA Uses" web page.

https://www.epa.gov/web-policies-and-procedures/list-social-media-platforms-epa-uses

Staff Directory
The EPA maintains an online staff directory.

https://cfpub.epa.gov/locator/index.cfm

Superfund Sites
The EPA's Superfund program cleans up some of the Nation's most contaminated land and responds to

environmental emergencies, oil spills, and natural disasters. The program's website has a search tool for locating

Superfund sites.

https://www.epa.gov/superfund/search-superfund-sites-where-you-live

Trash-Free Waters
Most of the trash that pollutes estuaries, lakes, rivers, and oceans washes into them from land-based sources. Plastic

trash, in particular, damages aquatic ecosystems, economic activity, and human health.

https://www.epa.gov/trash-free-waters

Website Snapshots
Snapshots of the EPA website are available for January 19, 2017, and January 19, 2021. The snapshots capture the

content of www.epa.gov at a specific point in time. A new snapshot is made every 4 years, the day before the

Presidential Inauguration, and added to the "www.epa.gov Snapshots" web page.

https://www.epa.gov/home/wwwepagov-snapshots
        The Sources of Information were updated 7–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                     Equal Employment Opportunity Commission




The United States Government Manual




     EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
    131 M Street NE., Washington, DC 20507


    202-663-4900

    TTY, 202-663-4444

    http://www.eeoc.gov




    The Commission
 CHAIR                                    Andrea R. Lucas, Acting


 Vice Chair                               Keith E. Sonderling




 COMMISSIONERS                            Charlotte A. Burrows


                                          Andrea R. Lucas


                                          Jocelyn F. Samuels

https://www.eeoc.gov/commission

 EXECUTIVE OFFICER                        Bernadette B. Wilson




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Data                                     Chris Haffer


 Financial                                Grace Zhao


 Human Capital                            Kevin L. Richardson


 Information                              Bryan Burnett


 Operating                                (vacancy)




 DIRECTORS


 Communications and Legislative Affairs   (vacancy)


 Equal Opportunity                        Stan Pietrusiak, Jr.


 Federal Operations                       Carlton M. Hadden


 Field Programs                           Martin S. Ebel


 Legal Counsel                            Andrew Maunz




 General Counsel                          Sharon F. Gustafson



 Inspector General                        Milton A. Mayo, Jr.
https://oig.eeoc.gov/about-us



  The above list of key personnel was updated 12–2020.



The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission enforces laws that prohibit employment discrimination based on age,

color, disability, gender, genetic information, national origin, race, or religion.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On July 2, 1964, President Lyndon B. Johnson approved Public Law 88–352, which is commonly cited as the Civil Rights

Act of 1964" (78 Stat. 241). Title VII of this Act "created a Commission to be known as the Equal Employment

Opportunity Commission" (78 Stat. 258). The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC), in accordance with

the effective date of Title VII, became operational on July 2, 1965 (78 Stat. 266).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-78/pdf/STATUTE-78-Pg241.pdf
The EEOC is a bipartisan commission comprising five members, whom the President appoints, by the advice and with

the consent of the Senate, to staggered 5-year terms. The President also designates one member to serve as Chair of

the Commission and another member to service as its Vice Chair (78 Stat. 258).


Public Law 92–261, which is also cited as the Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972, provides for the appointment

of "a General Counsel of the Commission." The President appoints this General Counsel, by the advice and with the

consent of the Senate, to support the Commission and provide direction, coordination, and supervision of the

agency's litigation program. The General Counsel serves for a term of 4 years (86 Stat. 110).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-86/pdf/STATUTE-86-Pg103.pdf
The EEOC included an organizational chart in its "Fiscal Year 2019 Agency Financial Report" in the section

"Management's Discussion and Analysis."

https://www.eeoc.gov/fiscal-year-2019-agency-financial-report-us-equal-employment-opportunity-
commission#h_1901273297971575392264997



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Codified statutory material on civil rights has been assigned to chapter 21 of 42 U.S.C. The chapter runs from section

1981 through 2000h-6.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title42/chapter21&edition=prelim
"Subchapter VI—Equal Employment Opportunities" runs from section 2000e through 2000e–17. Codified statutory

material on the EEOC has been assigned to section 2000e–4 of 42 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title42/chapter21/subchapter6&edition=prelim
Codified regulatory material that is associated with the EEOC has been assigned to chapter xiv of 29 CFR. The chapter

on the EEOC runs from part 1600 through 1899. Title 29 contains rules and regulations that address labor-related
issues.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=de3741e211c566331cb331784bb63c67&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title29/29chapterXIV.tpl



ACTIVITIES
Laws that the EEOC enforces include the Equal Pay Act of 1963 (PL 88–38 / 29 U.S.C. 206); Title VII of the Civil Rights

Act of 1964 (PL 88–352 / 42 U.S.C. 2000e et seq.); the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (PL 90–202 / 29

U.S.C. 621 et seq.); sections of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (PL 93–112 / 29 U.S.C. 791 et seq.); Title I of the Americans

with Disabilities Act of 1990 (PL 101–336 / 42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.); sections of the Civil Rights Act of 1991 (PL 102–166 / 2

U.S.C. 1219); and Title II of the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act of 2008 (PL 110–233 / 42 U.S.C. 2000ff et

seq.).


Complaints Against the Federal Government
The EEOC establishes the procedures for Federal employees and job applicants to file complaints of employment

discrimination or retaliation. The agency charged with discrimination is responsible for informal counseling and, if a

complaint is filed and accepted, for investigating the claims raised therein. At the conclusion of the investigation, a

complainant may request a hearing before an EEOC administrative judge or that the agency issue a final decision on

the matter. The agency's final decision or final action after a hearing may be appealed to the Commission.

https://www.eeoc.gov/federal-sector/overview-federal-sector-eeo-complaint-process
The Office of Federal Operations provides oversight of and technical assistance for equal employment opportunity

complaint adjudication and Governmentwide maintenance of affirmative employment programs. Using the guidance

and principles contained in its Equal Employment Opportunity Management Directive 715, the Commission monitors

and evaluates Federal agencies' affirmative employment programs under Title VII and section 501 of the Rehabilitation

Act and ensures that all Federal employees compete on a playing field that is fair and level.

https://www.eeoc.gov/federal-sector/management-directive/section-717-title-vii#

Enforcement
The EEOC carries out its statutory, regulatory, policy, and program enforcement responsibilities through its

headquarters-based Office of General Counsel, Office of Field Programs, and 53 field offices. The field offices receive

charges of discrimination from the public and use a variety of resolution methods, including voluntary mediation and

full-scale investigation and conciliation. The field staff seeks to achieve a wide range of objectives that center on the

quality, timeliness, and appropriateness of individual, class, and systemic charges; secures relief for victims of

discrimination in accordance with EEOC policies; counsels individuals about their rights under the laws that the EEOC

enforces; and conducts outreach and technical assistance programs. The EEOC's Office of General Counsel litigates in

U.S. District Courts and Courts of Appeal.

https://www.eeoc.gov/laws-guidance-0

Outreach
The Commission promotes voluntary compliance with equal employment opportunity statutes through a variety of

educational and technical assistance activities. Its outreach and education programs provide general information on
the EEOC, its mission, rights and responsibilities under the statutes that are enforced by the Commission, and the

charge (i.e., complaint) process. EEOC representatives are available, on a limited basis and at no cost, to make

presentations and to participate in meetings, conferences, and seminars with employee and employer groups,

professional associations, students, nonprofit entities, community organizations, and other members of the general

public.

https://www.eeoc.gov/outreach-education-technical-assistance
For a fee, the EEOC offers in-depth training that it has tailored for employers. The EEOC Training Institute makes

additional training available to private employers, to local and State government personnel, and to employees of the

Federal Government. Managers and employees receive training on the laws that the Commission enforces and on

ways to prevent and reduce discrimination in the workplace.

https://eeotraining.eeoc.gov/profile/web/index.cfm?PKwebID=0x2547b105&varPage=home                     |          Email:
eeoc.traininginstitute@eeoc.gov

Publication of Data and Statistics
The Commission publishes data on the employment status of minorities and women by conducting four employment

surveys that cover private employers (EEO–1), labor unions (EEO–3), State and local governments (EEO–4), and public

elementary and secondary schools (EEO–5). The collected data are shared with certain Federal agencies; prepared in

aggregated format for major geographic areas and, where possible, also by industry groups (EEO–1), by major trades

(EEO–3), or by government types and functions (EEO–4); and after aggregation, released into the public domain for

independent analysis and research.

https://www.eeoc.gov/statistics/employment



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that EEOC records have been

assigned to record group 403.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/403.html

Business Opportunities
The "Doing Business With the EEOC" web page has information for contractors and vendors.

https://www.eeoc.gov/doing-business-eeoc

Career Opportunities
The Commission hires in various job categories: attorneys, information intake representatives, investigators, mediators,

office automation assistants, paralegals, program analysts, and social scientists. EEOC employment opportunities are

posted on USAJobs—the Federal Government's official source for job listings and employment opportunity

information. For more information, contact the Office of Human Resources. Phone, 202-663-4306.

https://www.eeoc.gov/jobs-and-internships-eeoc
EEOC Internships offer high school, college, and graduate and law students the opportunity to gain experience
working on projects or cases involving issues of Federal antidiscrimination law. Interns work closely with experienced

attorneys and specialists on assignments. Work assignments include legal research and writing, research and analysis

of public policy developments, correspondence with Commission stakeholders, and assistance with charge intake and

investigations.

https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc-internship-program
In 2019, the EEOC ranked 12th among 25 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/EE00

Contact Information
The "Contact EEOC" web page has email addresses, phone numbers, and links to relevant EEOC resources.

https://www.eeoc.gov/contact-eeoc
News producers, reporters, writers for news publication and broadcasts, and other people working on news programs

or stories may contact the Office of Communications, using the phone number or email address that is provided here.

Phone, 202-663-4191. TTY, 202-663-4494.

https://www.eeoc.gov/newsroom/search | Email: newsroom@eeoc.gov

District Offices
The EEOC operates 15 district offices. An office list and jurisdictional map are available online. A search tool allows

EEOC website visitors to locate field offices by using Zip Codes.

https://www.eeoc.gov/field-office

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the EEOC recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/equal-employment-opportunity-commission

Federal Sector Reports
The EEOC posts reports that deal with subjects affecting Federal employees.

https://www.eeoc.gov/federal-sector/reports

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information that the records of

executive branch agencies contain. When the requested information is shielded from disclosure by one or more of

nine exemptions that are contained within the statute, this right to access is limited. The EEOC makes many records

publicly available on its main website. Documents are also available in an electronic library collection, as well as in

physical libraries that are located at EEOC headquarters and district offices. Before submitting a FOIA request, an

information seeker should search one of the aforementioned locations to see if the desired information has been

released already in the public domain and is accessible free of charge and without the delay of processing a formal

request.

https://www.eeoc.gov/foia
The EEOC maintains a collection of documents online in its electronic FOIA library.
https://www.eeoc.gov/foia/foia-e-library

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The EEOC posts answers to FAQs.

https://eeoc.custhelp.com/app/answers/list

Glossary
The EEOC maintains a glossary whose content is relevant to small-business owners and employees.

https://www.eeoc.gov/employers/small-business/eeoc-glossary-small-businesses

Open Government
The EEOC supports the Open Government initiative by implementing principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

https://www.eeoc.gov/open-government

Poster
An employer is required to post a notice describing the Federal laws that prohibit job discrimination based on age,

color, disability, equal pay, genetic information, national origin, race, religion, or sex. The "Equal Employment

Opportunity is THE LAW" poster contains a summary of these laws and explains how an employee or applicant can file

a discrimination complaint. The EEOC's poster is available in Arabic, Chinese, English, and Spanish.

https://www.eeoc.gov/employers/eeo-law-poster

Press Releases
The EEOC posts press releases.

https://www.eeoc.gov/newsroom/search

Publications
The EEOC's most popular publications may be downloaded in Portable Document Format (PDF) for easy reproduction.

Publications that are unavailable online may be obtained by phone or fax. Phone, 800-669-3362. TTY, 800-800-3302.

Fax, 513-489-8692.

https://www.eeoc.gov/eeoc-publications

Reading Room
Contact the EEOC Library, 131 M Street NE., Washington, DC 20507. Phone, 202-663-4630.


Reports / Surveys
The EEOC collects workforce data from employers with more than 100 employees. Employers who meet the reporting

thresholds are required to provide the information. The data are used for enforcement, research, and self-assessment

by employers. Data remain confidential; however, the public can access them in aggregate form.

http://www.eeoc.gov/employers/reporting.cfm

Resources
     EEOC material on specific discrimination topics that pertain to small businesses is available on the "EEOC Resources"

     web page.

     https://www.eeoc.gov/employers/small-business/eeoc-resources

     Small Business Resource Center
     The Small Business Resource Center provides answers to common questions regarding responsibilities that Federal

     employment discrimination laws require business owners to meet. It also has tips for preventing discrimination and

     dealing with issues when they do arise within a business context.

     https://www.eeoc.gov/employers/small-business

     Social Media
     The EEOC has a Facebook page.

     https://www.facebook.com/USEEOC
     The EEOC tweets announcements and other newsworthy items, using Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/useeoc
     The EEOC posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/TheEEOC

     Speakers
     An agency representative may be available to present an overview of the laws that the EEOC enforces and EEOC

     charge (i.e., complaint) processing procedures—including mediation—at a conference or seminar. Contact an

     outreach program coordinator for more information. Phone, 800-669-4000.

     https://www.eeoc.gov/no-cost-outreach-programs

     Statistics
     The EEOC posts data, reports, and statistics online.

     https://www.eeoc.gov/statistics

        The Sources of Information were updated 12–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility
Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                    Search
                                                                                            Search




                                            Export-Import Bank of the United States




The United States Government Manual




     EXPORT-IMPORT BANK OF THE UNITED STATES
    811 Vermont Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20571


    202-565-3946

    800-565-3946

    http://www.exim.gov


      PRESIDENT / CHAIR                                                                       Charles J. Hall, Acting


      First Vice President / Vice Chair                                                       Scott Schloegel, Acting
Director                                                             (vacancy)


Director                                                             (vacancy)


Director                                                             (vacancy)




Chief Financial Officer                                              David M. Sena


Chief Information Officer                                            Howard Spira


Chief Risk Officer / Executive Vice President                        Jeff Goettman, Acting




Chief of Staff / Senior Vice President                               Jesse Law


Deputy Chief of Staff                                                Ryan Caudelle


General Counsel / Senior Vice President                              Angela Mariana Freyre


Senior Vice President and Chief Strategy Officer                     Anthony Scaramucci


Senior Vice President, Export Finance / Chief Banking Officer        Troy Fuhriman


Senior Vice President, Communications                                Jennifer Hazelton


Senior Vice President, Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs   Kevin Warnke, Acting


Senior Vice President, Credit and Risk Management                    Kenneth M. Tinsley


Senior Vice President, Policy and Planning                           James C. Cruse


Senior Vice President, Resource Management                           Michael Cushing


Senior Vice President, Small Business                                James Burrows


Deputy Chief Banking Officer                                         Madolyn Phillips




Vice President, Asset Management                                     Walter F. Keating


Vice President, Business Credit                                      Pamela S. Bowers
  Vice President, Business Processes, Total Enterprise Modernization                      Michele A. Kuester


  Vice President, Communications                                                          Rebecca Rose


  Vice President, Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs                             Kevin Warnke


  Vice President, Controller                                                              Patricia Wolf


  Vice President, Country Risk and Economic Analysis / Chief Economist                    William A. Marsteller


  Vice President, Credit Review and Compliance                                            Walter Hill, Jr.


  Vice President, Credit Underwriting                                                     David W. Carter


  Vice President, Customer and Business Solutions                                         Rochele Barham


  Vice President, Engineering and Environment                                             James A. Mahoney, Jr.


  Vice President, Finance / Treasurer                                                     Nathalie Herman


  Vice President, International Relations                                                 Isabel Galdiz


  Vice President, Operations and Data Quality                                             Nicole M.B. Valtos


  Vice President, Policy Analysis                                                         Helene Walsh


  Vice President, Sales and Marketing                                                     Sean Luke


  Vice President, Structured Finance                                                      Hala El Mohandes


  Vice President, Transportation                                                          Robert F.X. Roy



The Export-Import Bank helps finance the export of U.S. goods and services to international markets.


The Export-Import Bank of the United States (ExIm Bank), established in 1934, operates as an independent agency of

the U.S. Government under the authority of the Export-Import Bank Act of 1945, as amended (12 U.S.C. 635 et seq.). Its

Board of Directors comprises the President and Chair, the First Vice President and Vice Chair, and three directors—a

total of five members. With the advice and consent of the Senate, the President appoints all of them.


The ExIm Bank helps American exporters adjust to government-supported financing competition from other countries.

The assistance allows U.S. exports to compete for overseas business on the basis of price, performance, and service,

which protects U.S. jobs. The Bank also fills gaps in the availability of commercial financing for creditworthy export

transactions by providing a variety of financing mechanisms, including working capital guarantees, export-credit

insurance, and financing for the purchase of U.S. goods and services.


The Bank is required to find a reasonable assurance of repayment for each transaction it supports. Its legislation

requires it to meet the financing terms of competitor export credit agencies, but not to compete with commercial
lenders. Restrictions also apply to the Bank's support for military goods and services and to its operation in some

countries.


A self-sustaining agency, EXIM operates at no cost to taxpayers. Since 2009, EXIM has contributed nearly $3.8 billion

to American taxpayers.

http://www.exim.gov/about



ACTIVITIES
The ExIm Bank is authorized to have loans, guarantees, and insurance outstanding at any one time in aggregate

amount not exceeding $120 billion. A variety of Ex-Im Bank programs offered under broad export financing categories

—working capital guarantees, export credit insurance, loan guarantees, and direct loans—support U.S. exporters.


The Bank's regional offices focus on small business outreach and support. Its Small Business Committee makes

recommendations on and coordinates and evaluates Bank functions necessary for an effective small-business strategy.

http://www.exim.gov/what-we-do#by-name



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Electronic Updates
An online subscription form is available to sign up for email updates from the Ex-Im Bank.

https://public.govdelivery.com/accounts/USEXIM/subscriber/new

Employment
To carry out its mission, the Bank relies on professionals with a range of skills and expertise: attorney-advisors, business

development and loan specialists, economists, engineers, and resource managers in accounting, finance, human

resources, and information technology.

http://www.exim.gov/about/careers

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
A FOIA request must be made in writing. It may be submitted using the online request form or by email, fax, or postal

mail.

http://www.exim.gov/about/foia | Email: foia@exim.gov

News
ExIm Bank posts board agendas and meeting minutes, reports, and speeches online.

http://www.exim.gov/news
The Chair writes a quarterly newsletter that includes information on the Bank's performance over the previous 3

months. The newsletter also includes analysis of global economic trends, customer stories, practical export tips,

upcoming Bank events, and other resources.

http://www.exim.gov/learning-resources/newsletters
     Office of the Inspector General (OIG)
     The OIG investigates complaints of abuse, fraud, and waste. Phone, 888-644-3946.

     http://www.exim.gov/about/oig/oig-hotline | Email: IGhotline@exim.gov

     Open Government
     The ExIm Bank is becoming more collaborative, participatory, and transparent by making data available in an open

     format and by providing a mechanism for the public to submit feedback.

     http://www.exim.gov/open-government-directive

     Project Information and Concerns
     The "Environmental and Social Project Information and Concerns" Web page provides an online form for expressing

     project-specific concerns, requesting project-specific information, or submitting information on a particular project.

     http://www.exim.gov/policies/ex-im-bank-and-the-environment/environmental-and-social-project-information-and-
     concerns

     Regional Offices
     The ExIm Bank operates regional export finance centers and field offices nationwide. A List of these centers, with their

     contact information, is available online.

     http://www.exim.gov/contact/regional-export-finance-centers
     http://www.exim.gov/contact/headquarters

        For further information, contact the Business Development Office, Export-Import Bank, 811 Vermont
        Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20571. Phone, 202-565-3946 or 800-565-3946.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                 Farm Credit Administration




The United States Government Manual




     FARM CREDIT ADMINISTRATION
    1501 Farm Credit Drive, McLean, VA 22102-5090


    703-883-4000

    703-790-3260

    http://www.fca.gov




    Board
 CHAIR                                                  Dallas P. Tonsager




 Member                                                 Jeffery S. Hall


 Member                                                 (vacancy)

https://www.fca.gov/about/fca_board.html



Officials


 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER                                Dallas P. Tonsager

https://www.fca.gov/about/board/tonsager.html

 Chief Operating Officer                                William J. Hoffman




 Designated Agency Ethics Official                      Philip J. Shebest


 General Counsel                                        Charles R. Rawls


 Secretary to the Board                                 Dale L. Aultman




 DIRECTORS


 Office of Agency Services                              A. Jerome Fowlkes


 Office of Congressional and Public Affairs             Michael A. Stokke


 Office of Equal Employment Opportunity and Inclusion   Thais Burlew


 Office of Examination and Chief Examiner               S. Robert Coleman


 Office of Information Technology                       Jerald Golley


 Office of Regulatory Policy                            Gary K. Van Meter


 Office of Secondary Market Oversight                   Laurie A. Rea


 Office of the Chief Financial Officer                  Stephen G. Smith
https://www.fca.gov/about/offices/officials.html

  Inspector General                                                                         Wendy R. Laguarda


https://www.fca.gov/home/inspector.html



The above list of key personnel was updated 09–2017.


  [For the Farm Credit Administration statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations, Title
  12, Parts 600 and 611]



The Farm Credit Administration ensures the safe and sound operation of the banks, associations, affiliated service
organizations, and other entities of the Farm Credit System, and protects the interests of the public and those who

borrow from Farm Credit institutions or invest in Farm Credit securities.


The Farm Credit Administration (FCA) was established as an independent financial regulatory agency in the executive

branch of the Federal Government by Executive Order 6084 on March 27, 1933. The FCA carries out its responsibilities

by conducting examinations of the various Farm Credit lending institutions: Agricultural Credit Associations, Farm

Credit Banks, Federal Land Credit Associations, and the Agricultural Credit Bank.


The FCA also examines the service organizations owned by the Farm Credit lending institutions, as well as the National

Consumer Cooperative Bank.

http://www.fca.gov/info/organization.html#service
FCA policymaking is vested in the Farm Credit Administration Board, whose three full-time members the President

appoints to 6-year terms with the advice and consent of the Senate. One member of the Board is designated by the

President as Chair and serves as the FCA's chief executive officer. The Board approves rules and regulations, provides

for the examination and regulation of and reporting by Farm Credit institutions, and establishes the policies under

which the Administration operates. Board meetings are regularly held on the second Thursday of the month and are

subject to the Government in the Sunshine Act. Public announcements of these meetings are published in the "Federal

Register."

http://www.fca.gov/about/fca_board.html
Authority for the organization and activities of the Farm Credit System may be found in the Farm Credit Act of 1971, as

amended.


The lending institutions of the Farm Credit System were established to provide adequate and dependable credit and

closely related services to farmers, ranchers, and producers or harvesters of aquatic products; persons engaged in

providing on-the-farm services; rural homeowners; and associations of farmers, ranchers, and producers or harvesters

of aquatic products, or federations of such associations that operate on a cooperative basis and are engaged in

marketing, processing, supply, or business service functions for the benefit of their members. Initially capitalized by the

U.S. Government, the Farm Credit lending institutions are organized as cooperatives—their borrowers completely own

them. The loan funds provided to borrowers by these institutions are obtained primarily through the sale of securities
to investors in the Nation's capital markets.

http://www.fca.gov/rpts/information.html
The Agricultural Credit Act of 1987, as amended (12 U.S.C. 2279aa-1), established the Federal Agricultural Mortgage

Corporation, commonly known as Farmer Mac. The Corporation, designated as part of the Farm Credit System, is a

federally chartered instrumentality of the United States and promotes the development of a secondary market for

agricultural real estate and rural housing loans. Farmer Mac also provides guarantees for the timely payment of

principal and interest on securities representing interests in or obligations backed by pools of agricultural real estate

loans. The Administration examines and regulates Farmer Mac to ensure the safety and soundness of its operations.

http://www.fca.gov/info/farmer_mac.html
The FCA manages regulations under which Farm Credit institutions operate. These regulations implement the Farm

Credit Act of 1971, as amended (12 U.S.C. 2001), and have the force and effect of law. Similar to the authorities of other

Federal regulators of financial institutions, the Administration's authorities include the power to issue cease-and-desist

orders, to levy civil monetary penalties, to remove officers and directors of Farm Credit institutions, and to establish

financial and operating reporting requirements. Although it is prohibited from participation in routine management or

operations of Farm Credit institutions, the Administration is authorized to become involved in these institutions'

management and operations when the Farm Credit Act or its regulations have been violated, when taking an action to

correct an unsafe or unsound practice, or when assuming a formal conservatorship over an institution.


The Administration does not operate on funds appropriated by Congress: It derives income from assessments

collected from the institutions that it regulates and examines. In addition to its headquarters in McLean, VA, the

Administration maintains four field offices located in Bloomington, MN; Greenwood Village, CO; Irving, TX; and

Sacramento, CA.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The FCA Web site has an A–Z index to help visitors navigate its content.

https://www.fca.gov/home/atozindex.html

Business Opportunities
The Office of Agency Services manages the FCA's procurement opportunities. Phone, 703-883-4378. TTY, 703-883-

4056.

https://www.fca.gov/about/procurement.html

Career Opportunities
To carry out its mission, the FCA relies on attorneys, examiners, information technology specialists, and other

professionals. Examiners play a prominent role at the FCA: They plan, organize, and conduct examinations of Farm

Credit System institutions. The FCA hires examiners who hold university degrees in a variety of disciplines. The ideal

candidate has a background in agriculture, business, finance, or information technology. Adaptability, teamwork, and

communication skills are essential. Contact the Office of Agency Services for more information. Phone, 703-883-4135.
TTY, 703-883-4056.

https://www.fca.gov/browse/fca_careers.html
In 2016, the FCA ranked 10th among 29 small agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/overall/small

Cooperative Principles
Farm Credit System institutions generally adhere to three core cooperative principles: user-ownership, user-control,

and user-benefits. These principles support the System’s cooperative practices. To learn more about them, visit the

"Cooperative Way" Web page.

https://www.fca.gov/info/cooperativeway.html

Economics / Policy
FCA economists monitor conditions in the U.S. farm, national, and global economies. They write economic and policy

reports that provide perspective for FCA examiners, leaders, and policy analysts. The FCA posts these reports on its

Web site to make them available to a broader audience.

https://www.fca.gov/rpts/economistreports.html

En Español
The FCA posts information in Spanish on its Web site.

https://www.fca.gov/browse/espanol.html

Financial Indicators
The FCA posts data on selected financial performance indicators for Farm Credit System institutions.

https://www.fca.gov/rpts/fcsindicators.html

Flood Disaster Protection
The FCA posts links to resources that help Farm Credit System lenders understand flood insurance rules.

https://www.fca.gov/info/flooddisasterprotection.html

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
A written submission must clearly indicate that it is a "FOIA Request." The FCA may require payment for searching for,

reviewing, and reproducing a document. A submitter must provide a detailed description—date, subject matter, title—

of the record sought and indicate the maximum amount he or she is willing to pay in fees. A request may be

submitted by email or fax, or by mail and addressed to the Freedom of Information Act Officer, Farm Credit

Administration, 1501 Farm Credit Drive, McLean, VA 22102-5090. Phone, 703-883-4020. TTY, 703-883-4056. Fax, 703-

790-0052.

http://www.fca.gov/home/freedom_info.html | Email: foiaofficer@fca.gov
The FCA maintains a FOIA reading room on its Web site. Before submitting a FOIA request, search the reading room

to see which documents are already accessible.

https://www.fca.gov/home/FOIA_index.html
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The FCA posts answers to FAQs on its Web site.

https://www.fca.gov/about/faqs.html

Glossary
The FCA maintains an online glossary.

http://www.fca.gov/info/glossary.html

Handbook
The FCA Handbook database includes regulations, statutes, and FCA Board policy guidance that are applicable to the

FCA, Farm Credit System, and Farm Credit System Insurance Corporation. The handbook is accessible free of charge in

two formats: a searchable electronic database and files in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.fca.gov/exam/handbook.html

History
For centuries, North American farmers have sought reliable sources of credit to acquire land and to develop and

expand farms. Their need to access long-term, fixed-rate credit has continued to the present. While 19th-century

commercial banks made long-term credit available at reasonable rates to businessmen and industrial capitalists, they

provided less of the same service to farmers. Presidents Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and Woodrow

Wilson saw the problem and sought solutions. To learn what they did to help 20th-century American farmers, visit the

"History of FCA" Web page.

https://www.fca.gov/about/history/historyFCA_FCS.html

Institution Directory and Map
The Farm Credit System institution directory contains information on each institution and its chartered territory.

https://www.fca.gov/info/directory.html

Lender Locator
The Farm Credit System has 70 lending associations. To find an association, use the online locator tool by entering a

street address or ZIP Code. Search results include all branch offices for a particular association. More than one lending

association may serve a location. Phone, 703-883-4056.

https://apps.fca.gov/Locator | Email: info-line@fca.gov

News / Events
The FCA announces events and posts news releases, rulemaking factsheets, speeches and statements, and testimonies

online.

http://www.fca.gov/news/index.html

Office of Inspector General (OIG)
The OIG conducts audits, evaluations, inspections, and investigations; reviews proposed legislation and regulations;

informs the FCA Board and Congress of fraud or other serious problems; recommends policies to promote economy

and efficiency and to prevent abuse, fraud, and waste; recommends corrective actions and reports on progress made
    in implementing them; and refers criminal matters to appropriate agencies for prosecution. Hotline, 800-437-7322 or

    703-883-4316. Phone, 703-883-4030.

    https://www.fca.gov/home/inspector.html

    Open Government
    The FCA supports the Open Government initiative by promoting collaboration, participation, and transparency.

    https://www.fca.gov/home/opengovernment.html

    Organizational Chart
    The FCA posts its organizational chart online.

    https://www.fca.gov/about/offices/orgchart.html
    The FCA's organizational chart is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

    https://www.fca.gov/Download/FCAorgchart.pdf

    Plain Writing
    Feedback on the clarity of documents and other items on the Web site helps improve the guidance that the FCA gives

    to institutions and the services that it offers to Americans. If a document or Web page is unclear, contact the Office of

    Congressional and Public Affairs. Phone, 703-883-4056.

    http://www.fca.gov/home/plainwriting.html

    Publications
    FCA documents are posted online, including publications about the Farm Credit Administration and information on

    the Farm Credit System. To find an older document, one that is over 5 years old, search in the archives. More

    information is available from the Office of Congressional and Public Affairs. Phone, 703-883-4056 (voice and TTY). Fax,

    703-790-3260.

    http://www.fca.gov/rpts/index.html | Email: info-line@fca.gov

    Site Map
    The Web site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

    https://www.fca.gov/home/sitemap.html
    http://www.fca.gov/home/contact.html | Email: info-line@fca.gov

        For further information, contact the Office of Congressional and Public Affairs, Farm Credit
        Administration, 1501 Farm Credit Drive, McLean, VA 22102-5090. Phone, 703-883-4056.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                           Federal Communications Commission




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION
    445 Twelfth Street SW., Washington, DC 20554


    888-225-5322

    TTY, 888-835-5322

    http://www.fcc.gov




    Commissioners
 CHAIR                                                   Brendan Carr




                                                         Geoffrey Starks


                                                         Nathan Simington


                                                         Anna M. Gomez

https://www.fcc.gov/about/leadership



Bureau/Office Chiefs


 Consumer and Governmental Affairs                       Eduard Bartholme


 Enforcement                                             Patrick Webre


 Media                                                   Erin Boone


 Public Safety and Homeland Security                     Zenji Nakazawa


 Space                                                   Jay Schwarz


 Wireline Competition                                    Trent Harkrader


 Wireless Telecommunications                             Joel Taubenblatt


 Engineering and Technology                              Ira Keltz


 Economics and Analytics                                 Catherine Matraves


 International Affairs                                   Thomas Sullivan

https://www.fcc.gov/offices-bureaus#block-menu-block-4



Office Heads


 General Counsel                                         Adam Candeub


 Managing Director                                       Mark Stephens




 CHIEFS
  Administrative Law Judges                                                                 Jane Hinckley Halprin


  Inspector General                                                                         Fara Damelin




  DIRECTORS


  Communications Business Opportunities                                                     Jamie Saloom, Acting


  Legislative Affairs                                                                       Matt Mittelstaedt


  Media Relations                                                                           Katie Gorscak, Acting


  Workplace Diversity                                                                       Larry Hudson


  Workplace Diversity                                                                       (Vacancy)

https://www.fcc.gov/about-fcc/organizational-charts-fcc

  Inspector General                                                                         David L. Hunt


https://www.fcc.gov/inspector-general#block-menu-block-4



The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2018.


  [For the Federal Communications Commission statement of organization, see the Code of Federal
  Regulations, Title 47, Part 0]



The Federal Communications Commission regulates interstate and foreign communications by radio, television, wire,

satellite, and cable in all 50 states, the District of Columbia and the U.S. territories. A U.S. government agency overseen

by Congress, the Commission is the federal agency responsible for implementing and enforcing America's

communications law and regulations.


The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) was established by the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. 151 et

seq.) and is charged with regulating interstate and foreign communications by wire and radio in the public interest.

The scope of FCC regulation includes radio and television broadcasting; telephone and cable television operation;

two-way radio and radio operators; and satellite communication.


The Commission comprises five members whom the President appoints with the advice and consent of the Senate.

One of the members is designated by the President as the Chair.

https://www.fcc.gov/about/overview
ACTIVITIES

Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau
The Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau develops and administers the FCC's consumer and governmental

affairs policies and initiatives. The Bureau facilitates public participation in the Commission's decisionmaking process;

represents the Commission on consumer and Government committees, working groups, task forces, and conferences;

works with public, Federal, State, local, and tribal agencies to develop and coordinate policies; oversees the Consumer

Advisory Committee, the Disability Advisory Committee, and the Intergovernmental Advisory Committee; offers expert

advice on applicable disability and accessibility requirements, rules, and regulations, and assists with compliance;

resolves informal complaints; and conducts consumer outreach and education programs.

https://www.fcc.gov/consumer-governmental-affairs#block-menu-block-4

  For further information, contact the Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau. Phone, 202-418-1400 or
  888-225-5322.



Enforcement Bureau
The Enforcement Bureau serves as the FCC's primary agency for enforcing the Communications Act, other

communications statutes, and the FCC's rules. The Bureau investigates and resolves complaints regarding common

carriers (wireline, wireless, and international) and noncommon carriers subject to the Commission's jurisdiction under

Title II of the Communications Act; radio frequency interference, equipment, and devices; accessibility to

communications services and equipment for persons with disabilities; noncompliance with the lighting and marking of

radio transmitting towers and pole attachment regulations; and unauthorized construction and operation of

communication facilities and false distress signals.

https://www.fcc.gov/enforcement#block-menu-block-4

  For further information, contact the Enforcement Bureau. Phone, 202-418-7450 or 888-225-5322.



Space Bureau
The Space Bureau plays a key role in advancing the Commission’s Space Innovation Agenda to meet the needs of the

next generation Space Age. The Space Bureau promotes a competitive and innovative global communications

marketplace by leading policy and licensing matters related to satellite and space-based communications and

activities. Among its responsibilities, it: leads complex policy analysis and rulemakings; authorizes satellite and earth

station systems used for space-based services; streamlines regulatory processes to provide maximum flexibility for

operators to meet customer needs; and fosters the efficient use of scarce spectrum and orbital resources. The Space

Bureau also serves as the FCC’s focal point for coordination with other U.S. government agencies on matters of space

policy and governance, and collaborates with the Office of International Affairs (OIA) for consultations with other

countries, international and multi-lateral organizations, and foreign government officials that involve satellite and

space policy matters.

https://www.fcc.gov/space
  For further information, contact the Space Bureau. Phone, 202-418-1048 or 888-225-5322.



Media Bureau
The Media Bureau oversees broadcast radio, television, and cable policy and licensing, as well as post-licensing

matters for satellite services. The Bureau also conducts rulemaking proceedings and studies, resolves waiver petitions,

and processes applications for authorization, assignment, transfer, and renewal of radio, television, and cable television

relay services.

https://www.fcc.gov/media#block-menu-block-4

  For further information, contact the Media Bureau. Phone, 202-418-7200 or 888-225-5322.



Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau
The Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau develops, recommends, and administers the FCC's policies on public

safety communication. This includes 911 and E911, operability and interoperability of public safety communications,

communications infrastructure protection and disaster response, and network security and reliability. The Bureau also

disseminates public safety communication information for emergency communication programs; alerting and warning

U.S. citizens; continuity of government operations and operational planning; public safety outreach (e.g., first-

responder organizations and hospitals); disaster management coordination and outreach; and studies and reports of

public safety, homeland security, and disaster management issues.

https://www.fcc.gov/public-safety-and-homeland-security#block-menu-block-4 | Email: pshsbinfo@fcc.gov

  For further information, contact the Public Safety and Homeland Security Bureau. Phone, 202-418-1300
  or 888-225-5322.



Wireless Telecommunications Bureau
The Wireless Telecommunications Bureau administers all domestic commercial and private wireless communication

programs and rules. It addresses present and future wireless communication and spectrum needs; promotes access,

efficiency, and innovation in the allocation, licensing, and use of electromagnetic spectrum; ensures choice,

opportunity, and fairness in the development of wireless communication services and markets; and encourages the

development and widespread availability of wireless communication devices, facilities, and services. The Bureau also

develops, recommends, administers, and coordinates policy for wireless communication services, including rulemaking,

interpretations, and equipment standards; advises the public on FCC rules; serves as the FCC's principal policy and

administrative resource for all spectrum auctions; and processes wireless service and facility authorization applications.

https://www.fcc.gov/wireless-telecommunications#block-menu-block-4

  For further information, contact the Wireless Telecommunications Bureau. Phone, 202-418-0600 or 888-
  225-5322.



Wireline Competition Bureau
The Wireline Competition Bureau advises and makes recommendations to the FCC on policies affecting telephone
landlines and fixed broadband. Its programs protect affordable communications access for health care providers,

libraries, schools, and lifeline and rural consumers. The Bureau also ensures choice, opportunity, and fairness in the

development of wireline communications; assesses the present and future wireline communication needs of the

Nation; encourages the development and widespread availability of wireline communication services; and promotes

investment in wireline communication infrastructure.

https://www.fcc.gov/wireline-competition#block-menu-block-4

  For further information, contact the Wireline Competition Bureau. Phone, 202-418-1500 or 888-225-5322.



Engineering and Technology
The Office of Engineering and Technology (OET) supports the proper management of spectrum and provide

leadership to create new opportunities for competitive technologies and services for the American public. It maintains

the U.S. Table of Frequency Allocations, manages the Experimental Licensing and Equipment Authorization programs,

regulates the operation of unlicensed devices, and conducts engineering and technical studies.

https://www.fcc.gov/engineering-technology

  For further information, contact the Office of Engineering and Technology. Phone, 202-418-2470 or 888-
  225-5322.



Economics and Analytics
The Office of Economics and Analytics (OEA) is tasked with expanding and deepening the use of economics and data

analytics in the Commission’s policymaking. To that end, OEA performs economic analyses of rulemakings,

adjudications, and transactions. OEA also develops and implements (1) spectrum auctions and auctions for universal

service support, (2) the Commission’s data practices and policies, and (3) many of the Commission’s largest data

collections.

https://www.fcc.gov/economics-and-analytics

  For further information, contact the Office of Economics and Analytics. Phone, 202-418-2030 or 888-225-
  5233.



International Affairs
The International Bureau serves as the FCC's principal representative at international conferences and in international

negotiations. The Bureau promotes procompetitive policies abroad, coordinating the FCC’s global spectrum activities

and advocating U.S. interests in international communications and competition. It provides advice and technical

assistance to U.S. trade officials in the negotiation and implementation of telecommunications trade agreements. It

also encourages the international coordination of spectrum allocation and of frequency and orbital assignments to

minimize cases of international radio interference involving U.S. licenses.

https://www.fcc.gov/international#block-menu-block-4

  For further information, contact the International Bureau. Phone, 202-418-0437 or 888-225-5322.
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Blog
The FCC maintains a blog.

https://www.fcc.gov/news-events/blog

Acquisition, Procurement, and Compliance
The FCC relies on contractors for goods and services to carry out its mission. Many of these procurements are suitable

for small businesses, and some offer opportunities for subcontracting possibilities. FCC obtains most goods and

services using GSA Schedules. Major procurements included are services supporting FCC IT systems, administrative

and professional services, and facility and maintenance services

https://www.fcc.gov/about-fcc/contracting | Email: EACHelp@fcc.gov

Career Opportunities
The FCC maintains a web-based recruitment system that allows employees and outside job seekers to apply for job

opportunities online.

https://www.fcc.gov/general/fcc-jobs
In 2023, the FCC ranked 13th among 26 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/FC00

Consumer Help Center
For general information on FCC operations, contact the FCC Consumer Center, Phone, 888-835-5322.

https://www.fcc.gov/consumers

Ex-Parte Presentations
For more information, contact the Commission's Office of General Counsel. Phone, 202-418-1720.

https://www.fcc.gov/proceedings-actions/ex-parte

Federal Advisory Committee Management
For more information, contact the Office of Managing Director. Phone, 202-418-2178.

https://www.fcc.gov/about-fcc/advisory-committees-fcc

Fees
Information on the FCC's fee programs is available online or from the Registration System / Fee Filer Help Desk.

Phone, 877-480-3201 (option 4).

https://www.fcc.gov/licensing-databases/fees | Email: ARINQUIRIES@fcc.gov

Freedom of Information Act
For more information, contact the FOIA Requester Service Center. Phone, 202-418-1379.
https://www.fcc.gov/general/foia | Email: foia@fcc.gov

Internal Equal Employment Practices
For more information, contact the Office of Workplace Diversity. Phone, 202-418-1799.

https://www.fcc.gov/workplace-diversity

Internships
Information on FCC internships is available online.

https://www.fcc.gov/general/internships-available-fcc

Licensing
Information on the FCC's licensing systems is available online.

http://www.fcc.gov/licensing

News
The Office of Media Relations distributes public notices and press releases and makes them available online.

https://www.fcc.gov/media-relations

Offices / Bureaus
The "Offices and Bureaus" web page includes a brief description of FCC offices and bureaus, as well as links to related

webpages with additional information.

https://www.fcc.gov/offices-bureaus#block-menu-block-4

Organizational Chart
The FCC's organizational chart is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.fcc.gov/sites/default/files/FCC-OrgChart_0.pdf
The organizational charts of FCC offices and bureaus are available online in Portable Document Format (PDF) for

viewing and downloading.

https://www.fcc.gov/about-fcc/organizational-charts-fcc

(%blankline%)

Public Inspection
Records that are deemed nonconfidential by law can be viewed on the FCC's Web site. Each broadcasting station

maintains a current copy of its application for license, operational information, and nonconfidential FCC reports for

public inspection.


Publications
The Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau maintains an online consumer publications library.

https://www.fcc.gov/consumers

Social Media
     To inform and to connect and engage with the general public, the FCC uses social media: Disqus, Facebook, GitHub,

     Instagram,LinkedIn, X, and YouTube.

     https://www.fcc.gov/social-media
     https://www.fcc.gov/about/contact

        For further information, contact the Consumer Center, Federal Communications Commission, Phone,
        888-225-5322.


     https://www.fcc.gov/about/contact

        For further information, contact the Consumer Center, Federal Communications Commission, 445 Twelfth
        Street SW., Washington, DC 20554. Phone, 888-225-5322. TTY, 888-835-5322.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                          Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORPORATION
    550 Seventeenth Street NW., Washington, DC 20429


    703-562-2222

    http://www.fdic.gov




    Board of Directors
 CHAIR                                                  Martin J. Gruenberg


 Vice Chair                                             Thomas M. Hoenig




 Director (Consumer Financial Protection Bureau)        J. Michael Mulvaney, Acting


 Director (Office of the Comptroller of the Currency)   Joseph M. Otting


 Director                                               (vacancy)

https://www.fdic.gov/about/learn/board



Headquarters–Washington, DC


 CHAIR                                                  Martin J. Gruenberg


 Vice Chair                                             Thomas M. Hoenig




 Chief of Staff                                         Barbara A. Ryan


 Special Advisor for Supervisory Matters                Jason C. Cave




 DEPUTIES


 Deputy to the Chair                                    Kymberly K. Copa


 Deputy to the Chair / Chief Financial Officer          Steven O. App


 Deputy to the Chair / Chief Operating Officer          Barbara A. Ryan


 Deputy to the Vice Chair                               Michael Spencer, Acting




 DIVISION HEADS


 Chief Information Officer / Chief Privacy Officer      Howard Whyte, Acting


 Chief Information Security Officer                     Noreen Padilla, Acting


 Director, Administration                               Arleas Upton Kea
  Director, Corporate University / Chief Learning Officer                                    Suzannah L. Susser


  Director, Depositor and Consumer Protection                                                Mark E. Pearce


  Director, Finance                                                                          Craig R. Jarvill


  Director, Information Technology                                                           Russell G. Pittman


  Director, Insurance and Research                                                           Diane Ellis


  Director, Resolution and Receiverships                                                     Bret D. Edwards


  Director, Risk Management Supervision                                                      Doreen R. Eberley


  General Counsel                                                                            Charles Yi




  OFFICE HEADS


  Chief Risk Officer                                                                         Kenyon Kilber, Acting


  Deputy to the Chair for Communications                                                     Barbara Hagenbaugh


  Director, Complex Financial Institutions                                                   Ricardo R. Delfin


  Director, Legislative Affairs                                                              M. Andy Jiminez


  Director, Minority and Women Inclusion                                                     Saul Schwartz, Acting


  Ombudsman                                                                                  M. Anthony Lowe


  Inspector General                                                                          Jay N. Lerner


https://www.fdicoig.gov



The above list of key personnel was updated 02–2018.

The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation preserves and promotes public confidence in U.S. financial institutions by

insuring bank and thrift deposits, examining State-chartered banks, and liquidating assets of failed institutions.


The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) was established under the Banking Act of 1933 after numerous

banks failed during the Great Depression. The FDIC began insuring banks on January 1, 1934. The basic insurance

coverage per depositor at each insured bank and savings association is $250,000.

https://www.fdic.gov/about/history
The FDIC is managed by a five-member Board of Directors, all of whom the President appoints and the Senate
confirms. No more than three of the Directors can be affiliated with the same political party.


The FDIC insures approximately 5,850 institutions. It receives no congressional appropriations. FDIC funding comes

from insurance premiums on deposits held by insured banks and savings associations and from interest on the

investment of those premiums in U.S. Government securities. FDIC has authority to borrow up to $100 billion from the

Treasury for insurance purposes.

https://www.fdic.gov/about/strategic/strategic/mission.html



ACTIVITIES
The FDIC insures about $13 trillion of U.S. bank and thrift deposits. As required by law, the fund relies on two sources

of income: premiums paid by banks and savings associations, and the interest on the investment of those premiums in

U.S. Government securities. An institution's level of capitalization and potential risk to the insurance fund determines its

premiums.

https://www.fdic.gov/deposit
The FDIC examines about 3,600 State-chartered commercial and savings banks that are not members of the Federal

Reserve System, called State nonmember banks. The FDIC also has authority to examine other types of FDIC-insured

institutions for deposit insurance purposes. The two types of examinations conducted are for safety and soundness

and for compliance with applicable consumer laws such as the Truth in Lending Act, the Home Mortgage Disclosure

Act, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, the Fair Housing Act, and the Community Reinvestment Act. FDIC examiners

work onsite at the institution as well analyze bank data offsite.

https://www.fdic.gov/regulations
A failed bank or savings association is generally closed by its chartering authority, and the FDIC is named receiver. The

FDIC is required to resolve the closure in a manner that is least costly to its Deposit Insurance Fund. Ordinarily, the

FDIC attempts to locate a healthy institution to acquire the failed entity. If such an entity cannot be found, the FDIC

pays depositors the amount of their insured funds, usually by the next business day following the closure. Depositors

with funds that exceed the insurance limit often receive an advance dividend, which is a portion of their uninsured

funds that is determined by an estimate of the future proceeds from liquidating the failed institution's remaining

assets. Depositors with funds in a failed institution that exceed the insurance limit receive a receivership certificate for

those funds and partial payments of their uninsured funds as asset disposition permits.


As part of its insurance, supervisory, and receivership responsibilities, the FDIC approves or disapproves mergers,

consolidations, and acquisitions where the resulting bank is an insured State nonmember; approves or disapproves

proposals by banks to establish and operate a new branch, close an existing branch, or move its main office from one

location to another; and approves or disapproves requests to engage as principal in activities and investments that are

not permissible for a national bank. It also issues enforcement actions, including cease-and-desist orders, for specific

violations or practices requiring corrective action and reviews changes in ownership or control of a bank.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Assistance for Bank Customers
An electronic form is available for filing a complaint against a particular financial institution. The form also may be used

to inquire about FDIC deposit insurance coverage or to ask a question about a particular financial institution.

https://www5.fdic.gov/starsmail/index.asp

Bank Failures
The FDIC maintains a failed bank list that contains information on how accounts and loans are affected, how vendors

can file claims against the receivership, and the acquiring bank—if applicable. The list covers from October 1, 2000, to

the present.

https://www.fdic.gov/bank/individual/failed/banklist.html
Starting with the year 2001, the FDIC maintains a brief summary of each bank failure. For additional information on

recent failures, call the customer service hotline. Phone, 888-206-4662.

https://www.fdic.gov/bank/historical/bank
A search tool is available online to help the public find the point of contact information of failed institutions.

https://www5.fdic.gov/drrip/cs/index.asp
Detailed information on bank and thrift failures since 1934 is available on the FDIC website.

https://www5.fdic.gov/hsob/SelectRpt.asp?EntryTyp=30

Bank Finder
The FDIC website has an online tool for locating insured banking institutions.

https://research.fdic.gov/bankfind

Call Center
The call center is open every day of the week: Monday–Friday, 8 a.m.–8 p.m., eastern standard time; Saturday and

Sunday, 9 a.m.–5 p.m., eastern standard time. Phone, 877-275-3342. Phone, 800-925-4618 (hearing impaired).


Career Opportunities
FDIC job openings and information on career transition assistance, student employment opportunities, and submitting

an application are available online.

https://www.fdic.gov/about/jobs
In 2017, the FDIC ranked 3d among 25 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/FD00

Electronic Deposit Insurance Estimator (EDIE)
Consumers and bankers can use EDIE to determine, on a per-bank basis, how the insurance rules and limits apply to a

depositor's specific group of deposit accounts—what is insured and what portion, if any, exceeds coverage limits.

https://www.fdic.gov/edie/index.html

Enlaces en Español
Links to information and resources in Spanish are available on the FDIC website.

https://www.fdic.gov/quicklinks/spanish.html

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FDIC operates a FOIA service center that is open on weekdays, 8:30 a.m.–5:00 p.m., excluding Federal holidays.

Phone, 202-898-7021.

https://www.fdic.gov/about/freedom | Email: efoia@fdic.gov
The FDIC's FOIA guide offers a concise explanation of the FOIA and how it can be used to access Government

records. It also explains the process for submitting a request to the FDIC. The guide also provides links to helpful

reference guides and describes how additional information may be obtained from the FDIC.

https://www.fdic.gov/about/freedom/guide.html
The FDIC accepts electronic FOIA requests.

https://efoiarequest.fdic.gov/palMain.aspx

History
"On March 3 banking operations in the United States ceased . . . the government has been compelled to step in."

These words, President Franklin D. Roosevelt spoke to the U.S. Congress in 1933, 6 days after the banks had closed,

when the Nation's banking system still lay dormant. The U.S. economy was in the throes of deep and widespread

depression. Three months later, in response to the crisis, President Roosevelt approved the Banking Act of 1933, giving

birth to the FDIC and Federal depositor protection, which the general public supported. To learn about the

antecedents to Federal deposit insurance and the creation of the FDIC and its general history, see "A History of the

FDIC 1933–1983."

https://www.fdic.gov/bank/analytical/firstfifty
In 2008 and 2009, FDIC agents were active seizing failed banks. To learn about the process of a bank seizure and the

efforts made by the FDIC to shield employees and depositors from the ill effects of a failure, watch the CBS 60 Minutes

video "Your Bank Has Failed."

https://www.fdic.gov/news/letters/60minutes.html

News / Events
The FDIC posts conferences and events, financial institution letters, opinion editorials, press releases, speeches, and

testimonies on its website.

https://www.fdic.gov/news
The FDIC offers an online subscription service for email alerts. A subscriber may opt to receive various types of alerts:

financial institution letters, news releases, statistical publications, and other types.

https://service.govdelivery.com/accounts/USFDIC/subscriber/new
The FDIC disseminates information and news using RSS feeds.

https://www.fdic.gov/rss.html
The FCC tweets news items and other information on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/FDICgov
Office of Inspector General (OIG)
The OIG operates a toll-free, nationwide hotline to provide a way for FDIC employees, its contractors, financial

institution staff, and other members of the public to report incidents of abuse, fraud, mismanagement, and waste

within FDIC programs and activities or its contractor operations. A person can file a report anonymously, confidentially,

or openly by using the hotline; however, filing a report by email guarantees neither anonymity nor confidentiality.

Phone, 800-964-3342. Fax, 703-562-6444.

https://www.fdicig.gov | Email: ighotline@fdic.gov

Open Government
The FDIC supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

https://www.fdic.gov/open | Email: opengov@fdic.gov

Plain Language
The FDIC welcomes comment on it’s compliance with the Plain Writing Act of 2010 and suggestions for improving

communication between the agency and the public.

https://www.fdic.gov/plainlanguage | Email: PlainWriting@fdic.gov

Publications
The FDIC website has an online product catalog and ordering system.

https://catalog.fdic.gov
Publications, press releases, congressional testimony, directives to financial institutions, and other documents are

available through the Public Information Center. Phone, 877-275-3342 (press 1, then press 5).

http://www.fdic.gov/news/publications/PIChardcopies.html | Email: publicinfo@fdic.gov

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse for content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.fdic.gov/sitemap

Social Media
The FDIC has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/FDICgov
The FDIC tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/FDICgov
The FDIC posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/FDICchannel
https://www.fdic.gov/about/contact/ask | Email: communications@fdic.gov

  For further information and media inquiries, contact the Office of Communications, Federal Deposit
  Insurance Corporation, 550 Seventeenth Street NW., Washington, DC 20429. Phone, 202-898-6993.
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                Federal Election Commission




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION
    999 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20463


    202-694-1100

    800-424-9530

    http://www.fec.gov


      CHAIR                                                                                 (vacancy)


      Vice Chair                                                                            James E. Trainor, III
  Commissioner                                                                                Shana M. Broussard


  Commissioner                                                                                Allen Dickerson


  Commissioner                                                                                Dara Lindenbaum


  Commissioner                                                                                (vacancy)


  Staff Director                                                                              Alec Palmer


  Chief Financial Officer                                                                     Gilbert Ford, Acting


  General Counsel                                                                             Lisa J. Stevenson, Acting


  Inspector General                                                                           Vacant



The Federal Election Commission provides public disclosure of campaign finance activities and ensures compliance with

campaign finance laws and regulations.

Organizational Chart
The Federal Election Commission is an independent agency established by section 309 of the Federal Election

Campaign Act of 1971, as amended (52 U.S.C. 30106). It comprises six Commissioners whom the President appoints

with the advice and consent of the Senate. The Act also provides for three statutory officers—the staff director, the

general counsel, and the inspector general—whom the Commissioners appoint.

https://transition.fec.gov/about/offices/offices.shtml



ACTIVITIES
The Commission administers and enforces the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971, as amended (52 U.S.C. 30101 et

seq.), and the Revenue Act, as amended (26 U.S.C. 1 et seq.). These laws provide for the public funding of Presidential

elections, public disclosure of the financial activities of political committees involved in Federal elections, and limitations

and prohibitions on contributions and expenditures made to influence Federal elections.


Public Funding of Presidential Elections
The Commission oversees the public financing of Presidential elections by certifying Federal payments to primary

candidates and general election nominees. It also audits recipients of Federal funds and may require repayment to the

U.S. Treasury if a committee has made nonqualified campaign expenditures.


Disclosure
The Commission ensures public disclosure of the campaign finance activities reported by political committees

supporting Federal candidates. These committees regularly file reports disclosing the sources of campaign money and

how that money is spent. The Commission places these reports on the public record within 48 hours after they are

received and digitizes the data contained in them.
http://www.fec.gov/ans/answers_disclosure.shtml



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Congressional Affairs
This Office of Congressional, Legislative, and Intergovernmental Affairs serves as the Commission's primary

congressional and executive branch liaison. Phone, 202-694-1006.

https://transition.fec.gov/about/offices/cong_affairs/cong_affairs.shtml | Email: congress@fec.gov

Data
Data tables summarizing campaign financial activity by filer type, election cycle, and reporting period are available

online.

http://www.fec.gov/press/campaign_finance_statistics.shtml

Career Opportunities
The Commission posts available positions on its Web site. Sign up online to receive email updates regarding

employment opportunities. Information is also available from the Office of Human Resources. Phone, 202-694-1080.

http://www.fec.gov/pages/jobs/jobs.shtml | Email: fecjobs@fec.gov

Filing
Information is available online to help filers comply with the disclosure requirements of the Federal campaign finance

law.

http://www.fec.gov/info/filing.shtml

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
FOIA requests may be submitted by email or fax or sent by mail to the Federal Election Commission, Attn: FOIA

Requester Service Center, Room 408, 999 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20463. Fax, 202-219-1043.

http://www.fec.gov/press/foia.shtml | Email: FOIA@fec.gov

General Inquiries
The Information Division informs and assists Federal candidates, political committees, and the public. It answers

questions on campaign finance laws, conducts workshops and seminars on these laws, and distributes publications and

forms. Phone, 202-694-1100 or 800-424-9530. TDD, 202-219-3336.

http://www.fec.gov/pages/contact.shtml | Email: info@fec.gov

Law Library
The library contains a collection of basic legal research resources on political campaign financing, corporate and labor

political activity, and campaign finance reform. It is open to the public on weekdays, 9 a.m.–5 p.m., except on Federal

holidays. Phone, 202-694-1516 or 800-424-9530.

http://www.fec.gov/general/library.shtml

Media Inquiries
     The Press Office answers questions from media sources, issues press releases on Commission actions and statistical

     data, responds to requests for information, and distributes other materials. Phone, 202-694-1220.

     http://www.fec.gov/press/index.shtml | Email: press@fec.gov

     Public Records
     The Public Records Branch, located at 999 E Street NW., Washington, DC, provides space for public inspection of

     campaign finance reports and statements after 1971. It is open to the public on weekdays, 9 a.m.–5 p.m., except on

     Federal holidays. Phone, 202-694-1120 or 800-424-9530.

     http://www.fec.gov/pubrec/publicrecordsoffice.shtml | Email: pubrec@fec.gov
     http://www.fec.gov/pages/contact.shtml

        For further information, contact the Information Division, Federal Election Commission, 999 E Street NW.,
        Washington, DC 20463. Phone, 202-694-1100 or 800-424-9530 (option 6).




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                              Federal Housing Finance Agency




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL HOUSING FINANCE AGENCY
    400 7th Street SW., Washington, DC 20219


    202-649-3800

    http://www.fhfa.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Melvin L. Watt


      Chief Operating Officer                                                               Lawrence Stauffer, Acting
  Director, Office of Minority and Women Inclusion                                      Sharron P. A. Levine




  Deputy Director, Division of Conservatorship                                          Bob Ryan, Acting


  Deputy Director, Division of Federal Home Loan Bank Regulation                        Fred C. Graham


  Deputy Director, Division of Enterprise Regulation                                    Nina Nichols


  Deputy Director, Division of Housing Mission and Goals                                Sandra Thompson




  General Counsel                                                                       Alfred M. Pollard


  Inspector General                                                                     Laura S. Wertheimer


  Obmbudsman                                                                            Janell Byrd-Chichester, Acting



The Federal Housing and Finance Agency ensures that the housing Government-Sponsored Enterprises operate safely

and soundly and serve as a reliable source of liquidity and funding for housing finance and community investment.

Organizational Chart
The Federal Housing and Finance Agency (FHFA) was established by the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008

(42 U.S.C. 4501 note) as an independent agency in the executive branch. The merger of the Federal Housing Finance

Board and the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, combined with the transfer of the Department of

Housing and Urban Development's Government-Sponsored Enterprise mission team, formed the FHFA.


The FHFA is managed by a Director whom the President appoints and the Senate confirms. FHFA's Director also serves

as the Chairman of the Federal Housing Oversight Board. The Secretary of the Treasury, the Secretary of Housing and

Urban Development, and the Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission are also members of the Board.

http://www.fhfa.gov/AboutUs



ACTIVITIES
The FHFA provides research and data, supervision, and policies for strengthening and securing the U.S. secondary

mortgage markets. It oversees vital components of those markets: the housing Government-Sponsored Enterprises of

Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the Federal Home Loan Bank System. Combined, these entities make available more

than $5.6 trillion in funding for financial institutions and the U.S. mortgage markets. The FHFA also acts as the

conservator of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

http://www.fhfa.gov/PolicyProgramsResearch
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Blog
Agency experts share their insights into housing finance issues on the blog "FHFA Insights."

https://www.fhfa.gov/Media/Pages/Insights.aspx

Business Opportunities
FHFA contracting operations is responsible for procuring all goods and services, including information technology, that

the agency requires.

http://www.fhfa.gov/AboutUs/Business

Career Opportunities
The Agency's mission-critical professionals include accountants, attorneys, economists, examiners, financial analysts,

and information technology specialists. The FHFA also relies on budget and procurement and human resource

specialists, facilities managers, policy experts, and student interns, to fill important support roles. The Agency advertises

opportunities for employment on its "Careers" Web page. Contact the Office of Human Resources Management for

additional information. Phone, 202-649-3807.

http://www.fhfa.gov/AboutUs/Careers

Dodd–Frank Act Stress Tests
The FHFA requires Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and Federal Home Loan Banks to conduct stress tests pursuant to the

Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010.

https://www.fhfa.gov/SupervisionRegulation/DoddFrankActStressTests
The FHFA is categorized as a small agency in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work in the Federal

Government rankings. In 2016, the Agency improved its index score.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/FY00

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA established a statutory right of public access to executive branch information in the Federal Government. It

gives a right to any person to obtain access to Federal agency records; however, nine exemptions and three special

law enforcement exclusions shield certain records from public disclosure.

https://www.fhfa.gov/AboutUs/FOIAPrivacy/Pages/FOIA.aspx | Email: foia@fhfa.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The FHFA posts answers to FAQs on various topics: the Home Affordable Refinance Program (HARP), housing price

index (HPI), servicing alignment initiative, as well as on conservatorship, Federal Home Loan Bank membership,

principal reduction modification, and private mortgage insurer draft eligibility requirements,

https://www.fhfa.gov/Media/Pages/FAQs.aspx

History
On September 6, 2008, the FHFA placed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac into conservatorship because they could no

longer carry out their mission without Government intervention. To learn more about this extraordinary action and this

critical moment in the history of the Nation's mortgage market, visit the "History of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac

Conservatorships" Web page.

https://www.fhfa.gov/Conservatorship/Pages/History-of-Fannie-Mae--Freddie-Conservatorships.aspx
A timeline of significant events in the history of the FHFA is available on its Web site.

https://www.fhfa.gov/AboutUs/Timeline

Key Topics
These Web pages contain information on the FHFA's work on a range of national issues. They highlight relevant news

releases, reports, statements, and web pages on the key topics.

https://www.fhfa.gov/KeyTopics

Meet the Experts
The "Meet the Experts" page contains brief professional biographies of experienced, well-educated FHFA personnel.

https://www.fhfa.gov/PolicyProgramsResearch/Pages/Meet-the-Experts.aspx

Navigate by Audience
The "Government" Web page contains consolidated resources for Federal, State, and local government personnel

seeking information related to the Nation's housing finance system.

https://www.fhfa.gov/Government
The "Homeowners and Homebuyers" Web page guides homeowners and buyers to resources and tools: information

on avoiding foreclosure, buying a new home, refinancing an existing home, shopping for a mortgage, understanding

the housing markets, and more.

https://www.fhfa.gov/Homeownersbuyer
The "Industry" Web page contains consolidated resources for advocacy organizations, investors, mortgage insurers,

originators, servicers, small and large companies, trade groups, vendors, and others with an interest in the Nation's

housing finance system.

https://www.fhfa.gov/Industry
The "Media" Web page gives members of the media and general public access to FHFA expertise on and insight into

housing finance.

https://www.fhfa.gov/Media | Email: MediaInquiries@fhfa.gov

News
The FHFA posts news releases on its Web site.

https://www.fhfa.gov/Media/Pages/News-Releases.aspx?k=ContentType%3APublic-
Affairs%20AND%20PublicAffairsCategoryOWSCHCS%3A%22News%20Release%22%20AND%20FHFAPublishedDateO
WSDATE%3D01%2F01%2F2017%2E%2E12%2F31%2F2017

Open Government
The FHFA supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and
     transparency.

     https://www.fhfa.gov/AboutUs/Policies/Pages/Open-Government.aspx

     Plans / Reports
     The FHFA posts performance and strategic plans and various types of reports on its Web site.

     https://www.fhfa.gov/AboutUs/reportsplans

     Privacy Act of 1974
     Fair information practices govern the collection, maintenance, use, and dissemination of an individual's personally

     identifiable information that a Federal agency maintains in a system of records—in a group of records that an agency

     controls and from which its staff may retrieve information by using the individual's name or an assigned identifier.

     https://www.fhfa.gov/AboutUs/FOIAPrivacy/Pages/Privacy.aspx | Email: Privacy@fhfa.gov

     Site Map
     The Web site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

     https://www.fhfa.gov/AboutUs/Sitemap

     Social Media
     The FHFA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/FHFA
     The FHFA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCoKP7Om6nsRkEav9yInFekw

     Tools
     A borrower assistance map, conforming loan limits map, and housing price index (HPI) calculator and motion chart, as

     well as HPI maps (county, four-quarter appreciation, ZIP5) and summary tables, are available online.

     https://www.fhfa.gov/DataTools/Tools
     https://www.fhfa.gov/AboutUs/Contact | Email: fhfainfo@fhfa.gov

        For further information, contact the Office of Congressional Affairs and Communications, Federal
        Housing Finance Agency, 400 7th Street SW., Washington, DC 20219. Phone, 202-649-3802.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility
Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                             Federal Labor Relations Authority




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL LABOR RELATIONS AUTHORITY
    1400 K Street NW., Washington, DC 20005


    202-218-7770

    http://www.flra.gov




    AGENCY SUPPORT
 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER                                                    Ernest DuBester


 CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER                                               Ernest DuBester




 DIRECTORS


 Collaboration and Alternative Dispute Resolution                           Michael Wolf


 Equal Employment Opportunity                                               (vacancy)




 Solicitor                                                                  Noah Peters




Office of Executive Director


 Executive Director                                                         Michael W. Jeffries




 DIRECTORS


 Administrative Services                                                    Xavier Storr


 Budget and Finance                                                         Gregory Mister


 Human Resources                                                            Paula Chandler


 Information Resources Management                                           David Fontaine


 Legislative Affairs and Program Planning                                   Aloysius Hogan

https://www.flra.gov/components-offices/offices/office-executive-director



AUTHORITY COMPONENT


 CHAIR                                                                      Ernest DuBester


 Members                                                                    James T. Abbott


                                                                            Colleen D. Kiko
 Case Intake and Publication                                                         (vacancy)


 Chief Administrative Law Judge                                                      David L. Welch


 Solicitor                                                                           Noah Peters

https://www.flra.gov/about/flra-leadership



Federal Service Impasses Panel


 CHAIR                                                                               (vacancy)


 Members                                                                             (vacancy)


                                                                                     (vacancy)


                                                                                     (vacancy)


                                                                                     (vacancy)


                                                                                     (vacancy)


                                                                                     (vacancy)


                                                                                     (vacancy)


                                                                                     (vacancy)


                                                                                     (vacancy)

https://www.flra.gov/components-offices/components/federal-service-impasses-panel-fsip-or-panel



Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel


 CHAIR                                                                               (vacancy)


 Members                                                                             Richard T. Miller


                                                                                     (vacancy)


                                                                                     (vacancy)


                                                                                     (vacancy)

https://www.flra.gov/components-offices/components/federal-service-impasses-panel-fsip-or-panel/foreign-service-
impasse
Foreign Service Labor Relations Board


 CHAIR                                                                               Ernest DuBester


 Members                                                                             Dennis K. Hays


                                                                                     Thomas J. Miller

https://www.flra.gov/components-offices/components/authority/foreign-service-labor-relations-board



GENERAL COUNSEL COMPONENT


 General Counsel                                                                     Charlotte A. Dye, Acting

https://www.flra.gov/OGC_bios



Regional Offices


 DIRECTORS


 Atlanta                                                                             Richard Jones


 Chicago                                                                             Greg A. Weddle, Acting


 Denver                                                                              Timothy J. Sullivan


 San Francisco                                                                       John Pannozzo


 Washington                                                                          Jessica Bartlett

https://www.flra.gov/components-offices/components/office-general-counsel-ogc/office-general-counsel-ogc-
regional-offices



OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL


 Inspector General                                                                   Dana A. Rooney

https://www.flra.gov/components-offices/offices/office-inspector-general



 The above list of key personnel was updated 7–2021.



The Federal Labor Relations Authority oversees labor-management relations between the Federal Government and its
employees.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On May 23, 1978, President James E. Carter transmitted his reorganizational plan that consolidated central

policymaking functions in Federal labor-management relations to the Senate and the House of Representatives in the

U.S. Congress. Part III of Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1978 "established, as an independent establishment in the

Executive Branch, the Federal Labor Relations Authority [FLRA]."

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-92/pdf/STATUTE-92-Pg3783.pdf
The reorganization plan was printed in the Federal Register on August 15, 1978 (43 FR 36037).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1978-08-15/pdf/FR-1978-08-15.pdf
The reorganization became effective January 1, 1979, pursuant to Executive Order 12107 of December 28, 1978 (44 FR

1055).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1979-01-03/pdf/FR-1979-01-03.pdf
The FLRA's duties and authority are specified in "Title VII—Federal Service Labor-Management Relations" (92 Stat. 1191)

of the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 (PL 95–454).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-92/pdf/STATUTE-92-Pg1111.pdf
The FLRA comprises three members whom the President nominates and the Senate confirms to 5-year terms. The

Chair of the Authority serves as its Chief Executive and Chief Administrative Officer. The Chair also presides over the

Foreign Service Labor Relations Board. The General Counsel investigates alleged unfair labor practices, files and

prosecutes unfair labor practice complaints before the Authority, and exercises other powers that the Authority may

prescribe.

https://www.flra.gov/about/introduction-flra
The FLRA is organized into three statutory components: the Authority, the Office of the General Counsel, and the

Federal Service Impasses Panel. Each of the components has its own unique adjudicative or prosecutorial roles. The

agency also provides program and staff support to two other organizations: the Foreign Service Impasse Disputes

Panel and the Foreign Service Labor Relations Board.

https://www.flra.gov/components-offices
The FLRA has a number of offices within its three components.

https://www.flra.gov/components-offices/offices
The FLRA posts its organizational chart online.

https://www.flra.gov/about/organizational-chart
The FLRA posted a press release describing highlights of its updated organizational chart (June 2020).

https://www.flra.gov/system/files/webfm/FLRA%20Agency-
wide/Public%20Affairs/Press%20Releases/Press%20Release%20-
%20FLRA%20RELEASES%20UPDATED%20ORGANIZATIONAL%20CHART%206-29-2020.pdf

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1978 has been codified in the United States Code (U.S.C.) and assigned to the Appendix

of 5 U.S.C.
https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title5a-node84-leaf186&num=0&edition=prelim
Statutory material that affects the FLRA has been codified and assigned to Chapter 71, sections 7101–7106, of 5 U.S.C.

Chapter 71 has the title "Labor-Management Relations" and runs from section 7101 through 7154.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title5/part3/subpartF/chapter71&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that are associated with the FLRA, General Counsel of the FLRA, and Federal Service Impasse

Panel have been codified and assigned to Chapter XIV, parts 2400–2499, of 5 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=cd49c395b33e34776afc1b9dce26710e&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title05/5chapterXIV.tpl
Rules and regulations that are associated with the Foreign Service Labor Relations Board, Federal Labor Relations

Authority, General Counsel of the FLRA, and the Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel have been codified and

assigned to Chapter XIV, parts 1400–1499, of 22 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=00ab5d289e663071e5fe1e32170fe541&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title22/22chapterXIV.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The Authority adjudicates disputes arising under the Federal Labor-Management Relations Program, deciding cases

concerning the negotiability of collective bargaining agreement proposals, appeals concerning unfair labor practices

and representation petitions, and exceptions to grievance arbitration awards. It also assists Federal agencies and

unions in understanding their rights and responsibilities under the program.


The Federal Service Impasses Panel, an entity within the FLRA, assists in resolving negotiation impasses between

agencies and unions. The Panel can either recommend procedures to the parties for the resolution of the impasse or

assist the parties in resolving the impasse through whatever methods and procedures it considers appropriate,

including fact-finding and mediation-arbitration. If the parties do not arrive at a voluntary settlement after receiving

Panel assistance, the Panel may take whatever action is necessary to resolve the impasse, including the imposition of

contract terms.


The Foreign Service Labor Relations Board and the Foreign Service Impasse Disputes Panel administer provisions of

chapter 2 of the Foreign Service Act of 1980 (22 U.S.C. 3921) concerning labor-management relations. This chapter

establishes a statutory labor-management relations program for Foreign Service employees of the U.S. Government.

Administrative and staff support is provided by the Federal Labor Relations Authority and the Federal Service Impasses

Panel.

https://www.flra.gov/about/mission



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
The FLRA posts announcements for job openings on USAJobs. For more information, contact the Human Resources

Division. Phone, 202-218-7979.

https://www.usajobs.gov
In 2020, the FLRA ranked 24th among 29 small agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work
Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=AU00

Electronic Filing
To use the FLRA's electronic case filing system, register online and create a user profile. Email addresses are the case

filing system's primary means of identifying electronic filers.

https://efile.flra.gov/representatives/sign_in

Federal Register
Documents that the FLRA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-labor-relations-authority

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded from

disclosure by any of nine exemptions that the statute contains.

https://www.flra.gov/freedom-information-act-program
The FLRA maintains an electronic FOIA reading room.

https://www.flra.gov/elibrary

Media
Members of the media should contact the Counsel for Regulatory and Public Affairs if they have questions or seek

information. Phone, 202-218-7776.

https://www.flra.gov/about/public-affairs

News
The FLRA posts press releases on its website. The online archives contain press releases from 2009 through 2014.

https://www.flra.gov/press_releases

Open Government
The FLRA supports the Federal Government's efforts to increase collaboration, participation, and transparency.

https://www.flra.gov/open-government

Plain Language
The FLRA adheres to Federal plain language guidelines. To comply with the Plain Writing Act of 2010, the agency relies

on the general public. If a document or web page is difficult to understand, alert the FLRA editorial team to the lack of

clarity by sending an email.

https://www.flra.gov/plain_language | Email: engagetheFLRA@flra.gov

Regional Offices
Contact information for each of the five Office of the General Counsel Regional Offices is available online.

https://www.flra.gov/components-offices/components/office-general-counsel-ogc/office-general-counsel-ogc-
     regional-offices

        The above Sources of Information were updated 7–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Federal Maritime Commission




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL MARITIME COMMISSION
    800 North Capitol Street NW., Washington, DC 20573


    202-523-5707

    http://www.fmc.gov




    The Commission
 CHAIR                                              Michael A. Khouri




 COMMISSIONERS


                                                    Rebecca F. Dye


                                                    Daniel B. Maffei


                                                    Louis E. Sola


                                                    (vacancy)

https://www.fmc.gov/commissioners



Bureaus and Offices


 MANAGING DIRECTOR                                  Karen V. Gregory




 BUREAU DIRECTORS


 Certification and Licensing                        Sandra L. Kusumoto


 Enforcement                                        Benjamin K. Trogdon


 Trade Analysis                                     Florence A. Carr


 OFFICE DIRECTOR


 Consumer Affairs and Dispute Resolution Services   Rebecca A. Fenneman




 Chief Administrative Law Judge                     Erin M. Wirth


 Equal Employment Opportunity Director              Ebony Jarrett


 General Counsel                                    Tyler J. Wood


 Secretary                                          Rachel E. Dickon

https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/bureaus-offices
Office of Inspector General


  Inspector General                                                                         Jonathan Hatfield

https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/bureaus-offices/office-of-inspector-general | Email: OIG@fmc.gov



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2019.



The Federal Maritime Commission promotes an efficient, fair, and reliable supply system of international ocean

transportation; protects the public from deceptive, unfair, and unlawful practices; and contributes to the integrity and

security of the Nation's supply chain and transportation system.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Federal Maritime Commission (FMC) was established by Reorganization Plan No. 7 of 1961 (46 U.S.C. 301–307),

effective August 12, 1961. The FMC is an independent establishment, regulating shipping under the the Shipping Act of

1984, as amended (46 U.S.C. 40101–41309); Section 19 of the Merchant Marine Act, 1920 (46 U.S.C. 42101–42109); the

Foreign Shipping Practices Act of 1988 (46 U.S.C. 42301–42307); and Public Law 89–777, approved on November 6,

1966 (46 U.S.C. 44101–44106).

https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/fmc-regulations-statutes
The Commission is composed of five Commissioners, whom the President appoints by the advice and with the consent

of the Senate. The President may not appoint more than three Commissioners who are from the same political party.

The term of each Commissioner is 5 years. When his or her term ends, the Commissioner may continue to serve until

a successor is appointed and qualified, but only for 1 year or less. A vacancy is filled in the same manner as the original

appointment, which may be extended to include a second term. An individual appointed to fill a vacancy is appointed

for the unexpired term of the person being succeeded. That individual may serve two complete terms in addition to

the remainder of the term for which the predecessor of that individual was appointed.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2017-title46/pdf/USCODE-2017-title46-subtitleI-chap3.pdf
The FMC posts its organizational chart online.

https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/organizational-chart



ACTIVITIES

Adjudicatory Procedures
The FMC conducts formal investigations and hearings on its own motion and adjudicates formal complaints in

accordance with the Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. note prec. 551).

https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/bureaus-offices/administrative-law-judges | Email: judges@fmc.gov

Agreements
The FMC reviews agreements by and among ocean common carriers or marine terminal operators or by and among

carriers and operators, which are filed under section 5 of the Shipping Act of 1984, for statutory compliance and for

their likely effect on competition. It also monitors activities under all effective agreements for compliance with the

provisions of law and its rules, orders, and regulations.

https://www.fmc.gov/resources-services/vessel-operating-common-carriershttps://www.fmc.gov/resources-
services/marine-terminal-operators

Alternative Dispute Resolution
The FMC reviews informal complaints and assists parties in resolving disputes. Mediation and other dispute resolution

services are available to assist parties in achieving a more acceptable resolution to a dispute at less cost than may be

possible in litigation. These services are available before and after the commencement of litigation. The Commission

also provides an informal process to adjudicate certain complaints involving less than $50,000 in damages.

https://www.fmc.gov/databases-services/alternative-dispute-resolution-services | Email: complaints@fmc.gov

Complaints
The FMC reviews alleged or suspected violations of the shipping statutes and rules and regulations of the Commission

and may take administrative action to institute formal proceedings, to refer matters to other governmental agencies,

or to bring about voluntary agreement between the parties.

https://www.fmc.gov/databases-services/consumer-affairs-dispute-resolution-services | Email: complaints@fmc.gov

Economic Analyses
The FMC relies on the Office of Economics and Competition Analysis (OECA) for support in antitrust economics and

competition policy. OECA staff analyzes and monitors agreements that are filed with the FMC and that are between

ocean carriers or marine terminal operators or between carriers and operators. These agreements are monitored for

effects that inhibit competition and for compliance with FMC regulations and U.S. shipping laws.

https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/bureaus-offices/bureau-of-trade-analysis | Email: tradeanalysis@fmc.gov

Enforcement
The FMC relies on the Bureau of Enforcement (BOE) to serve as its prosecutorial component. Its attorneys participate

in formal proceedings as trial counsel and, with the assistance of FMC area representatives, they investigate potential

violations of the Shipping Act and FMC regulations. BOE attorneys also negotiate settlements and informal

compromises of civil penalties and may participate in factfinding investigations that are initiated under the Shipping

Act or the Foreign Shipping Practices Act.

https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/bureaus-offices/bureau-of-enforcement | Email: boe@fmc.gov

International Affairs
The FMC conducts investigations of foreign governmental and carrier practices that adversely affect the U.S. shipping

trade. In consultation with other executive agencies, the FMC takes action to effect the elimination of discriminatory

practices on the part of foreign governments against shipping in the United States foreign trade and to achieve comity

between the United States and its trading partners.

https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/bureaus-offices/general-counsel | Email: generalcounsel@fmc.gov
Licenses
The FMC issues licenses to those persons and entities in the United States who wish to carry out the business of

providing freight forwarding services and non-vessel-operating common carrier services.

https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/bureaus-offices/bureau-of-certification-and-licensing | Email: bcl@fmc.gov

Non-Vessel-Operating Common Carrier Service Arrangements
The FMC receives and reviews service arrangements entered into by non-vessel-operating common carriers and their

customers. Cargo moving under these service arrangements is exempt from the tariff publication and adherence

requirements of the Shipping Act, on the condition that the service arrangements must be filed with the Commission.

https://www.fmc.gov/resources-services/ocean-transportation-intermediaries

Passenger Indemnity
The FMC administers the passenger indemnity provisions of the act of November 6, 1966, which require shipowners

and operators to obtain certificates of financial responsibility to pay judgments for personal injury or death or to

refund fares in the event of nonperformance of voyages.

https://www.fmc.gov/resources-services/passenger-vessel-operators | Email: pvo@fmc.gov

Rulemaking
The FMC promulgates rules and regulations to interpret, enforce, and ensure compliance with shipping and related

statutes by common carriers and other persons subject to the Commission's jurisdiction.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=77cce38e9b335eb5c0f5f515f1bbe2a2&c=ecfr&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title46/46cfrv9_02.tpl

Service Contracts
The FMC receives and reviews filings of confidential service contracts between shippers and ocean common carriers. It

also monitors publication of certain essential terms of those service contracts.

https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/bureaus-offices/bureau-of-trade-analysis

Tariffs
The FMC monitors and prescribes requirements to ensure accessibility and accuracy of electronic tariff publications of

common carriers engaged in the foreign commerce of the United States. Special permission applications may be

submitted for relief from statutory and/or Commission tariff requirements.

https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/bureaus-offices/bureau-of-trade-analysis



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
To carry out its mission, the FMC relies on attorneys, economists, and other professionals.

https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/employment-opportunities
In 2018, the FMC ranked 9th among 29 small agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.
http://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/MC00

Contact Information
Contact and other general information is available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.fmc.gov/contact | Email: Inquiries@fmc.gov

Cruise Vacations
The FMC has posted the brochure "Cruise Vacations: Know Before You Go" on its website to help potential passengers

select an appropriate cruise before purchasing their tickets.

https://www.fmc.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/09/PVO2014-508.pdf
General information and additional resources to help cruise passengers are available on the FMC website.

https://www.fmc.gov/resources-services/cruise-passenger-assistance

Events
The FMC posts events upcoming events on its website.

https://www.fmc.gov/events

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Enacted in 1966, the FOIA took effect on July 4, 1967. The law gives a right to obtain access to Federal agency records

to any person, except a fugitive from the law. Some records, or portions of them, are, however, shielded from

disclosure by one or more of nine statutory exemptions or by specific harm that disclosure may cause. The FMC makes

a lot of information publicly available to reduce the need of filing an official FOIA request.

https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/freedom-of-information-act-requests-reports | Email: FOIA@fmc.gov
The FMC maintains an electronic reading room on its website.

https://www2.fmc.gov/readingroom/ProceedingSearch

Greenhouse Gas Reduction / Sustainable Development
The "Federal Maritime Commission 2017 Strategic Sustainability Performance Plan" is available online. Greenhouse gas

reduction is part of the plan.

https://www.fmc.gov/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/2017SustainabilityPlan.pdf | Email: omd@fmc.gov
"The maritime industry realized years ago that sustainable development is necessary to the survival of people and

businesses—whether it is related to maritime transportation, port development, or infrastructure. Any discussion in the

industry now necessarily involves mention of sustainability principles. We know that a cleaner environment means

economic growth, job creation, and reduced costs with greater efficiency." (excerpted from Chair Mario Cordero's

statement on Earth Day 2016)

https://www.fmc.gov/chairmans-statement-on-earth-day

History
In 1961, the White House and Congress made a decision that affected international liner shipping companies and the

U.S. merchant marine. To learn more about that decision and the establishment of two new maritime agencies by

President John F. Kennedy's Executive order, visit the "History" page on the FMC website.
https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/our-history
The FMC maintains an online archive of maritime decisions that are associated with the Department of Commerce,

Federal Maritime Board, U.S. Maritime Commission, U.S. Shipping Board, and itself. The archive's content begins with

the year 1919.

https://www.fmc.gov/fmc-reports

Library
The FMC's law and reference library contains books, directories, encyclopedias, journals, magazines, microforms,

reports, and videos. It has specialized material that covers the various segments of the international shipping industry

and historical and contemporary regulatory materials that cover all phases of shipping in the U.S. foreign trades. It also

has material on economics, engineering, political science, and a collection of legal publications. The library's holdings

comprise approximately 8,700 volumes and numerous microfiches, CD–ROMs, and online services. Members of the

public may visit the library and use the collection; however, all materials must be used in the library during its hours of

operation. Materials are released only through an interlibrary loan request. A librarian is available from 8 a.m. to 4:30

p.m., eastern standard time, Monday–Friday. The library is closed on weekends and Federal Holidays. Phone, 202-523-

5762.

https://www.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/bureaus-offices/law-reference-library | Email: LibraryInquiries@fmc.gov
All effective vessel-operating common carrier (VOCC) and marine terminal operator (MTO) agreements on file with

the FMC are accessible in its electronic agreement library.

https://www2.fmc.gov/FMC.Agreements.Web/Public

Moving Overseas
The FMC posts tips for protecting property when shipping goods internationally by sea.

https://www.fmc.gov/resources-services/protect-your-international-move
Before shipping a car overseas, become familiar with the laws and regulations of the United States and the destination

country regarding which vehicles may be imported and the fees that must be paid.

https://fmc2.fmc.gov/resources-services/shipping-your-vehicle-overseas

News
The "FMC Newsroom" posts recent headlines.

https://www.fmc.gov/news-events

Notices of Agreements
Recent notices of agreements filed are posted on the "Federal Register" website.

https://fmc2.fmc.gov/about-the-fmc/weekly-agreement-notices

Open Government
The FMC supports the Open Government initiative by promoting collaboration, participation, and transparency.

https://www.fmc.gov/open-government

Resources / Services
     The FMC has gathered its resources and services in one place, on a single web page, for its stakeholders. In the

     "Audiences" section, resources and services are grouped by audience: public, attorneys and litigants, ocean

     transportation intermediaries (OTIs), passenger vessel operators (PVOs), vessel-operating common carriers (VOCCs),

     and marine terminal operators (MTOs).

     https://www.fmc.gov/resources-services

     Social Media
     The FMC tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/FMC_gov
     The FMC posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCwKTAlGGHIA0xcN3bDt_Uqg

        The Sources of Information were updated 6–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                 Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL MINE SAFETY AND HEALTH REVIEW COMMISSION
    1331 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Suite 520N, Washington, DC 20004-1710


    202-434-9900

    TTY/TDD, 202-434-4000, ext. 293

    http://www.fmshrc.gov | Email: fmshrc@fmshrc.gov




    Commission
 CHAIR                                                                                 Marco M. Rajkovich, Jr.




 Commissioners                                                                         William I. Althen


                                                                                       Mary Lucille Jordan


                                                                                       Arthur R. Traynor III


                                                                                       Michael G. Young

https://www.fmshrc.gov/about/commissioners



Administration


 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR                                                                    Lisa M. Boyd




 Chief Administrative Law Judge                                                        (vacancy)


 General Counsel                                                                       Michael A. McCord


 Senior Policy Advisor                                                                 Timothy A. Greten




The above list of key personnel was updated 4–2019.

The Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission ensures compliance with occupational safety and health

standards in the Nation's surface and underground coal, metal, and nonmetal mines.


The Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 (30 U.S.C. 801 et seq.), as amended, established the Federal Mine

Safety and Health Review Commission as an independent and adjudicative agency.


The Commission comprises five members whom the President appoints and the Senate confirms. Each Commissioner

serves a 6-year term, and all the terms are staggered. The President appoints one of the Commissioners to serve as

the Chair. At the trial level, the FMSHRC's administrative judges decide cases. The Commissioners are responsible for

appellate review of a decision made by an administrative law judge.




ACTIVITIES
FMSHRC provides administrative trial and appellate review of legal disputes arising from enforcement actions taken by
the Department of Labor.


The FMSHRC and its administrative law judges decide cases brought before it by the Department of Labor's Mine

Safety and Health Administration, mine operators, and miners or their representatives. These cases generally involve

review of the Administration's enforcement actions, including citations, mine-closure orders, and proposals for civil

penalties issued for violations of the act or the mandatory safety and health standards promulgated by the Secretary

of Labor. The FMSHRC also has jurisdiction over discrimination complaints filed by miners or their representatives

regarding their safety and health, complaints for compensation filed on behalf of miners idled as a result of mine

closure orders issued by the Administration, and disputes involving mine emergency response plans.


Cases brought before the FMSHRC are assigned to a judge in the Office of Administrative Law Judges, and hearings

are conducted pursuant to the requirements of the Administrative Procedure Act (5 U.S.C. 554, 556) and the

FMSHRC's procedural rules (29 CFR 2700).


A judge's decision becomes a final, nonprecedential order of the FMSHRC 40 days after issuance unless it has directed

the case for review in response to a petition or on its own motion. If a review is conducted, a decision of the FMSHRC

becomes final 30 days after issuance unless a party adversely affected seeks review in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the

District of Columbia Circuit or the circuit within which the mine subject to the litigation is located.


As far as practicable, hearings are held at locations convenient to the affected mines. In addition to its District of

Columbia offices, the Office of Administrative Law Judges maintains offices in Colorado and Pennsylvania.

https://www.fmshrc.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Administrative Law Judges
To ask a question regarding a case before an administrative law judge, send an email to the address below or call the

Office of the Administrative Law Judges. Phone, 202-434-9950.

https://www.fmshrc.gov/about/aljs | Email: docket@fmshrc.gov

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has contact information for the Office of the Executive Director and Office of the

Administrative Law Judges. The FMSHRC maintains offices in Washington, DC; Denver, CO; and Pittsburgh, PA.

Washington—phone, 202-434-9905; fax, 202-434-9906. Denver—phone, 303-844-5267; fax, 303-844-5268.

Pittsburgh—phone, 412-920-7240; fax, 412-928-8689.

https://www.fmshrc.gov/contact | Email: fmshrc@fmshrc.gov

Decisions
Searchable databases of FMSHRC decisions and decisions of administrative law judges are available online.

http://www.fmshrc.gov/decisions
The "Cases on Review" web page includes links to cases currently on review before the FMSHRC and to decisions on

appeal before the U.S. Courts of Appeals.
http://www.fmshrc.gov/content/cases-review

Federal Mine Safety and Health Act
The FMSHRC has prepared a version of the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act of 1977 that reflects changes made to

it by the Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response Act of 2006. This unofficial document is available in

Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.fmshrc.gov/content/federal-mine-safety-and-health-act-1977

Filing
Electronic filing may be done through the FMSHRC’s electronic case management system (e-CMS). To use the e-CMS,

a filer must register at the FMSHRC-eCMS website. The e-CMS support team is available to provide assistance.

http://www.fmshrc.gov/guides/instructions-electronic-filing | Email: e-CMS.Support@fmshrc.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires Federal agencies to disclose records after receiving a properly written request. The law does include

provisions that shield certain records, or parts of them, from disclosure. The FOIA Service Center assists those seeking

information through the FOIA. For more information, write to the Federal Mine Safety and Health Review Commission,

FOIA Service Center, 1331 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Suite 520N, Washington, DC 20004-1710. Phone, 202-434-9935.

Fax, 202-434-9944.

http://www.fmshrc.gov/foia | Email: foia@fmshrc.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The FMSHRC posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.fmshrc.gov/guides/faq

Guidance
The "Guides" web page includes links to guidance on proceedings, case procedures, reopening a case, electronic

filing, and the Freedom of Information Act,

https://www.fmshrc.gov/guides

Meetings
The FMSHRC posts audio files of decisional public meetings on its website.

https://www.fmshrc.gov/meetings-arguments/meetings

News
The latest FMSHRC news is available online.

http://www.fmshrc.gov/about/news

Oral Arguments
The FMSHRC posts audio files of oral arguments on its website.

https://www.fmshrc.gov/meetings-arguments/arguments

Organizational Chart
     The FMSHRC publishes its organizational chart as part of its "Congressional Budget Justification and Annual

     Performance Plan." In the budget justification and performance plan for fiscal year 2020 (18 MAR 2019), the chart is on

     page 5. The key personnel list of commissioners and administrators, which appears at the top of this entry, relies on

     the organizational chart published in the budget justification and performance plan.

     https://www.fmshrc.gov/plans/fy2020-justification#

     Procedural Rules (29 CFR 2700)
     The FMSHRC posts its procedural rules online in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

     https://www.fmshrc.gov/rules/Procedural%20Rules%20Booklet%20Jan%202014.pdf

     Reports / Budget Submissions
     The "Reports and Budget Submissions" web page includes links to the FMSHRC's current and past strategic plans,

     sustainability report, reports to Congress, as well as to its budget and annual performance, buy American, and

     performance accountability reports.

     http://www.fmshrc.gov/reports-budget-submissions

        The Sources of Information were updated 4–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                         Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL MEDIATION AND CONCILIATION SERVICE
    250 E Street SW., Washington, DC 20427


    202-606-8100

    http://www.fmcs.gov




    Office of the Director
  DIRECTOR                                                                               (vacancy)


  Deputy Director                                                                        Richard R. Giacolone




  Assistant Director                                                                     Gary Hattal


  Attorney-Advisor                                                                       Dawn Starr


  Equal Employment Opportunity Director                                                  Denise McKenney


  Senior Advisor                                                                         David Thaler

https://www.fmcs.gov/aboutus/agency-departments/office-of-the-director

  DEPUTY DIRECTORS


  Field Operations                                                                       D. Scott Blake


  National Representative                                                                Scot Beckenbaugh




  Chief Operating Officer                                                                Gregory Goldstein




  The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2019.


https://www.fmcs.gov/aboutus/agency-departments
The Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service helps labor and management resolve disputes in industries affecting

commerce, offers training in cooperative processes to promote workplace stability and economic growth, and provides

alternative dispute resolution services, training, negotiated rulemaking, and public policy facilitation to government

entities.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 23, 1947, the "Labor Management Relations Act, 1947," became Public Law 80–101 after the Congress enacted

it over a veto by President Harry S. Truman. This Act is also referred to as the Taft-Hartley Act because Senator Robert

A. Taft and Representative Fred A. Hartley, Jr., sponsored the bill. The Act amended the National Labor Relations Act

of 1935, commonly known as the Wagner Act, and established the The Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service

(FMCS) as an independent agency of the U. S. Government to prevent or minimize the effects of labor-management

disputes on the free flow of commerce.

https://catalog.archives.gov/id/299855
The FMCS "may proffer its services in any labor dispute in any industry affecting commerce, either upon its own

motion or upon the request of one or more of the parties to the dispute, whenever in its judgment such dispute
threatens to cause a substantial interruption of commerce" (29 U.S.C. 173). Subsequent emendations to the original

Labor Management Relations Act have expanded the scope of the agency's dispute resolution services.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2017-title29/pdf/USCODE-2017-title29-chap7-subchapIII-sec173.pdf
The President appoints the Director by the advice and with consent of the Senate. The Director is prohibited from

engaging in any other business, employment, or vocation (29 U.S.C. 172).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2017-title29/pdf/USCODE-2017-title29-chap7-subchapIII-sec172.pdf
The FMCS is headquartered in Washington, DC, and it has 10 regional offices and more than 60 field and local offices.

It provides mediation and conflict resolution services to industry, government agencies, and communities.

https://www.fmcs.gov/aboutus
The agency's organizational chart (AUG 2019) is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and

downloading.

https://www.fmcs.gov/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/FMCS-Org-Structure-August-2019.pdf



ACTIVITIES
The FMCS reduces disruptions to interstate commerce and improves government efficiency by providing skilled

mediators to resolve workplace disputes and conflicts arising under the statutory jurisdiction of government entities.

FMCS mediators do not enforce laws: They rely on innovative mediation, communication, and relationship building

techniques to help disputants achieve consensus.


The FMCS offers its labor mediation and training services in a variety of industries and sectors of the economy,

including the private sector (except airlines and railroads), the Federal sector, and the public sector (in States without

labor mediation agencies). The Labor-Management Cooperation Act of 1978 recognized the economic benefits of a

more proactive approach to workplace stability. The FMCS awards grants to encourage the establishment of local,

regional, and industrywide labor management committees to improve labor management relationships, organizational

effectiveness, and economic development. The FMCS also promotes workplace innovation, productivity, and

competitiveness through collaboration, good labor-management relationships, and problem solving between

companies and their workers.


The Administrative Dispute Resolution and Negotiated Rulemaking Acts of 1996 recognized the broader value of

FMCS conflict resolution services for government efficiency. The agency was designated as a key resource to help

government entities resolve individual employment disputes, design conflict management systems, achieve

stakeholder consensus on new regulations, and conduct more effective multi-stakeholder public policy dialogues.

https://www.fmcs.gov/services

Mediation / Training
FMCS mediators help parties resolve workplace disputes and establish sound, stable, and enduring labor-management

relations. In addition to mediating collective bargaining disputes, mediators facilitate better day-to-day workplace

relations through a variety of joint training programs. FMCS mediators also assist other government entities with

resolving disputes arising under their jurisdictions.
https://www.fmcs.gov/services/resolving-labor-management-disputes

Arbitration
Voluntary arbitration and factfinding are widely used in labor-management relations. Upon request, the FMCS can

provide panels of arbitrators who are experienced in labor relations issues. Requests can be tailored, in terms of

expertise, fees, geography, and other considerations, to accommodate a variety of requirements.

https://www.fmcs.gov/services/arbitration



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Calendar
A day-by-day listing of important FMCS events is available on online.

https://www.fmcs.gov/resources/calendar

Career Opportunities
Stationed in offices nationwide, FMCS mediators are full-time excepted service employees of the Federal Government.

They perform duties in five major areas: advocacy, education, and outreach; alternative dispute resolution services to

government entities; collective bargaining mediation; grievance mediation; and relationship development training. The

ideal applicant seeking to become an FMCS mediator has full-time experience in the collective bargaining process.

U.S. citizenship is required.

https://www.fmcs.gov/careers
In 2018, the FMCS ranked 1st among 29 small agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings!

http://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/FM00

Conflict Management
The FMCS Institute for Conflict Management offers practical and experience-based conflict resolution training for

individuals and groups. Course descriptions and enrollment information are available online.

https://www.fmcs.gov/services/education-and-outreach/fmcs-institute

Contact
To ask a question or leave a comment, use the electronic "Feedback Form."

https://www.fmcs.gov/feedback

Documents / Data
Budgets and performance information, regulations and policies, speeches and presentations, publications (some in

Spanish), and reports are available online. Collective bargaining notice data and work stoppage data are also posted

online.

https://www.fmcs.gov/resources/documents-and-data

Electronic Updates
The FMCS uses email updates to disseminate information on its dispute resolution services and to announce training

opportunities. A sign-up form is available online.

https://public.govdelivery.com/accounts/USFMCS/subscriber/new

Find a Mediator
An online search tool is available to find a mediator by city, State, or Zip Code, as well as by name, email, or phone

number.

https://www.fmcs.gov/aboutus/locations/find-a-mediator

Forms / Applications
Forms and applications needed to obtain FMCS services and funding—arbitration, Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)

requests, labor-management cooperation grants, and notice of bargaining (F–7)—are available online.

https://www.fmcs.gov/resources/forms-applications

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires Federal agencies to disclose records after receiving a proper written request for them. Certain

records, however, are shielded from disclosure by provisions contained within the statute. The FMCS has an online

FOIA requester center. The specific procedures for requesting its records, FOIA-related contact information, and a link

to records that are already accessible online may be found on the "FOIA Requestor Center" web page.

https://www.fmcs.gov/foia | Email: foia@fmcs.gov
Subsequent amendments to the FOIA of 1966 require publicly accessible, electronic reading rooms that contain FOIA

response documents and other information that is routinely available to the public. Before submitting a FOIA request,

see if the FMCS already has placed the desired information in its electronic reading room.

https://www.fmcs.gov/resources/documents-and-data

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The FMCS posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.fmcs.gov/resources/faqs

History
A timeline of events in modern American labor relations is available online. The timeline starts with the first

Government-mediated settlement in 1838, continues through the creation of the FMCS in 1947 and the West Coast

port mediation of 2002, to end currently with President Donald J. Trump's appointment of Richard Giacolone to serve

as the agency's acting Director.

https://www.fmcs.gov/aboutus/our-history

News
The FMCS maintains an online news archive.

https://www.fmcs.gov/news

Regional Offices
Headquartered in Washington, DC, the FMCS delivers services nationwide through its 10 regional and numerous field
     offices. Contact information for the FMCS national office and its regional and field offices is available online.

     https://www.fmcs.gov/aboutus/locations/regional-offices

     Shared Neutrals
     Shared Neutrals, also known as Sharing Neutrals, is an interagency mediation program in the National Capital Region,

     including the Washington, DC, area and Baltimore. The Shared Neutrals program assists participating Federal agencies

     through a pool of trained, collateral-duty Federal employees who provide mediation services to an agency, other than

     their own, in exchange for like services to the program from the recipient agency.

     https://www.fmcs.gov/sharedneutrals

     Site Map
     The site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

     https://www.fmcs.gov/site-map

     Social Media
     The FMCS has a Facebook account

     https://www.facebook.com/fmcs.usa
     The FMCS tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/FMCS_USA
     The FMCS posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/FMCSInfo

        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                   Federal Reserve System




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
    Twentieth Street and Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20551


    202-452-3000

    http://www.federalreserve.gov




    Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
 CHAIR                                                              Jerome H. Powell


 Vice Chair                                                         Philip N. Jefferson


 Vice Chair for Supervision                                         Michael S. Blair




 GOVERNORS


                                                                    Michelle W. Bowman


                                                                    Lisa D. Cook


                                                                    Adriana D. Kugler


                                                                    Christopher J. Waller




 Assistant to the Board and Director                                Michelle A. Smith

https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/bios/board/default.htm



Federal Reserve Bank Presidents


 NEW YORK                                                           John C. Williams




 Atlanta                                                            Raphael W. Bostic


 Boston                                                             Susan M. Collins


 Chicago                                                            Austan D. Goolsbee


 Cleveland                                                          Beth M. Hammack


 Dallas                                                             Lorie K. Logan


 Kansas City                                                        Jeffrey R. Schmid


 Minneapolis                                                        Neel T. Kashkari


 Philadelphia                                                       Patrick T. Harker


 Richmond                                                           Thomas I. Barkin
 San Francisco                                                                   Mary C. Daly


 St. Louis                                                                       Alberto G. Musalem

https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/federal-reserve-system-new-york.htm



Official Staff


 Chief Operating Officer                                                         Patrick J. McClanahan


 General Counsel                                                                 Mark E. Van Der Weide


 Secretary                                                                       Ann E. Misback




 DIRECTORS OF DIVISIONS


 Consumer and Community Affairs                                                  Eric S. Belsky


 Financial Management                                                            Stephen J. Bernard


 Financial Stability                                                             Andreas W. Lehnert


 Information Technology                                                          Jeff Riedel


 International Finance                                                           Beth Anne Wilson


 Management                                                                      Winona Varnon


 Monetary Affairs                                                                Trevor A. Reeve


 Research and Statistics                                                         Stacey M. Tevlin


 Reserve Bank Operations and Payment Systems                                     Matthew J. Eichner


 Supervision and Regulation                                                      Michael S. Gibson

https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/officialstaff.htm

 Inspector General                                                               Mark Bialek


https://oig.federalreserve.gov/the-inspector-general.htm

 The above list of key personnel was updated 2-2025.




 The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.
The Federal Reserve System keeps the Nation's monetary and financial system flexible, safe, and stable.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On December 23, 1913, President Woodrow Wilson approved Public Law 63–43, whose short title is the "Federal

Reserve Act." The Act provided "for the establishment of Federal reserve banks, to furnish an elastic currency, to afford

means of rediscounting commercial paper, to establish a more effective supervision of banking in the United States."

Pursuant to the Act, the Secretary of Agriculture, Secretary of the Treasury, and Comptroller of the Currency,

constituting The Reserve Bank Organization Committee, designated "not less than eight nor more than twelve cities to

be known as Federal reserve cities" and divided "the continental United States, excluding Alaska, into districts, each

district to contain only one of such Federal reserve cities" (38 Stat. 251).

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/63rd-congress/session-2/c63s2ch6.pdf
On December 23, 1913, President Woodrow Wilson approved Public Law 63–43, whose short title is the "Federal

Reserve Act." The Act provided "for the establishment of Federal reserve banks, to furnish an elastic currency, to afford

means of rediscounting commercial paper, to establish a more effective supervision of banking in the United States."

Pursuant to the Act, the Secretary of Agriculture, Secretary of the Treasury, and Comptroller of the Currency,

constituting The Reserve Bank Organization Committee, designated "not less than eight nor more than twelve cities to

be known as Federal reserve cities" and divided "the continental United States, excluding Alaska, into districts, each

district to contain only one of such Federal reserve cities" (38 Stat. 251).

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/63rd-congress/session-2/c63s2ch6.pdf
On August 23, 1935, President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved Public Law 74–305, which is also cited as the Banking

Act of 1935. The new law provided "for the sound, effective, and uninterrupted operation of the banking system" (49

Stat. 684), amending parts of the Federal Reserve Act. One of the amendments to the earlier Act renamed the Federal

Reserve Board: It now became "known as the 'Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.'" The Federal

Reserve Board's "governor" and "vice governor" also became "known as the 'chairman' and the 'vice chairman,'

respectively, of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System" (49 Stat. 704).

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/74th-congress/session-1/c74s1ch614.pdf
An organizational chart is accessible in Portable Document Format (PDF) on the "Structure of the Federal Reserve

System" web page under "Board Responsibilities."

https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/structure-federal-reserve-board.htm



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material on the subject of banks and banking is codified in 12 U.S.C. The third chapter, sections 221–522, of

title 12 is dedicated to the Federal Reserve System.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title12/chapter3&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations whose subject matter is banks or banking are codified in 12 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=267f2409cd6deeef4d6a0875bc7f21bb&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title12/12tab_02.tpl
Subchapter A, parts 200–269b, of 12 CFR is dedicated to codified subject matter associated with the Board of

Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=f90a95ecd3b26b1b4cf2f8d82c26abaa&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title12/12chapterII.tpl
Subchapter B, parts 270–281, of 12 CFR is dedicated to codified subject matter associated with the Federal Open

Market Committee.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=4c219c3266afff42e7efd18cf82f1135&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title12/12CIIsubchapB.tpl



STRUCTURE
The FRS comprises the Board of Governors; the 12 Federal reserve banks and their branches and other facilities; the

Federal Open Market Committee; the Federal Advisory Council; the Consumer Advisory Council; the Thrift Institutions

Advisory Council; and the Nation's financial institutions, including commercial banks, savings and loan associations,

mutual savings banks, and credit unions.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/structure-federal-reserve-system.htm

Board of Governors
The Board comprises seven members whom the President appoints by the advice and with the consent of the Senate.

The President also designates a chair and two vice chairs by the advice and with the consent of the Senate. The Chair

of the Board is a member of the National Advisory Council on International Monetary and Financial Policies, which is

chaired by the Secretary of the Department of the Treasury. The Board determines general monetary, credit, and

operating policies for the FRS as a whole and formulates the rules and regulations for carrying out the purposes of the

Federal Reserve Act. The Board's principal duties consist of monitoring credit conditions; supervising the Federal

reserve banks, member banks, and bank holding companies; and regulating the implementation of some consumer

credit protection laws.


Within statutory limitations, the Board has the power to fix the requirements for reserves that depository institutions

maintain on transaction accounts or nonpersonal time deposits (an interest-bearing bank deposit account that has a

date of maturity, such as a certificate of deposit). The Board reviews and determines the discount rate charged by the

Federal reserve banks. For the purpose of preventing excessive credit use for the purchase or carrying of securities, the

Board regulates the amount of credit that may be initially extended and subsequently maintained on securities (with

certain exceptions).

http://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/bios/board/boardmembership.htm

Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)
The Committee comprises the Board of Governors and five of the presidents of the Federal reserve banks. The Chair

of the Board of Governors is traditionally the Chair of the FOMC. The president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New

York serves as a permanent member. Four of the other 11 reserve bank presidents rotate annually as voting members

of the FOMC.
The Federal reserve banks carry out open market operations in accordance with regulations that the FOMC adopts

and pursuant to specific policy directives that it issues. Purchases and sales of securities in the open market are

undertaken to supply bank reserves for supporting the credit and money needed for long-term economic growth, for

offsetting cyclical economic swings, and for accommodating seasonal business and consumer demand for money and

credit. These operations are carried out principally in U.S. Government obligations, but they also include purchases

and sales of Federal agency obligations. The Federal Reserve Bank of New York executes transactions for the FRS open

market account.


Under the FOMC's direction, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York also undertakes transactions in foreign currencies

for the FRS open market account. These operations are meant to safeguard the value of the dollar in international

exchange markets and facilitate growth in international liquidity in accordance with the needs of an expanding world

economy.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/structure-federal-open-market-committee.htm

Federal Reserve Banks
The 12 reserve banks and their branches function as the operating arms of the FRS. Each reserve bank operates within

its own geographic area, or district, of the United States and gathers data and other information on the businesses

and the needs of local communities in that district. The FOMC and Board of Governors then factor that information

into monetary policy and other decisions.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/structure-federal-reserve-banks.htm



ACTIVITIES
By influencing the lending and investing of depository institutions and the cost and availability of money and credit,

the FRS promotes use of human and capital resources, growth of productivity, relatively stable prices, and equilibrium

in the Nation's international balance of payments. The agency's supervisory and regulatory banking functions help

maintain a commercial banking system that responds to the Nation's financial needs and objectives.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/pf.htm

Conducting Monetary Policy
The FRS seeks price stability, moderate long-term interest rates, and maximum employment. Under normal economic

conditions, the FOMC sets monetary policy by selecting an interest rate. To a bank, that interest rate is the cost of

holding reserves. (Reserves are funds held by depository institutions as cash in their vaults or as deposits with their

regional Federal reserve bank.) In recent years, the FRS has set a target, or target range, for the Federal funds rate,

which is the interest rate that commercial banks charge each other for borrowing reserves for short periods. The open

market desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York then conducts open market operations—buying or selling U.S.

Treasury securities—to change the amount of reserves in the banking system to adjust the Federal funds rate. Since

the Federal funds rate is the price of borrowing reserves, open market operations bring the actual Federal funds rate in

line with the FOMC’s target. The strategy to vary the quantity or the price of reserves in the banking system defines

FRS monetary policy.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy.htm
Financial Supervision and Regulation
Supervision refers to the oversight and enforcement of regulations to ensure safe and sound banking behavior. The

FRS's supervisory and regulatory actions help to build confidence in the banking system. Protecting the integrity of the

Nation’s financial institutions, fostering stability in financial markets, ensuring compliance with applicable laws and

regulations, and encouraging banking institutions to meet responsibly the financial needs of their communities,

promote financial stability. The FRS supervises and regulates State member banks (State chartered banks that have

chosen to become members of the FRS) and bank and financial holding companies (companies that own banks). The

agency also supervises overseas and international operations of regulated financial institutions. Foreign banks with U.S.

branches, agencies, and nonbank operations are also subject to supervision. The FRS's banking supervision and

regulation units work with other regulators and authorities to ensure that regulations are uniformly applied and

consistently enforced throughout the banking system.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/supervisionreg.htm

Payment Services
The FRS provides payment services, including processing checks and electronic payments, to commercial banks and

other depository institutions. The FRS operates a nationwide check clearing system. Traditionally, depository

institutions sent the actual paper checks that they had received to reserve banks, which processed and routed them to

the originating depository institution for collection. These institutions used their Federal reserve accounts to settle the

transactions. Since enactment of the Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act, which is also cited as the Check 21 Act,

institutions have been using electronic check clearing options. The Check 21 Act enabled reserve banks to employ

electronic image-based solutions for the exchange of check data between depository institutions. Ongoing industry

advances continue to improve the process of check clearing and to renew the FRS's role in that process.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-117/pdf/STATUTE-117-Pg1177.pdf
The FRS provides two types of electronic payment services: fund transfers (Fedwire) and the Automated Clearinghouse

(ACH). Fedwire processes payments of all sizes up to a maximum of just less than $10 billion. ACH is used mostly for

recurring payments, such as business payrolls, consumer insurance payments, and the U.S. Government’s military and

civilian payrolls and Social Security benefits.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems.htm

Protecting and Educating Consumers
The FRS has consumer protection responsibilities. The agency writes consumer protection regulations for the financial

industry and enforces consumer protection and civil rights laws and regulations at the banks that it supervises.

Community affairs offices across the FRS promote community development and fair and impartial access to credit. In

each district of the FRS, economic education offices increase the public’s understanding of the role that the FRS plays

in the economy.


Services for the Department of the Treasury
As banker and fiscal agent for the Department of the Treasury, the FRS provides services for the Government, primarily

through depository institutions. Federal reserve banks provide the Treasury with a checking account. When the

Government makes a payment by check or electronically, that payment is usually cashed by or deposited in a
commercial bank or similar institution. The FRS processes the payment and deducts the amount from the Treasury's

account. Although the Treasury usually keeps the money received from tax payments on deposit at commercial banks,

it transfers funds to a Federal reserve bank as needed to make payments. The Federal Government has reduced costs

and improved service to the public by using the FRS's electronic payments network. Most regular Federal Government

payments, such as Social Security benefits and the Government payroll, are direct deposits made through the FRS's

automated clearinghouse service.


Acting as the U.S. fiscal agent, reserve banks sell, transfer, and redeem Government securities; make interest payments

on these securities; and assist the Treasury and other Federal Government agencies with their securities in other ways.

These actions are done electronically through a system called "Treasury Direct." The Treasury and Federal agencies

reimburse the reserve banks for expenses associated with these fiscal agency functions.


Most currency enters circulation and exits circulation through the Federal reserve banks. As the public demands

currency from the banking system, depository institutions draw down their accounts at the reserve banks in exchange

for additional currency. When currency from the public flows back into depository institutions, those institutions

deposit the surplus in their reserve banks. The Department of the Treasury designs and produces U.S. paper money

and coin. As the Treasury produces currency, reserve banks put the new money into circulation to meet public needs.

The FRS also destroys money that is no longer fit for circulation. By crediting the Government’s account, reserve banks

“buy" new paper money and coin from the Treasury to replace the notes that they destroy and coin that they return to

the U.S. Mint.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
An alphabetical subject index helps visitors navigate the website's content.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/azindex.htm

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FRS records have been

assigned to record group 082.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/082.html

Beige Book
The “Summary of Commentary on Current Economic Conditions by Federal Reserve District" is published eight times

per year. Each Federal reserve bank gathers anecdotal information on current economic conditions in its district

through reports from bank and branch directors and interviews with key business contacts, economists, market

experts, and other sources. The "Summary" or "Beige Book" summarizes this information by district and sector. The

Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis maintains an online "Beige Book" archives whose content goes back to 1970.

https://www.minneapolisfed.org/region-and-community/regional-economic-indicators/beige-book-archive

Business Opportunities
The FRS generally relies on competitive bidding procedures for purchasing supplies and acquiring services. The

process involves issuing a solicitation. Companies respond by submitting bids. The agency awards contracts after

evaluating the bidders' prices, and in some cases, their technical abilities.

http://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/procurement/about.htm

Calendar
An electronic calendar of FRS events, past and future, is available online.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/calendar.htm

Career Opportunities
The FRS relies on attorneys, economists, financial analysts, research assistants, information technology experts, and

other skilled professionals to carry out its mission.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/careers.htm

Consumer Help
The FRS can help a consumer who is having a problem with a bank or other financial institution. Phone, 888-851-1920.

TTY, 877-766-8533. Fax, 877-888-2520.

https://www.federalreserveconsumerhelp.gov/

Contact Information
To speak with an FRS operator, call 202-452-3000. TDD, 202-263-4869.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/contact-us-topics.htm

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID–19)
The FRS has published a "Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID–19)" web page where it posts informational resources and

its most recent actions to mitigate the economic effects of the pandemic.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/covid-19.htm

Currency Academy
The U.S. Currency Education Program website runs the online Currency Academy, where learning about U.S. currency,

or money, is fun.

https://www.uscurrency.gov/educational-materials/classrooms/currency-academy

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the FRS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-reserve-system

Fine Arts
Like all Federal agencies, the Board of Governors may receive gifts of artwork and funds to purchase art. In 1975,

former Chairman Arthur F. Burns established the agency's fine arts program. He was responding to President Richard

Nixon's urgent desire to continue the development of "the growing partnership between Government and the arts."

Chairman Burns created the program to collect and care for artwork and to organize exhibitions in the historic
Marriner S. Eccles building. The collection holds more than 1,000 works of art that private individuals have donated. To

view a gallery of the Board's permanent collection, visit the "Fine Arts Program" page.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/aroundtheboard/fine-arts.htm

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
A request for information may be submitted online with an electronic request form; made in writing and mailed to the

Information Disclosure Section, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 20th and Constitution Avenue NW.,

Washington, DC 20551; or sent by facsimile to the Information Disclosure Section. Fax, 202-872-7565.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/foia/request.htm
The FRS has a FOIA service center to help information seekers learn about the status of a FOIA request or get answers

to questions regarding the freedom of information process. The center is open from 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday–

Friday. Phone, 202-452-3684.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/foia/servicecenter.htm
The FRS maintains electronic FIOA reading rooms. Before submitting a FOIA request, a requester should browse or

search the content of the online reading rooms to ensure that the desired information is not already accessible

immediately and free of charge.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/foia/readingrooms.htm

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The FRS posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs.htm

Glossary
The Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond included a short glossary in its 16th edition (2012) of "The Federal Reserve

Today." The glossary starts on page 35.

https://www.richmondfed.org/-
/media/richmondfedorg/education/for_teachers/resources/federal_reserve_today/frtoday.pdf#page=40

History
"Hello! This is Liberty speaking—billions of dollars are needed and needed NOW." That message came from Lady

Liberty, according to a World War I era depiction of her. To learn more about the role that the FRS played in financing

U.S. participation in World War I, visit the "Federal Reserve History" website.

https://www.federalreservehistory.org/essays/liberty_bonds
In 1957, shortly after the U.S. Congress had enacted a law making "In God We Trust" the official national motto, the

first dollar bills bearing the same four words entered circulation. To learn more about the history of American

currency, visit the U.S. Currency Education Program's history section.

https://www.uscurrency.gov/history

Interest Rates
As part of the "Fed Listens" series, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago hosted a conference (June 2019) on monetary

policy strategy, tools, and communication practices. Chair of the Board of Governors Jerome H. Powell gave the
opening remarks and spoke about the effective lower bound of interest rates and monetary policy tools.

https://www.chicagofed.org/events/2019/fed-listens-conference-on-monetary-policy-sessions/opening-remarks-1

Monetary Policy
The Federal Reserve Board prepares a semiannual report that discusses monetary policy management, economic

developments, and future prospects. It submits this report, which is called the "Monetary Policy Report," to the Senate

Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs and to the House Committee on Financial Services.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/mpr_default.htm
As part of the "Fed Listens" series, Governor Lael Brainard participated in a community listening session at the Federal

Reserve Bank of Richmond (May 2019). Her short presentation was titled "How Does Monetary Policy Affect Your

Community?"

https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/brainard20190508a.htm

Money-Financed Fiscal Programs
William B. English, Christopher J. Erceg, and David Lopez-Salido published the staff working paper "Money-Financed

Fiscal Programs: A Cautionary Tale" in the Finance and Economics Discussion Series (2017–060) to stimulate discussion

and critical comment. In the paper's abstract they wrote: "A number of prominent economists and policymakers have

argued that money-financed fiscal programs (helicopter drops) could be efficacious in boosting output and inflation in

economies facing persistent economic weakness, very low inflation, and significant fiscal strains. . . . While we do find

that money-financed fiscal programs, if communicated successfully and seen as credible by the public, could provide

significant stimulus, we underscore the risks that would be associated with such a program."

https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/feds/files/2017060pap.pdf

News / Events
The FRS posts press releases, speeches, and testimonies online.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents.htm

Open Government
The FRS supports the Open Government initiative by promoting collaboration, participation, and transparency.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/open/open.htm

Photo Gallery
The FRS posts photographs on its website. High resolution images are available on its Flickr photostream.

https://www.federalreserve.gov/photogallery.htm

Publications
The FRS posts its publications online. The agency's most requested publications are its annual report, "Monetary Policy

Report," supervision manuals, and "The Federal Reserve System Purposes and Functions."

http://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/default.htm

Quantitative Easing
Michael T. Kiley's working paper "Quantitative Easing and the 'New Normal' in Monetary Policy" is meant to stimulate
     discussion and critical comment on the economic effects of applying this monetary policy tool.

     https://www.federalreserve.gov/econres/feds/files/2018004pap.pdf

     Recent Postings
     The most recent postings of the FRS are available on a single web page.

     https://www.federalreserve.gov/recentpostings.htm

     Site Map
     The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse for content that aligns with their interests.

     https://www.federalreserve.gov/sitemap.htm

     Social Media
     The FRS maintains a presence on Facebook, Flickr, LinkedIn, Twitter, and YouTube.

     https://www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/contact-us-topics.htm

     What Is The Fed?
     The Federal Reserve, which is often referred to as "the Fed," serves as the central bank of the United States. The U.S.

     Congress created the Fed in 1913 to promote a safer and sounder monetary and financial system for the Nation. To

     learn more about the Fed, watch the 3-minute video.

     https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wLyh5fSTLLw

        The Sources of Information were updated 5–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                         Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL RETIREMENT THRIFT INVESTMENT BOARD
    77 K Street NE., Washington, DC 20002


    202-942-1600

    202-942-1676

    http://www.frtib.gov




    Board Members
 CHAIR                                          David A. Jones, Acting




                                                Dana K. Bilyeu


                                                William S. Jasien


                                                Ronald D. McCray


                                                (vacancy)

https://www.frtib.gov/BoardMembers/index.html



Management


 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR                             Ravindra Deo


 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Financial                                      Susan C. Crowder


 Investment                                     Sean Mccaffrey


 Operating                                      Suzanne Tosini


 Risk                                           (vacancy)


 Technology                                     Vijay Desai




 DIRECTORS


 Communications and Education                   James Courtney


 Enterprise Planning                            Renée C. Wilder Guerin


 External Affairs                               Kimberly A. Weaver


 Participant Services                           Tee Ramos


 Resource Management                            Gisile Goethe




 General Counsel                                Dharmesh Vashee, Acting
https://www.frtib.gov/MeetingMinutes/index.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2021.



The Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board administers the Thrift Savings Plan in the interest of its participants and

beneficiaries.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 6, 1986, Ronald W. Reagan approved Public Law 99–335, which is also cited as the Federal Employees'

Retirement System Act of 1986. The Act established the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board (FRTIB) as an

independent agency in the executive branch of the Government (100 Stat. 514).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-100/pdf/STATUTE-100-Pg514.pdf
The Board includes three members whom the President appoints, and one of them, the President designates to serve

as its Chair. The President also appoints two additional members: one is appointed after considering "the

recommendation made by the Speaker of the House of Representatives" in consultation with the minority leader of

that Chamber; the other is appointed after considering "the recommendation made by the majority leader of the

Senate" in consultation with the the minority leader of that Chamber (100 Stat. 578). Board members serve on a part-

time basis.


The Act vests responsibility for the agency in six named fiduciaries: the Executive Director and the five Board members.

"By action agreed to by a majority of the members," the Board appoints the Executive Director, who is required to

have "substantial experience, training, and expertise in the management of financial investments and pension benefit

plans." The Director oversees the agency and invests and manages "the Thrift Savings Fund in accordance with the

investment policies and other policies established by the Board" (100 Stat. 580).


The FRTIB does not post an organizational chart on its website.




STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material that is associated with the Federal Employees' Retirement System is codified and has been assigned

to Chapter 84 (sections 8401–8480) of 5 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title5/part3/subpartG/chapter84&edition=prelim
Statutory material affecting "Government Organization and Employees" is codified and has been assigned to 5 U.S.C.

The heading "Participation in the Thrift Savings Plan" describes section 8351.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title5-section8351&num=0&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that govern the FRTIB are codified and have been assigned to Chapter VI (parts 1600–1699) of 5

CFR.
https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=381bec672672e2c9d813a8633bd18d00&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title05/5cfrv3_02.tpl#1600



ACTIVITIES
The TSP is a tax-deferred, defined contribution plan that constitutes one of the three components of the Federal

Employees' Retirement System (FERS). Employees participating in the FERS accumulate savings through the TSP and

combine those savings with retirement income from the two other components: Social Security benefits and the FERS

Annuity. Employees participating in the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS) and members of the uniformed services

also may take advantage of the TSP to supplement their annuities.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XnlQZa7g_d4
The FRTIB operates the TSP and manages the investments of the Thrift Savings Fund for the benefit of participants and

their beneficiaries. These operational and management responsibilities include maintaining an account for each TSP

participant, making loans, purchasing annuity contracts, and providing for the payment of benefits.

https://www.tsp.gov



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Annuities
The TSP posts a periodically updated factsheet that explains life annuities. The "Annuities" factsheet (MAR 2020) is

posted in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.tsp.gov/publications/tspfs24.pdf

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that FRTIB records have been

assigned to record group 474. Record group 474 does not have a description that is associated with it. It was created

in anticipation of the transfer of archival records; however, no transfer had been made before the "Guide to Federal

Records in the National Archives of the United States" was updated.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/401-to-500.html

Business Opportunities
The FRTIB purchases products and services through contracts and agreements with private-sector entities and other

Federal agencies. Due to its unique status—a self-funded Federal agency with independent budgetary authority that

receives no annual appropriations from the U.S. Congress—the FRTIB is not strictly bound by the Federal Acquisition

Regulation. While subject to many of the same procurement laws as other Government agencies, the FRTIB also works

under the mandate of the Federal Employees' Retirement System Act. FRTIB fiduciaries are required by that law to

manage Thrift Savings Fund assets in the sole interest of the TSF participants and beneficiaries, expending funds to

provide benefits to participants and beneficiaries and defraying reasonable expenses of administering the TSP.

https://www.frtib.gov/Procurement/DoingBusiness.html

Calculators / Estimators
The TSP website's "Calculators" web page provides convenient access to a collection of calculating and estimating

tools.

https://www.tsp.gov/calculators

Career Opportunities
To carry out its mission, the FRTIB relies on financial experts, tax attorneys, and other professionals who possess

diverse skills and expertise.

https://www.frtib.gov/Careers/index.html
In 2019, the FRTIB ranked 19th among 28 small agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/RF00

Contact Information
Information for contacting the FRTIB and the TSP is available on the FRTIB website.

https://www.frtib.gov/contacts.html
TSP contact information also is available from the "We're Here To Help" web page on the TSP website.

https://www.tsp.gov/contact

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the FRTIB recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-retirement-thrift-investment-board

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA gives a right to access Federal Government records to any person. The FOIA is designed to make

Government actions and operations more transparent. It applies to existing records and does not require an agency to

create new records for compliance. The FOIA also does not require an agency to collect information that it does not

have or to do research or analyze data to fulfill a request. Certain records, or parts of them, may be exempt from

disclosure by the Act if one of nine exemptions shields their content. In some cases, the FRTIB provides copies of all of

the records that a requester seeks. In other cases, part or all of the information falls under an exemption and is

withheld, as the law permits. Before making a FOIA request, browse the holdings of the electronic reading room to see

what records already are available and consult the FRTIB's "Freedom of Information Act Guide," which is accessible

online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.frtib.gov/ReadingRoom/FOIA/e-read_guide.pdf | Email: foiarequest@tsp.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
TSP staff posts answers to questions that are asked frequently.

https://www.tsp.gov/frequently-asked-questions

Funds
TSP participants may opt to invest their retirement dollars in one or more of five individual funds: the Common Stock

Index Investment Fund (C), Fixed Income Index Investment Fund (F), Government Securities Investment Fund (G),
International Stock Index Investment Fund (I), and Small Cap Stock Index Investment Fund (S).

https://www.tsp.gov/funds-individual
Each of the TSP's 10 lifecycle (L) funds is a diversified blend of the 5 individual core funds (C, F, G, I, and S).

https://www.tsp.gov/funds-lifecycle

Glossary
The January 2021 edition of the "Summary of the Thrift Savings Plan" has a glossary of terms that starts on page 23.

The summary is posted in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.tsp.gov/publications/tspbk08.pdf

History of Share Prices
The TSP website's "Share Price History" web page allows visitors to retrieve share prices for all of the individual and

lifecycle funds from a specified range of dates.

https://www.tsp.gov/fund-performance/share-price-history

Meeting Minutes
Starting with the year 2007 and continuing to the present, minutes of the meetings of FRTIB members are available

online.

https://www.frtib.gov/MeetingMinutes/index.html

News / Resources
To keep abreast of TSP announcements, news, and popular resources, visit the "News and Resources" web page.

https://www.tsp.gov/whatsnew/index.html

Rates of Return
Annual and monthly rates of return for each of the individual and life cycle funds are available on the TSP website's

"Rates of Return" web page.

https://www.tsp.gov/fund-performance

Reading Room
Benchmark evaluation and investment option review reports, employee and participant surveys, financial statements,

FOIA reports, frequently requested records, press releases, regulations, reports to the U.S. Congress, strategic plans,

and other documents are available online in the FRTIB's reading room.

https://www.frtib.gov/ReadingRoom/index.html

Social Media
The TSP has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/tsp4gov
The TSP tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/tsp4gov
The TSP posts videos on its YouTube channel.
     https://www.youtube.com/user/tsp4gov

     TSP Basics
     The "TSP Basics" web page highlights the following topics: fitting the TSP into a comprehensive plan for retirement,

     moving money into the TSP, administrative and investment expenses, and designating beneficiaries.

     https://www.tsp.gov/tsp-basics

        The Sources of Information were updated 5–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                 Federal Trade Commission




The United States Government Manual




     FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION
    600 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20580


    202-326-2222

    http://www.ftc.gov




    COMMISSION
 CHAIR                                                  Lina Khan




 Commissioners                                          Rohit Chopra


                                                        Noah J. Phillips


                                                        Rebecca K. Slaughter


                                                        Christine S. Wilson




 Chief of Staff                                         Jennifer Howard


 Chief Technologist                                     Erie Meyer

https://www.ftc.gov/about-ftc/commissioners



BUREAUS


 Competition                                            Holly Vedova, Acting


 Consumer Protection                                    Samuel Levine, Acting


 Economics                                              Marta Wosińska




OFFICES


 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR                                     David B. Robbins




 DIRECTORS


 Equal Employment Opportunity and Workplace Inclusion   Namon C. Friends, Acting


 Congressional Relations                                Jeanne Bumpus


 International Affairs                                  Randolph W. Tritell


 Public Affairs                                         Lindsay Kryzak


 Policy Planning                                        Sarah Mackey, Acting
  CHIEFS


  Administrative Law Judge                                                            D. Michael Chappell


  Legal Officer                                                                       Reilly Dolan, Acting


  Privacy Officer                                                                     John Krebs




  General Counsel                                                                     Reilly Dolan, Acting


  Secretary of the Commission                                                         April Tabor

https://www.ftc.gov/about-ftc/bureaus-offices



OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL


                                                                                      Andrew Katsaros

https://www.ftc.gov/about-ftc/office-inspector-general



  The above list of key personnel was updated 7–2021.



The Federal Trade Commission protects America's consumers and enforces laws prohibiting anticompetitive, deceptive,

or unfair business practices.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) was established in 1914 by the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S.C. 41-58).

The Commission comprises five members whom the President appoints with the advice and consent of the Senate for

7-year terms. No more than three of the Commissioners may be members of the same political party. The President

designates one of them as Chair of the Commission to oversee its administrative management.


The FTC's statement of organization has been codified in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) and assigned to Part

0 of 16 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=1eef003b863924b104aa3a379a1a8b5c&mc=true&node=pt16.1.0&rgn=div5
The FTC posts its organizational chart (JUN 2021) in Portable Document Format for viewing and downloading.

https://www.ftc.gov/system/files/attachments/about-ftc/ftc_org_chart_0.pdf

ACTIVITIES
The FTC protects consumers and promotes competition in broad sectors of the economy. It safeguards and

strengthens free and open markets and helps consumers make informed choices. The FTC carries out its mission by
using a variety of tools: consumer and business education, law enforcement, research, rulemaking, and studies of

marketplace trends and legal developments. The FTC envisions a vigorously competitive U.S. economy offering

accessible and accurate information to consumers, an economy yielding high-quality products at competitive prices

and fostering efficiency, innovation, and consumer choice.

https://www.ftc.gov/about-ftc

Competition
The FTC prevents anticompetitive mergers and works to keep the marketplace free from anticompetitive business

practices. To promote competition, the FTC engages in six law enforcement-related activities: premerger notification,

merger and joint venture enforcement, merger and joint venture compliance, nonmerger enforcement, nonmerger

compliance, and antitrust policy. Policy initiatives, research, and business guidance and education also play a role in

promoting competition.

https://www.ftc.gov/about-ftc/bureaus-offices/bureau-competition

Consumer Protection
The FTC brings a variety of consumer protection cases and works with State attorneys general and other State and

local consumer protection officials. To protect consumers, it relies on five law enforcement functions: privacy and

identity protection, financial practices, marketing practices, advertising practices, and enforcement. Policy initiatives,

research, and business and consumer education also enhance protection.

https://www.ftc.gov/about-ftc/bureaus-offices/bureau-consumer-protection

Enforcement
The FTC's law enforcement activities foster voluntary compliance with the law, but also include formal administrative or

Federal court litigation leading to mandatory orders against offenders.


The FTC can issue an administrative complaint or authorize the filing of a Federal district court complaint charging a

person, partnership, or corporation with violating one or more of the statutes that the FTC enforces. If the charges are

not contested, settled by consent of the parties, or found to be true after an administrative hearing or a Federal court

trial, an administrative law judge or Federal court judge will issue an order requiring discontinuance of the unlawful

practices. The FTC also may request that a U.S. district court issue preliminary relief to halt allegedly unfair or deceptive

practices, to prevent an anticompetitive merger or unfair methods of competition from taking place, or to prevent

violations of any statute that the FTC enforces, pending the full adjudication of the matter. In Federal court, the FTC

may obtain other relief, including monetary redress. An order issued after an administrative or Federal court

proceeding that requires the respondent to cease and desist or take other corrective action may be appealed.

https://www.ftc.gov/enforcement

International Affairs
With other nations and international organizations, the FTC promotes sound competition and consumer protection

policies and provides technical assistance to nurture competition and enable consumer protection agencies to perform

their missions.

https://www.ftc.gov/policy/international
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Antitrust Violations
To report an antitrust violation, contact the Bureau of Competition's Office of Policy and Coordination. Phone, 202-

326-3300.

https://www.ftc.gov/faq/competition/report-antitrust-violation | Email: antitrust@ftc.gov

Business Opportunities
For information on contracts and procurement, contact the Assistant Chief Financial Officer for Acquisitions. Phone,

202-326-2339. Fax, 202-326-3529.

https://www.ftc.gov/about-ftc/bureaus-offices/office-executive-director/financial-management-office/acquisitions

Career Opportunities
To carry out its mission, the FTC relies on attorneys, investigators, and specialists in financial management, information

technology, public affairs, public policy, and in other fields. The agency posts current job vacancies on its Web site.

Information on benefits, working at the FTC, and the application process is also accessible online. For additional

information, contact the Human Capital Management Office. Phone, 202-326-2021. TTY, 202-326-3422.

https://www.ftc.gov/about-ftc/careers-ftc
The Partnership for Public Service categorizes the FTC as a midsize agency. In the Partnership's 2020 Best Places To

Work in the Federal Government rankings, the FTC placed second in its 25-agency category

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=FT00

Consumer Complaints
The FTC relies on complaints from consumers to detect patterns of abuse and fraud. A complaint may be filed in

English or Spanish and online or by phone. The FTC enters complaints into Consumer Sentinel, a secure online

database that civil and criminal law enforcement agencies in the U.S. and abroad can access. Phone, 877-382-4357.

https://www.ftccomplaintassistant.gov

Contact Information
Addresses (electronic and postal), links, and phone numbers are available on the "Contact the Federal Trade

Commission" web page.

https://www.ftc.gov/contact

Credit Reports
The Fair Credit Reporting Act requires each of the nationwide credit reporting companies to provide a free credit

report, upon request, once every 12 months.

https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/articles/0155-free-credit-reports

Do Not Call Registry
Register a home or mobile phone for free on the National Do Not Call Registry to eliminate most telemarketing calls.
https://www.donotcall.gov

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the FTC recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/federal-trade-commission

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Enacted in 1966, the FOIA generally provides that any Individual has the right to make a request for Federal agency

records or information; all Federal Government agencies are required to disclose records upon receiving a written

request for them; nine exemptions, in addition to limits to FOIA, shield certain records from disclosure. The Federal

FOIA does not provide access to records that State or local government agencies hold, or that private businesses or

individuals hold.

https://www.ftc.gov/about-ftc/foia

History
American Presidents are a part of the FTC's history. To learn which President helped pave the way toward the

Commission's creation, whose signature approved the Federal Trade Commission Act, which President literally helped

with the building, and which 21st-century President paid a visit to the FTC, see the "Our History" Web page.

https://www.ftc.gov/about-ftc/our-history

Identity Theft
Use IdentiftyTheft.gov to report identity theft and formulate a personal recovery plan.

https://www.identitytheft.gov

Open Government
The FTC supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

https://www.ftc.gov/site-information/open-government

Regional Offices
A map of the seven FTC regions—East Central, Midwest, Northeast, Northwest, Southeast, Southwest, and Western—

and contact information for the regional offices representing them are available online.

https://www.ftc.gov/about-ftc/bureaus-offices/regional-offices

Scam Alerts
Stay abreast of new scams with the latest information and practical tips. An online subscription form is available to

receive scam alerts by email.

https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/scam-alerts

Workshops
Information on conferences and workshops is available online.

https://www.ftc.gov/news-events
        The above Sources of Information were updated 7–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                              General Services Administration




The United States Government Manual




     GENERAL SERVICES ADMINISTRATION
    1800 F Street NW., Washington, DC 20405


    http://www.gsa.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         Robin Carnahan


      Deputy Administrator                                                                  Katy Kale
 Chief of Staff                                                                       Brett Prather


https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/organization/office-of-the-administrator/administrator-bio



National Services


 COMMISSIONERS


 Federal Acquisition                                                                  Sonny Hashmi


 Public Buildings                                                                     Nina M. Albert




Regional Services


 Region 1–New England                                                                 Glenn C. Rotondo, Acting


 Region 2–Northeast and Caribbean                                                     Michael Gelber, Acting


 Region 3–Mid-Atlantic                                                                Joanna Rosato, Acting


 Region 4–Southeast Sunbelt                                                           Kevin Kerns, Acting


 Region 5–Great Lakes                                                                 John Cooke, Acting


 Region 6–Heartland                                                                   Mary A. Ruwwe, Acting


 Region 7–Greater Southwest                                                           Giancarlo Brizzi, Acting


 Region 8–Rocky Mountain                                                              Penny Grout, Acting


 Region 9–Pacific Rim                                                                 Daniel R. Brown, Acting


 Region 10–Northwest / Arctic                                                         Chaun Benjamin, Acting


 Region 11–National Capital                                                           Darren Blue, Acting

https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/gsa-regions



Staff Offices


 ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATORS


 Civil Rights                                                                         Aluanda Drain, Acting
  Congressional and Intergovernmental Affairs                                              Gianelle Rivera


  Government-wide Policy                                                                   Krystal Brumfield


  Mission Assurance                                                                        Robert J. Carter


  Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization                                             Exodie C. Roe III


  Strategic Communication                                                                  Teressa Wykpisz-Lee




  CHIEF OFFICERS


  Administrative Services                                                                  Robert Stafford


  Customer                                                                                 Ed Walters


  Financial                                                                                Gerard Badorrek


  Human Capital                                                                            Traci DiMartini


  Information                                                                              David A. Shive




  General Counsel                                                                          Nitin Shah

https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/organization/gsa-leadership-directory



Independent Offices


  CIVILIAN BOARD OF CONTRACT APPEALS


  Chair                                                                                    Erica S. Beardsley

https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/organization/leadership-directory/chair-civilian-board-of-contract-appeals

  Inspector General                                                                        Carol F. Ochoa


https://www.gsaig.gov/content/meet-ig



  The above list of key personnel was updated 7–2021.



The General Services Administration delivers value and savings in real estate, acquisition, technology, and other mission-

support services across Government.
ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The General Services Administration (GSA) streamlined the Federal Government's administrative work. Its creation

involved consolidating the Federal Works Agency, the National Archives Establishment, and the Public Buildings

Administration; the Bureau of Federal Supply and the Office of Contract Settlement; and the War Assets Administration

into a single Federal agency that would administer supplies and provide workplaces for Federal employees.

https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/background-and-history
On June 30, 1949, President Harry S. Truman approved Public Law 81–152, which also is cited as the Federal Property

and Administrative Services Act of 1949. Section 101 of Title I of that statute deals with the organization of the General

Services Administration (GSA). To head the new agency, the statute provides for the office of an Administrator of

General Services, whom the President appoints by the advice and with the consent of the Senate (63 Stat. 379).

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/81st-congress/session-1/c81s1ch288.pdf
Pursuant to Public Law 81–109, which is also cited as the Reorganization Act of 1949, President Truman transmitted

Reorganization Plan No. 18 of 1950 to the U.S. Congress on March 13 of that same year. The plan transferred functions

of building and space management to the Administrator of General Services.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title5a-node84-leaf122&num=0&edition=prelim
The Reorganization Act of 1949 also required that each ensuing plan of reorganization be published in the Federal

Register (63 Stat. 206). On May 25, 1950, Reorganization Plan No. 18 was one of 16 reorganization plans published in

the daily issue (15 FR 3177).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1950-05-25/pdf/FR-1950-05-25.pdf
The GSA posts its organizational chart online.

https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/gsa-organization

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Subtitle I of 40 U.S.C. is dedicated to statutory material affecting Federal property and administrative services. Chapter

3, which comprises sections 301–323, is dedicated to the organization of the GSA.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title40/subtitle1&edition=prelim
Part 105–53 of 41 CFR is dedicated to the GSA's statement of organization and functions.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=43d7a5329a09931825fc019b64f070b8&
mc=true&node=pt41.3.105_653&rgn=div5



ACTIVITIES
The GSA started out, disposing of war surplus goods, managing and storing Government records, handling

emergency preparedness, and stockpiling strategic supplies for wartime. It also regulated the sale of various office

supplies to Federal agencies and managed a few unexpected operations (e.g., abacá plantations abroad). Today, the

GSA provides the spaces, technical innovations, and goods and services that are essential for operating the Federal

Government. It provides workplaces by constructing, managing, and preserving Government buildings and by leasing

and managing commercial real estate. Its acquisition solutions offer private sector professional services, equipment,

supplies, telecommunications, and information technology to Government organizations and the U.S. military. GSA
leadership in technology helps agencies buy, build, and use technology in ways that support their missions and better

serve the public. The GSA also implements Governmentwide policies to promote best practices of management and

efficiency in operations.


Governmentwide Policymaking
The Office of Government-wide Policy (OGP) uses policies, data, and strategy to achieve efficiency and effective

management across the Federal Government for key administrative areas: acquisition, fleet management travel and

transportation, information technology modernization, and real estate management. The OGP influences agency

behavior in these areas through the development of Governmentwide policy, performance standards, data analysis

and benchmarking, and reporting of Governmentwide data.

https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/organization/office-of-governmentwide-policy-overview

Product Acquisition / Service Management
The Federal Acquisition Service (FAS) offers more than 28 million different products and services to Federal agencies

and delivers annually over $60 billion in information technology products, services, and solutions; telecommunication

services; assisted acquisition services; travel and transportation management solutions; motor vehicle and fleet

services; and charge card services. The FAS manages over 219,000 vehicles, more than 3.5 million charge cards, and

provides personal property disposal services that facilitate the reuse of $1 billion in excess and surplus personal

property every year. The FAS leverages the buying power of the Federal Government to negotiate prices on products

and services that agencies require for daily operations. By arranging a network of service providers for information

technology and total solutions for law enforcement, including security and facility management systems, the FAS

meets the operating and mission requirements of an array of Federal agencies and State, Tribal, and local

governments. Leveraging its technology transformation services and information technology portfolios, the FAS is

developing and deploying Centers of Excellence to improve the public’s experience with Government by obtaining

and sharing technology applications, platforms, and processes that make Federal services more accessible, efficient,

and effective.

https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/organization/federal-acquisition-service

Workspace Acquisition / Property Management
The Public Buildings Service (PBS) provides quality facility and workspace solutions to more than 50 Federal agencies,

disposes of excess or unneeded Federal properties, and promotes the adoption of innovative workplace solutions and

technologies. It acquires space on behalf of the Federal Government through new construction and leasing and acts as

a caretaker for Federal properties across the country. As the largest public real estate organization in the United States,

the PBS owns or leases more than 8,800 assets and maintains an inventory of nearly 370 million square feet of

rentable workspace. This inventory includes more than 413 buildings that are on the National Register of Historic

Places. The PBS works with its Federal customers to reduce, overall, the need for workspace and the costs that are

associated with acquiring and managing it.

https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/organization/public-buildings-service



SOURCES OF INFORMATION
A–Z Index
An alphabetized list of frequently visited web pages on the GSA website is available online.

https://www.gsa.gov/website-information/az-index

Annual Reports
To enable a more informed assessment of performance, the GSA posts its annual financial report and performance

report on the "Annual Reports" web page.

https://www.gsa.gov/reference/reports/budget-performance/annual-reports

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that GSA records have been

assigned to record group 269.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/269.html

Auctions
The GSA Auctions website is a final part of the agency's transition to becoming an entirely electronic asset

management system. The site allows the general public to bid electronically on a wide selection of Federal assets. The

auctions are web-enabled: All registered participants may bid on items within specified timeframes. Federal personal

property assets, such as airplanes, furniture, heavy machinery, office equipment, scientific equipment, vehicles, vessels,

and other items, which may be located anywhere nationwide, can be purchased by online bidders whose physical

location is restricted only by Internet access.

https://gsaauctions.gov | Email: gsaauctionshelp@gsa.gov

Blogs
The "GSABlog" is available on the agency's main website. Ten other blogs that are associated with the GSA also are

accessible on the "GSABlog" web page. These blogs include the 18F Blog, Citizenscience.gov Blog, Code.gov Blog,

Data.gov Blog, DigitalGov Blog, FedRAMP Blog, IT Accessibility Blog, and USA.gov Blog, as well as the blogs "Around

the Corner" and "Great Government Through Technology."

https://www.gsa.gov/blog

Business Opportunities
The GSA serves as the Federal Government's procurement arm. It offers facilities, products, and services that Federal

agencies use to benefit the public. The GSA also gives businesses the opportunity to sell billions of dollars worth of

products and services to Federal agencies.

https://www.gsa.gov/buying-selling/getting-started-with-gsa-purchasing-programs
The Office of Small Business Utilization web pages has information on opportunities, resources, and training for

owners of small businesses. Phone, 855-672-8472.

https://www.gsa.gov/small-business

Career Opportunities
The GSA relies on professionals with diverse academic backgrounds, life experiences, and skills to carry out its mission.
It encourages Federal and private sector employees, Peace Corps volunteers and staff, persons with disabilities, recent

retirees, students and recent graduates, veterans, and others to apply for job openings. For more information, contact

the national recruitment center. Phone, 816-823-2006.

https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/careers | Email: NRC@gsa.gov
In 2019, the GSA ranked 7th among 25 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/GS00

Consumer Rights
The "Consumer Action Handbook" is a free resource guide that provides general information on shopping for goods

and services, information for filing a complaint about a purchase, and tips on consumer rights. Its contents also include

a sample complaint letter and a consumer assistance directory that contains contact information for Government

agencies and national corporations. The handbook is available in English and Spanish. A digital version in Portable

Document Format (PDF) may be downloaded from the USA.gov website. A hardcopy may be ordered online; over the

phone, weekdays, 8 a.m.–8 p.m., excluding Federal holidays; or by writing to USAGov–Handbook, Pueblo, CO 81009.

Phone, 844-872-4681.

https://www.usa.gov/handbook

Contact GSA
The "Contact Us" web page has live chat, an electronic form for submitting questions, a phone number, and a link that

leads to an electronic agencywide staff directory.

https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/contact-us | Email: press@gsa.gov

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the GSA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/general-services-administration

Federal Relay (FedRelay)
FedRelay provides telecommunications services to Federal agencies and tribal governments for conducting official

business with people who struggle with deafness, hearing impairments, or speech disabilities. The general public also

may use FedRelay for conducting business with Federal agencies. Phone, 855-482-4348.

https://www.gsa.gov/technology/technology-purchasing-programs/telecommunications-and-network-
services/federal-relay-fedrelay | Email: ITCSC@gsa.gov

Forms
An electronic forms library is available on the GSA website. The library has an easily accessible collection of the forms

that are most frequently downloaded.

https://www.gsa.gov/reference/forms | Email: forms@gsa.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded from
disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute. The GSA participates in FOIAonline, which enables

users to submit a FOIA request to all participating agencies, track the status of a request, search for requests submitted

by others, access previously released records, and generate agency-specific FOIA processing reports.

https://foiaonline.gov/foiaonline/action/public/home#participatingAgencies | Email: gsa.foia@gsa.gov

Governmentwide Initiatives
The GSA is involved with dozen of initiatives whose scope is governmentwide.

https://www.gsa.gov/governmentwide-initiatives

Help Government Find Answers
The GSA maintains the Challenge.gov website, which is the official hub for prize competitions and challenges across

the Federal Government. It is a web platform that assists Federal agencies with inviting the public to submit ideas and

solutions for solving specific problems.

https://www.challenge.gov

Historic Preservation
The GSA posts historic preservation resources and tools on its website.

https://www.gsa.gov/real-estate/historic-preservation/historic-preservation-policy-tools/preservation-tools-resources

History
The GSA has posted a brief history that describes its establishment, original mission, accomplishments through the

decades, and changes that it has undergone.

https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/background-history/a-brief-history-of-gsa
"GSA70—Supporting Modernization, Innovation, and Efficiency" is a video timeline that celebrates the agency's 70th

anniversary and highlights 7 decades of achievements, which include renovating the Presidential residence, starting a

Governmentwide motor pool, creating a Federal telecommunications system, introducing the first Government charge

card, opening childcare centers in Federal buildings, creating the Government's first official web portal (FirstGov.gov),

moving email to a cloud-based system, and more.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=czy4eQ5iGhU

Inspector General
The Office of Inspector General operates a fraud hotline for reporting abuse, fraud, and waste in GSA programs or

mismanagement or violations of law, regulations, and rules by GSA employees or contractors. Phone, 202-501-1780 or

800-424-5210.

https://www.gsaig.gov/hotline | Email: fraudnet@gsa.gov

Newsroom
The GSA posts congressional testimonies, news releases, and photo galleries on its website.

https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/newsroom | Email: press@gsa.gov

Open Government
The GSA supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and
transparency.

https://www.gsa.gov/governmentwide-initiatives/gsas-open-government-initiatives                   |              Email:
Open.Government@gsa.gov

Payroll Calendars
The payroll services branch of the Office of the Chief Financial Officer posts payroll calendars in Portable Document

Format (PDF) on the GSA website for viewing and downloading. Phone, 844-303-6515.

https://www.gsa.gov/buying-selling/purchasing-programs/shared-services/payroll-shared-services/payroll-calendars

Per Diem Rates
The GSA sets the per diem rates for Federal travel within the continental United States. Per diem is the allowance for

incidental expenses, lodging, and meals. The GSA website features a search tool for finding current rates in the

continental United States by State or ZIP Code or by clicking on a map.

https://www.gsa.gov/travel/plan-book/per-diem-rates | Email: travelpolicy@gsa.gov

Plain Language
The "Plain Writing Act of 2010" was passed by Congress and approved by the President to improve the effectiveness of

Federal agencies and increase their accountability to the public "by promoting clear Government communication that

the public can understand and use." The GSA is committed to writing agency documents and its website content in

plain language.

https://www.gsa.gov/governmentwide-initiatives/plain-language

Presidential Transition Directory
The 2020 directory connects the people who are helping plan and design the next Federal Government with

information and resources that are relevant to their efforts.

https://www.gsa.gov/governmentwide-initiatives/presidential-transition-directory

Properties
The GSA owns and leases over 376.9 million square feet of space in 9,600 buildings in more than 2,200 communities

nationwide. In addition to office buildings, GSA properties include courthouses, data processing centers, laboratories,

land ports of entry, and post offices.

https://www.gsa.gov/real-estate/gsa-properties

Real Property Disposal
The Office of Real Property Utilization and Disposal is a governmentwide realty services provider. It provides

information on the handling of excess real property and on properties that are being offered for sale.

https://disposal.gsa.gov

Regional Offices
The GSA operates 11 regional offices.

https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/gsa-regions

Site Map
    The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

    http://www.gsa.gov/portal/site/map

    Social Media
    In addition to a main Facebook page, the GSA has other pages that are associated with its component organizations

    and programs and its activities and services. The "Social Media at GSA" web page allows visitors to see GSA's entire

    Facebook presence on social media.

    https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/newsroom/social-media-at-gsa#Facebook | Email: socialmedia@gsa.gov
    The GSA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on its Twitter accounts. In addition to a main Twitter

    feed, the GSA has other feeds that are associated with its component organizations and programs and its activities

    and services. The "Social Media at GSA" web page allows visitors to see GSA's entire Twitter presence on social media.

    https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/newsroom/social-media-at-gsa#Twitter
    The GSA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/usgsa

    Staff Directory
    The GSA maintains an electronic staff directory on its website. After August 1, 2020, the staff directory will be accessible

    only as a Comma-Separated Values (CSV) file, which allows users to view, search, and download the directory's

    content.

    https://www.gsa.gov/staff-directory

    Sustainable Facilities (SF) Tool
    The SFTool supports the efforts of designers, facility managers, purchasing agents, tenants, and others to make

    buildings healthier and more efficient and to become more environmentally-responsible in their purchasing.

    https://sftool.gov | Email: sustainability@gsa.gov

    Upcoming Events and Training
    The GSA posts upcoming events and training on its "GSA Events" web page.

    https://www.gsa.gov/about-us/events-and-training/gsa-events

    USA.gov
    USA.gov is a governmentwide guide to information and services.

    https://www.usa.gov

        The Sources of Information were updated 7–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About
Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                 Inter-American Foundation




The United States Government Manual




     INTER-AMERICAN FOUNDATION
    1331 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Suite 1200 North, Washington, DC 20004


    202-360-4530

    http://www.iaf.gov


      CHAIR                                                                                 Eduardo Arriola


      Vice Chair                                                                            Juan Carlos Iturregui


      Secretary                                                                             Jack C. Vaughn, Jr.
 Director                                                                             J. Kelly Ryan


 Director                                                                             Luis A. Viada


 Director                                                                             Roger W. Wallace


 Director                                                                             (vacancy)


 Director                                                                             (vacancy)


 Director                                                                             (vacancy)




 President / Chief Executive Officer                                                  Paloma Adams-Allen


 Chief Operating Officer                                                              Lesley Duncan


 General Counsel                                                                      Paul Zimmerman




 MANAGING DIRECTORS


 Grant-Making and Portfolio Management                                                Marcy Kelley


 Networks and Strategic Initiatives                                                   Stephen Cox


 Office of External and Government Affairs                                            (vacancy)




The above list of key personnel was updated 09–2017.

The Inter-American Foundation supports social and economic development in Latin America and the Caribbean.


The Inter-American Foundation (IAF) was created in 1969 (22 U.S.C. 290f) as an experimental U.S. foreign assistance

program. The Foundation is governed by a nine-person Board of Directors whom the President appoints with the

advice and consent of the Senate. Six members are drawn from the private sector and three from the Federal

Government. The Board of Directors appoints the president of the Foundation.

http://www.iaf.gov/about-the-iaf/at-a-glance-3798
In Latin America and the Caribbean, the IAF promotes equitable, participatory, and sustainable self-help development
by awarding grants and giving other technical assistance directly to local organizations throughout the region. It also

partners with the public and private sectors to build support and to mobilize local, national, and international

resources for grassroots development.

http://www.iaf.gov/about-the-iaf/more-about-the-iaf



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Blog
The IAF blogs in four languages: English, Kreyol, Portuguese, and Spanish.

http://www.iaf.gov/resources/blog

Career Opportunities
The IAF posts employment opportunities online.

http://www.iaf.gov/about-the-iaf/iaf-jobs/vacancies
The IAF posts information on student internships on its Web site.

http://www.iaf.gov/about-the-iaf/iaf-jobs/internships

Corporate Partners
Contact the Office of External and Government Affairs for information on participating in the program for corporate

partners. Phone, 202-688-3051.

http://www.iaf.gov/partners/corporate | Email: partnerships@iaf.gov

Country Portfolios
A list of the countries where the IAF currently works is available on its Web site. Country pages include descriptions of

active IAF grants.

http://www.iaf.gov/our-work/where-we-work/country-portfolios

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The IAF generally discloses documents or records upon receiving a properly submitted request in writing. Records, or

parts of them, that one or more of the nine FOIA exemptions shield will not be released.

http://www.iaf.gov/about-the-iaf/legal-notices-and-reports/freedom-of-information-act-foia | Email: foia@iaf.gov
The IAF maintains an electronic FOIA reading room.

http://www.iaf.gov/about-the-iaf/legal-notices-and-reports/freedom-of-information-act-foia/foia-e-reading-room

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The IAF posts answers to FAQs online.

http://www.iaf.gov/about-the-iaf/faq

Grants
The IAF funds the self-help efforts of grassroots groups in Latin America and the Caribbean. It welcomes proposals for

its grant program.
http://www.iaf.gov/apply-for-grants/call-for-proposals

Multilingual Resources
Español

http://spanish.iaf.gov/home-spanish
Kreyol

http://kreyol.iaf.gov/home-kreyol
Português

http://portugues.iaf.gov/home-portuguese

News
The IAF posts news items on its Web site.

http://www.iaf.gov/resources/news
The IAF posts newsletters on its Web site.

http://www.iaf.gov/resources/newsletters

Open Government
The IAF's Open Government Web page has shortcuts to items of interest to the public.

http://www.iaf.gov/about-the-iaf/legal-notices-and-reports/open-government-initiative | Email: inquiries@iaf.gov

Organizational Chart
The IAF includes a small organizational chart on its "Our People" Web page.

http://www.iaf.gov/about-the-iaf/our-people

Project Achievements
The "From the Field" Web page presents highlights and milestones of projects that the IAF has supported.

http://www.iaf.gov/our-work/results/stories-from-the-field

Publications
The IAF produces print and digital publications in English, Spanish, and Portuguese.

http://www.iaf.gov/resources/publications

Site Map
The Web site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

http://www.iaf.gov/about-the-iaf/new-advanced-components/site-map

Social Media
The IAF has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/iafgrassroots
The IAF tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/IAFgrassroots
     The IAF uploads videos to Vimeo.

     https://vimeo.com/user15989133/videos
     http://www.iaf.gov/about-the-iaf/contact-us | Email: inquiries@iaf.gov

        For further information, contact the Office of the President, Inter-American Foundation, 1331
        Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Suite 1200 North, Washington, DC 20004. Phone, 202-360-4530.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                              Merit Systems Protection Board




The United States Government Manual




     MERIT SYSTEMS PROTECTION BOARD
    1615 M Street NW., Fifth Floor, Washington, DC 20419


    202-653-7200

    800-209-8960

    202-653-7130

    http://www.mspb.gov


      CHAIR                                                                                 Mark Robbins, Acting
 Vice Chair                                                                             Mark Robbins


 Member                                                                                 (vacancy)




 Director, Office of Equal Employment Opportunity                                       Jerry Beat




 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR                                                                     James M. Eisenmann


 Clerk of the Board                                                                     Jennifer Everling, Acting


 Director, Financial and Administrative Management                                      Kevin Nash


 Director, Information Resources Management                                             William D. Spencer, Acting


 Director, Office of Appeals Counsel                                                    Susan M. Swafford


 Director, Office of Policy and Evaluation                                              James M. Read


 Director, Office of Regional Operations                                                Deborah Miron


 General Counsel                                                                        Bryan G. Polisuk


 Legislative Counsel                                                                    Rosalyn L. Coates




 [For the Merit Systems Protection Board statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations,
 Title 5, Part 1200]



The Merit Systems Protection Board protects the integrity of the Federal personnel merit systems and the rights of

Federal employees.

Organizational Chart
The Merit Systems Protection Board (MSPB) is a successor agency to the United States Civil Service Commission,

established by act of January 16, 1883 (22 Stat. 403). Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1978 (5 U.S.C. app.) redesignated

part of the Commission as the Merit Systems Protection Board. The Board comprises three members whom the

President appoints with the advice and consent of the Senate.




ACTIVITIES
The Board has responsibility for hearing and adjudicating appeals by Federal employees of adverse personnel actions,

such as removals, suspensions, and demotions. It also resolves cases involving reemployment rights, denial of periodic
step increases in pay, actions against administrative law judges, and charges of prohibited personnel practices,

including charges in connection with whistleblowing.


The Board has the authority to enforce its decisions and to order corrective and disciplinary actions. An employee or

applicant for employment involved in an appealable action that also involves an allegation of discrimination may ask

the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission to review a Board decision. Final decisions and orders of the Board

can be appealed to the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit.


The Board reviews regulations issued by the Office of Personnel Management and has the authority to require

agencies to cease compliance with any regulation that could constitute a prohibited personnel practice. It also

conducts special studies of the civil service and other executive branch merit systems and reports to the President and

the Congress on whether the Federal workforce is being adequately protected against political abuses and prohibited

personnel practices.

http://www.mspb.gov/About/about.htm



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Electronic Filing
An appeal may be filed online using the e-Appeal process.

https://e-appeal.mspb.gov

Career Opportunities
The MSPB posts current job openings on USAJobs.

http://www.mspb.gov/contact/jobs.htm

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The MSPB participates in FOIAonline, which allows an information seeker to submit FOIA requests to participating

agencies, track the status of requests, search for requests that others have submitted, access previously released

records, and generate agency-specific FOIA processing reports.

http://www.mspb.gov/foia/request.htm
https://foiaonline.regulations.gov/foia/action/public/home

Interviews
The MSPB posts external links to MSPB-related interviews on its Web site.

http://www.mspb.gov/radio.htm
http://www.mspb.gov/video.htm

Public Affairs
The MSPB posts "Federal Register" notices, press releases, reports, and the results of its annual Federal Employee

Viewpoint Survey online.

http://www.mspb.gov/publicaffairs/publicaffairs.htm
http://www.mspb.gov/contact/contact.htm | Email: mspb@mspb.gov
        For further information, contact the Merit Systems Protection Board, 1615 M Street NW., Washington, DC
        20419. Phone, 202-653-7200 or 800-209-8960. TDD, 800-877-8339. Fax, 202-653-7130.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                    National Aeronautics and Space Administration




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION
    300 E Street SW., Washington, DC 20546


    202-358-0000

    http://www.nasa.gov




    Office of the Administrator
 ADMINISTRATOR                               Janet Petro, Acting


 Deputy Administrator                        Vacant




 ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATORS                    Vanessa Wyche, Acting


 Strategic Engagement and Assessment         Thomas E. Cremins




 Chief of Staff                              Trey Carlson, Acting


 Deputy Associate Administrator              Casey Swails

https://www.nasa.gov/nasa-leadership



Administrator Staff Offices


 ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATORS


 Communications                              Jeffrey "Wes" Brown, Acting


 Diversity and Equal Opportunity             Stephen T. Shih


 International and Interagency Relations     Karen Feldstein


 Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs   Jackie Jester


 Small Business Programs                     Dwight Deneal


 STEM Engagement                             Elaine Ho




 CHIEFS


 Financial Officer                           Steve Shinn, Acting


 Information Officer                         Jeffrey M. Seaton




 General Counsel                             Iris Lan

https://www.nasa.gov/about/org_index.html
Administrator Staff Offices


 Senior Climate Advisor                 Katherine Calvin




 CHIEFS


 Engineer                               Joe Pellicciotti


 Health and Medical Officer             James D. Polk


 Safety and Mission Assurance Officer   W. Russ DeLoach


 Scientist                              Katherine Calvin


 Technologist                           A.C. Charania




Mission Directorates


 ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATORS


 Aeronautics Research                   Robert A. Pearce


 Exploration Systems Development        Lori Glaze


 Science                                Nicola Fox


 Space Operations                       Kenneth Bowersox


 Space Technology                       Clayton Turner




Mission Support Directorate


 Associate Administrator                David Mitchell




 ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATORS


 Human Capital Management               Kelly Elliot


 Procurement                            Karla Smith Jackson
 Protective Services                                   Charles Lombard


 Strategic Infrastructure                              Joel Carney




 EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS


 NASA Shared Services Center                           Anita F. Harrell

https://www.nasa.gov/msd/msd-leadership



CENTERS AND FACILITIES


 DIRECTORS


 Ames Research Center                                  Eugene L. Tu


 Armstrong Flight Center                               Bradley Flick


 Glenn Research Center                                 James A. Kenyon


 Goddard Space Flight Center                           Makenzie Lystrup


 Jet Propulsion Laboratory                             Laurie Leshin


 Johnson Space Center                                  Stephen Koerner, Acting


 Kennedy Space Center                                  Kelvin Manning, Acting


 Langley Research Center                               Trina Dyal, Acting


 Marshall Space Flight Center                          Joseph Pelfrey


 Stennis Space Center                                  John Bailey




 NASA Management Office                                Andrea Razzaghi

https://www.nasa.gov/about/sites/index.html

 Inspector General                                     Robert H. Steinau, Acting


https://oig.nasa.gov/nasa-oig-organization/



 The above list of key personnel was updated 3–2025.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration explores the unknown in air and space, innovates for the benefit of

humanity and inspires the world through discovery.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On July 29, 1958, President Dwight D. Eisenhower approved Public Law 85–568, which also is cited as the National

Aeronautics and Space Act of 1958, "to provide for research into problems of flight within and outside the earth's

atmosphere." In the Act's declaration of policy and purpose, the U.S. Congress declared "that it is the policy of the

United States that activities in space should be devoted to peaceful purposes for the benefit of all mankind" (72 Stat.

426).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-72/pdf/STATUTE-72-Pg426-2.pdf
By approving this Act of Congress, President Eisenhower "established the National Aeronautics and Space

Administration" (72 Stat. 429). The newly created executive branch agency has become widely known by its acronym

NASA.


The National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) was NASA's predecessor organization. The Committee was

established on March 3, 1915, as a part of Public Law 63–271, which made appropriations for the naval service and

established the Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (38 Stat. 930). After serving four decades as the Nation's premier

aeronautical research institution, the NACA was dissolved in 1958, and its laboratories became the nucleus of NASA.

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/63rd-congress/session-3/c63s3ch83.pdf
NASA's statement of organization and general information on the agency have been codified and assigned to Part

1201 of 14 CFR. The Administration is headed by a civilian Administrator whom the President appoints by the advice

and with the consent of the Senate. The Administrator, whom the President supervises and directs, is responsible for

exercising all NASA powers and discharging all of its duties.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=e7061af8ea4349271e3601ceda1fbcdd&mc=true&node=pt14.5.1201&rgn=div5
NASA posts its organizational chart (FEB 2021) in Portable Document Format for viewing and downloading.

https://www.nasa.gov/sites/default/files/atoms/files/nasa_organizational_chart_feb_2021.pdf
The "NASA Organizational Charts" web page contains information on NASA organizational changes from the agency's

formation in 1958 through the year 2015.

https://history.nasa.gov/orgcharts/orgcharts.html



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material on national and commercial space programs has been codified and assigned to 51 U.S.C. Statutory

material on the coordination of aeronautical and space activities has been assigned to Subchapter II of Chapter 201.

Subchapter II includes sections 20111–20117.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title51/subtitle2/chapter201/subchapter2&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations concerning aeronautics and space have been assigned to 14 CFR. Chapter V of Title 14 contains

codified rules and regulations that are associated with NASA.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
gp=&SID=e7061af8ea4349271e3601ceda1fbcdd&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title14/14chapterV.tpl



ACTIVITIES

Earth and Space Exploration
The Science Mission Directorate explores Earth and space to advance Earth science, heliophysics, planetary science,

and astrophysics. Using in situ and space-based observations, the Directorate seeks a better understanding of the Sun

and its influence on the solar system, climate change, the solar system's origin and evolution, whether life is limited to

Earth, and the universe beyond.

https://science.nasa.gov/about-us

  For further information, call 202-358-3889.



Increasing Efficiency and Safety / Reducing Environmental Harm
The Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate conducts research, ground tests, and flight demonstrations to develop

technologies and tools that reduce the adverse effects of aviation on the environment, increase efficiency while

maintaining safety in skies that are becoming more crowded, and prepare the way for the emergence of new aircraft

shapes and propulsion. The Directorate's four research programs partner with industry, other government agencies,

and universities to develop technologies, converge breakthroughs from other fields, and ensure that the next

generation workforce has the vision and skills for maintaining U.S. leadership in aviation.

https://www.nasa.gov/aeroresearch/about-armd

  For further information, call 202-358-2047.



Institutional Support for Mission Objectives
The Mission Support Directorate provides overall leadership, stewardship, advocacy, integration, and optimization of

Agency institutional activities. These activities include management of human capital and strategic infrastructure,

procurement, protective services, headquarters operations, shared services, partnerships, external audits, and

management of Agency directives. To enable successful operations, the Directorate focuses on three major goals: to

provide stewardship of major institutional operations; to integrate resources, infrastructure, and processes and to

advocate for institutional capabilities and needs; and to optimize mission support services through strategic analysis

and business services assessments to achieve greater operational efficiency.

https://www.nasa.gov/msd/aboutus

  For further information, call 202-358-2789.
Space Technology for Missions
The Space Technology Mission Directorate develops crosscutting and pioneering technologies and capabilities that the

agency needs to carry out current and future missions. Through transparent, collaborative partnerships, the

Directorate rapidly develops and demonstrates high-payoff technologies. It uses a merit-based competition model

with a portfolio approach, spanning a range of discipline areas and technology readiness levels.

https://www.nasa.gov/directorates/spacetech/about_us/index.html

  For further information, call 202-358-0454.



Supporting Human Exploration
The Human Exploration and Operations Mission Directorate oversees NASA space systems development and

operations that support human exploration in and beyond low-Earth orbit. It also oversees low-level requirements

development, policy, and programmatic oversight. The International Space Station represents the agency's exploration

activities in low-Earth orbit. Beyond low-Earth orbit, exploration activities include the management of exploration

systems development, human space flight capabilities, advanced exploration systems, and space life sciences research

and applications. The Directorate also provides agency leadership and management of NASA space operations related

to launch services and space communications and navigation in support of both human and robotic exploration

programs.

https://www.nasa.gov/directorates/heo/index.html

  For further information, call 202-358-1562.




NASA CENTERS

Ames Research Center
Located in California's Silicon Valley, the Center enables exploration through selected developments, innovative

technologies, and interdisciplinary scientific discovery. It provides leadership in astrobiology; small satellites;

technologies for CEV, CLV, and HLV; the search for habitable planets; supercomputing; intelligent-adaptive systems;

advanced thermal protection; and airborne astronomy. The Center also develops tools for a safer, more efficient

national airspace, and it cultivates partnerships that benefit NASA's mission.

https://www.nasa.gov/ames

Armstrong Flight Research Center
Located at Edwards Air Force Base, CA, the Center carries out flight research and technology integration, validates

space exploration concepts, conducts airborne remote sensing and science missions, enables airborne astrophysics

observation missions to study the universe, and supports International Space Station operations. It also supports

activities of the Agency's four Mission Directorates.

https://www.nasa.gov/centers/armstrong/home/index.html
Glenn Research Center
Located on two campuses—at Lewis Field, next to Cleveland Hopkins International Airport, and at Neil A. Armstrong

Test Facility (formerly the Plum Brook Station) in Sandusky, OH—the Center is associated with cutting edge

technologies that will enable human exploration to Mars, the design of environmentally friendlier commercial hybrid

electric aircraft, and the development of more advanced high-temperature materials. Its 3,200 scientists, engineers,

and other specialized employees work in partnership with U.S. companies, universities, and other Government

institutions to produce and improve new technologies that are useful on and above and beyond Earth. The Center's

specialized staff focuses on air-breathing and in-space propulsion, power and energy storage, aerospace

communications, extreme environment materials, biomedical technologies, and high-value space experiments in the

physical sciences.

https://www.nasa.gov/centers/glenn/home/index.html

Goddard Space Flight Center
Located in Greenbelt, MD, the Center expands humankind's knowledge of Earth and its environment, the solar system,

and the universe by observing them from space. It also conducts scientific investigations, develops and operates space

systems, and advances essential technologies.

https://www.nasa.gov/goddard

Johnson Space Center
Located in Houston, TX, the Center specializes in human space flight. It hosts and staffs program and project offices;

selects and trains astronauts; manages and conducts projects that build, test, and integrate human-rated systems for

transportation, habitation, and working in space; and plans and operates human space flight missions. This work

requires a comprehensive understanding of space and planetary environments, as well as research into the effects of

those environments on human physiology. It also requires development of technology to sustain and preserve life;

maintenance of a supply chain to design, manufacture, and test flight products; selection, training, and provision of

medical care to those who fly space missions; and ongoing administrative mission support services. The Center is

currently hosting the International Space Station Program, the Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle Program, and the Human

Research Program. It plays a lead role in developing, operating, and integrating human exploration missions that

include commercial, academic, international, and U.S. Government partners.

https://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/home/index.html

Kennedy Space Center
Located on Florida's east coast, the Center is responsible for space launch operations and spaceport and range

technologies. Home to the launch services program, it manages the processing and launching of astronaut crews and

associated payloads. Its management activities include the International Space Station segments, research experiments

and supplies, and NASA’s scientific and research spacecraft. These scientific and research spacecraft range from

robotic landers to Earth observation satellites and space-based telescopes on a variety of launch vehicles.


Innovative technology experts at the Center support NASA’s current programs and future exploration missions by

developing new products and processes that benefit the Agency and consumers. The Center remains a leader in

cutting-edge research and development in the areas of physics, chemistry, technology, prototype designing,
engineering, environmental conservation, and renewable energy.

https://www.nasa.gov/centers/kennedy/home/index.html

Langley Research Center
Located in Hampton, VA, and established in 1917 as an aeronautics lab, the Center is renowned for its scientific and

technological expertise in aerospace research, atmospheric science, systems analysis and integration, and planetary

entry, descent and landing. Its researchers and engineers conduct research in structures and materials, applied

sciences, space technology development, and aerosciences across the hyper, super, and subsonic flight regimes.

Langley researchers and engineers have developed and validated technologies to improve the effectiveness, safety,

environmental compatibility, and efficiency of the Nation's air transportation system. The Center supports space

exploration and operations, and it plays a major role in expanding science-based knowledge of Earth and its

environment. By determining appropriate preventative and corrective action for problems, trends, and issues across

agency programs and projects, its engineering and safety personnel at the NASA Engineering Safety Center have

improved mission safety and execution.

https://www.nasa.gov/langley

Marshall Space Flight Center
Located in Huntsville, AL, the Center oversees complex engineering, technology development, and scientific research

for making human space exploration a reality. The Center is building the space launch system and developing

advanced technologies that are necessary for the human journey to Mars. It also manages a number of programs and

projects: the International Space Station's environmental control and life support system, its payload operations, and

numerous other facilities and experiments; the Chandra X-ray Observatory; the Discovery and New Frontiers

programs; space technology demonstration missions; and the Michoud Assembly Facility, where space vehicles are

manufactured and assembled.

https://www.nasa.gov/centers/marshall/home/index.html

Stennis Space Center
Located near Bay St. Louis, MS, the Center serves as the agency's rocket propulsion testing ground. It provides test

services not only for America's space program, but also for the Department of Defense and private sector. Its unique

rocket propulsion test capabilities will be used for testing the engines and stages of NASA's space launch system

rocket. The Advanced Technology and Technology Transfer Branch develops and licenses state-of-the-art

components, processes, sensors, and software.

https://www.nasa.gov/centers/stennis/home/index.html

Jet Propulsion Laboratory
The Laboratory is a Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC) managed under contract by the

California Institute of Technology (Caltech) in Pasadena, CA. This FFRDC is a unique nongovernment entity sponsored

and funded by the Agency to meet specific long-term technical needs that cannot be met by other organizations

within the Agency. As part of this special relationship, the Laboratory must operate in the public interest with

objectivity and independence, avoid organizational conflicts of interest, and fully disclose its affairs to NASA. The

Laboratory develops and maintains technical and managerial competencies to perform the following missions in
support of the Agency's strategic goals: to explore the solar system to understand its formation and evolution; to

establish a continuous and permanent robotic presence on Mars to discover its history and habitability; to make critical

measurements and models to understand the global and regional integrated Earth system; to conduct observations to

search for neighboring solar systems and Earth-like planets and help understand formation, evolution, and

composition of the Universe; to conduct communications and navigation for deep space missions; to provide support,

particularly in robotic infrastructures and precursors, that enables human exploration of the Moon, Mars, and beyond;

and, under Caltech's initiative, to collaborate with other Federal and State government agencies and commercial

endeavors in areas synergistic with the Laboratory's work performed for NASA.

https://www.nasa.gov/centers/jpl/home/index.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
NASA maintains an online index of all topics to help visitors browse or search for specific information.

https://www.nasa.gov/sitemap

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that NASA records have been

assigned to record group 255.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/255.html

Business Opportunities
Information on business opportunities is available on NASA's Office of Procurement website.

https://www.nasa.gov/office/procurement
NASA offers contracting and subcontracting opportunities to small businesses. Connect with the Office of Small

Business Programs through various electronic and social communications methods listed on the website.

https://www.nasa.gov/osbp

Career Opportunities
In addition to astronauts, the agency relies on accountants, engineers, human resources specialists, IT specialists,

scientists, technicians, writers, and other skilled professionals, to carry out its mission. To learn more about

employment opportunities and programs, visit the "Careers at NASA" web page.

https://www.nasa.gov/careers
In 2024, NASA ranked the highest among 18 large Government agencies in the Best Places To Work Agency Rankings!

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/overall/?type=large&subtype=large&category=overall&
In addition, NASA offers several opportunities for students to undertake meaningful and challenging projects that truly

make an impact on humanity through our Internship Programs. To learn more about internships at NASA, visit this

web page overview of our Internship Programs.

https://www.nasa.gov/learning-resources/internship-programs/
Contact Information
NASA Communications Office personnel work hard, answering questions and responding to requests in a timely

manner. Before relying on the "Contact Page" or directing an email to the public inquiries inbox, search NASA's

website to see if the desired information is already accessible. NASA also has communication tools that make it easy to

keep abreast of the agency's announcements and exciting achievements.

https://www.nasa.gov/contact/
The "Media Contacts and Information" web page was designed with journalists and reporters in mind.

https://www.nasa.gov/news/media-contacts

Data
NASA's central open-data website aggregates public data from different archives and provides datasets not available

anywhere else. There are thousands of public datasets on data.nasa.gov. To get a better understanding of the

different types of datasets available, a data visualization page has been created entirely dedicated to helping users

gain a better understanding as to what kind of data they can expect to find.

https://data.nasa.gov/

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that NASA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/national-aeronautics-and-space-administration

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Any person has a court-enforceable right to request and obtain access to Federal agency records. That right has

restrictions and does not extend to records, or portions of them, that are shielded from public disclosure by one of

nine statutory exemptions or by one of three special law enforcement record exclusions. The FOIA established a

statutory right that affects the process for accessing executive branch information in the Federal Government.

https://www.nasa.gov/FOIA/
NASA maintains a hyperlinked list of FOIA websites for each of its centers.

https://www.nasa.gov/foia/foia-contacts/
NASA maintains a hyperlinked list of its centers' electronic libraries.

https://www.nasa.gov/foia/nasa-e-libraries

Get Involved with NASA
NASA invites members of the public to contribute their time and expertise to advancing research, solving problems,

and potentially winning prizes as a result of their work. Members of the public are also invited to find out all of the

ways they can bring NASA into their life through participating in experiences, learning engagements, and activities that

they can do on their own.

https://www.nasa.gov/get-involved/

Glossary
NASA;s Earth Observatory maintains an online glossary.
https://earthobservatory.nasa.gov/glossary/all
The Science Mission Directorate website has a glossary.

https://science.nasa.gov/glossary
NASA has posted a short animated video on YouTube that shows how a glacier melts.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0QVVzFPChAU

History
Students of aeronautical and space history can find a treasure trove of resources on the the "NASA History" web page,

which includes links to audio and written sources and image and video collections.

https://www.nasa.gov/topics/history/index.html

Missions
A hyperlinked list of NASA missions is maintained on the "NASA Missions A–Z" web page.

https://www.nasa.gov/missions

Multimedia
NASA maintains a comprehensive overview of the multimedia available from the agency that shows everything from

our Images of the Day to the latest visuals from our missions. This indexes everything from streaming video, to

podcasts, sounds, e-Books and more.

https://www.nasa.gov/multimedia/
NASA also maintains a robust series of multimedia, including imagery, video, and audio from across all NASA

locations, all available to the public in the agency’s online library.

https://images.nasa.gov/

News
NASA provides a list of the latest news and recently published content from all of our missions and activities.

https://www.nasa.gov/news/

Partnerships
NASA is committed to partnering with a wide variety of domestic and international partners to successfully accomplish

its missions, including future exploration initiatives.

https://www.nasa.gov/partnerships/

Social Media
NASA maintains a presence on popular social media websites. The "Social Media at NASA" page provides easy access

to the agency's social media accounts.

https://www.nasa.gov/socialmedia

Software Catalog
NASA's Software Catalog offers hundreds of new software programs one can download for free to use in a wide

variety of technical applications.
     https://software.nasa.gov/

     Students / Teachers
     A feast of educational resources for educators and learners is available on the "NASA STEM Engagement" web page.

     https://www.nasa.gov/stem

     Technology Transfer
     The NASA Technology Transfer program ensures that innovations developed for exploration and discovery are

     broadly available to the public, maximizing the benefit to the Nation.

     https://technology.nasa.gov/

        The above Sources of Information were updated 3–2025.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                     National Archives and Records Administration




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL ARCHIVES AND RECORDS ADMINISTRATION
    700 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC, 20408-0001


    866-272-6272

    http://www.archives.gov


      ARCHIVIST OF THE UNITED STATES                                                        Marco Rubio, Acting


    https://www.archives.gov/about/organization/senior-staff/archivist

      MANAGEMENT TEAM
Deputy Archivist of the United States                             (vacancy)


Chief of Staff                                                    Monica M. Woods




Chief Operating Officer                                           Jay Trainer


DIRECTORS


Chief, Management and Administration                              Colleen Murphy, Acting


General Counsel                                                   Hannah Bergman, Acting


Chief Innovation Officer                                          Pamela S. Wright


Congressional Affairs                                             Shawn Morton, Acting


Equal Employment Opportunity Program                              Erica Pearson


Senior Advisor                                                    Ellis Brachman


Chief Human Capital Officer                                       Valorie Findlater


Chief Financial Officer                                           Colleen Murphy


Chief Information Officer                                         Gulam Shakir, Acting


Executive for Agency Services                                     Jay Trainer, Acting


Executive for Presidential Libraries                              Kara Blond


Executive for Public Museum Engagement and Legislative Archives   Susan K. Donius


Executive for Research Services                                   Chris Naylor


Executive for Business Support Services                           Mark A. Smith


Director, Office of Federal Register                              Oliver Potts


Chief Acquisition Officer                                         Damon Nevils, Acting


Chief Records Officer                                             William P. Fischer, Acting


Deputy Chief Human Capital Officer                                Ovnelle Millwood


Director, Communications and Marketing                            Monica M. Woods, Acting
Director, Executive Secretariat                                               Merrily Harris




IMPORTANT POINTS OF CONTACT


Inspector General                                                             (vacancy)


External Affairs Liaison                                                      Meg Phillips


Executive Director, National Historical Publications and Records Commission   Christopher R. Eck


Director, Information Security Oversight Office (ISOO)                        Michael Thomas


Director, Office of Government Information Services (OGIS)                    Alina Semo


Director, Federal Records Centers Program (FRCP)                              Tasha Ford


Director, National Declassification Center (NDC)                              William P. Fischer


Director, National Personnel Records Center (St. Louis)                       Scott Levins


Director, Preservation Programs                                               Allison Olson


Director, Center for Legislative Archives                                     Richard Hunt



CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER                                                       William J. Bosanko




DIRECTOR


Office of the Federal Register                                                Oliver A. Potts




EXECUTIVES


Agency Services                                                               Jay A. Trainer


Legislative Archives, Presidential Libraries, and Museum Services             Susan K. Donius


Research Services                                                             Ann A. Cummings



CHIEF OF MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION                                        Micah M. Cheatham
  CHIEF OFFICERS


  Acquisition                                                                             La Verne Fields


  Financial                                                                               Colleen V. Murphy


  Human Capital                                                                           Valorie Findlater


  Information                                                                             Swarnali Haldar




  Executive for Business Support Services                                                 Mark A. Smith, Acting


https://www.archives.gov/about/organization/senior-staff

  Inspector General                                                                       Brett M. Baker


https://www.archives.gov/oig/about


The National Archives and Records Administration safeguards and preserves the records of the U.S. Government and

provides public access to them, ensuring that the American people can discover, learn from, and use their documentary

heritage to support democracy.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) is the successor agency to the National Archives

Establishment (NAE). The National Archives was officially established in 1934, during a time of expanding Federal

reforms, regulations, and work projects. The National Archives also recognizes April 1, 1985, as its "other birthday." On

that day, NARA became an independent Federal agency.

https://prologue.blogs.archives.gov/2015/04/01/happy-other-birthday-national-archives
On June 19, 1934, President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved Public Law 73–432 "to establish a National Archives of the

United States Government." The statute "created the Office of Archivist of the United States," empowered the

President to appoint the Archivist by the advice and with the consent of the Senate, and empowered the Archivist to

appoint "all persons to be employed in the National Archives Establishment" (48 Stat. 1122).

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/73rd-congress/session-2/c73s2ch668.pdf
On June 30, 1949, President Harry S. Truman approved Public Law 81–152, which also is cited as the Federal Property

and Administrative Services Act of 1949. Section 104 of Title I of that statute deals with records management. The

statute transferred "the National Archives Establishment and its functions, records, property, personnel, obligations,

and commitments" to the newly created General Services Administration. It also empowered the Administrator of the

new agency to appoint the Archivist of the United States (63 Stat. 381). The new arrangement transformed the NAE

into the National Archives and Records Service. More than three decades passed before the National Archives

reemerged as an independent agency within the Federal Government's executive branch.
https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/81st-congress/session-1/c81s1ch288.pdf
On October 19, 1984, President Ronald W. Reagan approved Public Law 98–497 "to establish the National Archives

and Records Administration" as "an independent establishment in the executive branch of the Government" (98 Stat.

2280). President Reagan issued a statement on signing the Senate bill into law. The new statute's provisions became

effective on April 1, 1985, a day that is like a second birthday for the agency (98 Stat. 2295).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-98/pdf/STATUTE-98-Pg2280.pdf
On June 25, 1985, NARA published a notice in the Federal Register (50 FR 26278). It promulgated the agency's

statement of organization. Functions that had been assigned to the General Services Administration were being

performed now by NARA.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1985-06-25/pdf/FR-1985-06-25.pdf
NARA posts an organizational chart on its "NARA Organization" web page.

https://www.archives.gov/about/organization

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Chapter 21 of 44 U.S.C., which includes sections 2101–2120, contains codified statutory material affecting NARA.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title44/chapter21&edition=prelim
Chapter XII of 36 CFR is dedicated to codified regulatory material associated with NARA. The chapter comprises parts

1200–1299.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=284fe0a169d8d22863ef40cfec0c2dcc&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title36/36chapterXII.tpl



ACTIVITIES

Classified and Controlled Information Management
The Information Security Oversight Office (ISOO) oversees programs for classified national security information and

controlled unclassified information in both Government and industry and reports on their status annually to the

President. It receives policy and program guidance from the National Security Council and operates under the

authority of Executive Orders 12829, 13549, 13587, 13526, and 13556. As a NARA component, ISOO's goals are

fourfold: holding classification activities to the minimum necessary standard for protecting national security; promoting

consistency and transparency in how controlled unclassified information is handled; efficiently and cost-effectively

safeguarding classified national security information; and encouraging declassification of and public access to

information as soon as security considerations permit.

https://www.archives.gov/isoo/about
In 2010, ISOO was named the Executive agent for administering Executive Order 13556, "Controlled Unclassified

Information." The order establishes consistent information sharing and protection practices by replacing the ad hoc,

agency-specific policies and procedures with an Executive branchwide program to manage unclassified information

that requires safeguarding or dissemination controls pursuant to and consistent with applicable law, regulations, and

Governmentwide policies.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/DCPD-201000942/pdf/DCPD-201000942.pdfhttp://www.archives.gov/isoo                   |
Email: isoo@nara.gov

  For further information, contact the Information Security Oversight Office. Phone, 202-357-5250.



Declassification of Records
The National Declassification Center (NDC) was established by Executive Order 13526 and began operations in January

of 2010. The Center is responsible for the timely and appropriate processing of referrals between agencies for

accessioned Federal records and transferred Presidential records; general interagency declassification activities

necessary to fulfill the requirements of sections 3.3 and 3.4 of the Order; the exchange among agencies of detailed

declassification guidance to support equity recognition; the development of effective, transparent, and standard

declassification work processes, training, and quality assurance measures; the development of solutions to

declassification challenges posed by electronic records, special media, and emerging technologies; and the linkage

and effective utilization of existing agency databases and the use of new technologies to support declassification

activities under the purview of the Center.

http://www.archives.gov/declassification | Email: ndc@nara.gov

  For further information, contact the National Declassification Center. Phone, 301-837-0405.



Federal Records Storage and Retrieval
NARA's Federal Records Centers Program (FRCP) stores and services active and inactive records for Federal agencies.

A national network of 18 facilities, the FRCP system currently stores more than 30 million cubic feet of records. Since

1999, the FRCP system has operated as a reimbursable program that provides the Federal community with services on

a fee-for-service basis. These services include storage of textual and special media records; management of classified

and nonclassified records; retrieval of records needed by customers to conduct daily business or fulfill statutory

requirements; expedited responses to congressional inquiries, litigation, and urgent business needs; disposition

services, including the disposal of temporary records that have reached the end of their required retention period and

the transfer of permanent records to the legal custody of the National Archives; and a variety of special projects based

on customer needs.

https://www.archives.gov/frc
The National Personnel Records Center (NPRC) in St. Louis, MO, is the largest facility in the FRCP system. This facility

stores and services the civilian personnel, medical, and pay records of former U.S. Civil Service employees and the

personnel, medical, and related records of discharged military personnel. The NPRC maintains research rooms where

Federal employees and the general public can review official military and civilian personnel folders and other related

records. It also supports Federal agencies by providing them with technical advice on and services relating to records

disposition, filing and classification schemes, document conversion, and protection of civilian and military records.

https://www.archives.gov/st-louis Email: frc@nara.gov

  For further information, contact the Federal Records Centers. Phone 314-801-9300.
Federal Register Publications and Services
The Federal Register system is an official legal information service of the U.S. Government. The Federal Register system

operates under the general authority of the Administrative Committee of the Federal Register (ACFR), as well as under

statutory and regulatory authority that is specific to the Office of the Federal Register (OFR). The OFR is a component

of NARA, which is obliged by statute to partner with the Government Publishing Office (GPO) to provide Federal

Register publications and services to the public. The OFR's mission centers on informing citizens of their rights and

obligations, documenting the actions of Federal agencies, and providing a public forum for participation in the

democratic process.

https://www.archives.gov/federal-register/about
The OFR makes the official text of several document types publicly accessible: administrative regulations and notices,

Presidential documents, and Federal laws. In partnership with the GPO, its editors prepare and publish the "Code of

Federal Regulations," "Compilation of Presidential Documents," "Federal Register," "Public Papers of the Presidents,"

and "United States Statutes at Large," as well as additional publications.


The OFR coordinates the functions of the Electoral College on behalf of the American people, the Archivist of the

United States, the Congress, and the States. It also administers the constitutional amendment process.

https://www.archives.gov/federal-register | Email: fedreg.info@nara.gov

  For further information, contact Information Services and Technology, Office of the Federal Register.
  Phone, 202-741-6000. TTY, 202-741-6086. Fax, 202-741-6012.



Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Compliance
Established under the OPEN Government Act of 2007 (5 U.S.C. 101), the Office of Government Information Services

(OGIS) works with agencies across the Executive branch to improve the Government's ability to respond to FOIA

requests. OGIS serves as liaison between individuals making FOIA requests and administrative agencies, providing

mediation services to resolve disputes as an alternative to litigation. It reviews policies and procedures of

administrative agencies under FOIA. OGIS also reviews agency compliance with FOIA and recommends policy changes

to the President and Congress.

https://www.archives.gov/ogis | Email: ogis@nara.gov

  For further information, contact the Office of Government Information Services. Phone, 202-741-5770.



Grant Making
The National Historical Publications and Records Commission (NHPRC) is NARA's grant-making affiliate. NHPRC

supports the preservation and promotes the use of America's documentary heritage that is essential for understanding

American culture, democracy, and history. NHPRC grants help State and local archives, universities, historical societies,

and other nonprofit organizations preserve and manage electronic records, improve training and techniques,

strengthen archival programs, preserve and process records collections, and provide access to them through the

publication of finding aids and documentary editions of the papers of the Founding Era and other themes and

historical figures in American history. NHPRC works in partnership with a national network of State historical records
advisory boards. It also provides Federal leadership in public policy affecting the preservation of and access to

America's documentary heritage.

http://www.archives.gov/nhprc | Email: nhprc@archives.gov

  For further information, contact the National Historical Publications and Records Commission. Phone,
  202-357-5010.



Innovation
The Office of Innovation finds innovative ways to serve its customers and to increase access to and delivery of records

through all forms of media. Its mission includes demonstrating leadership in the archival and information access field.

The Office coordinates NARA's efforts for Open Government and the National Digital Strategy. It comprises several

divisions: digitization; digital engagement, including Internet, social media, and NARA's online catalog; business

architecture, standards, and authorities; and the Innovation Hub.

http://www.archives.gov/innovation-hub

National Archives Trust Funding
The National Archives Trust Fund Board receives funds from the sale of historic document reproductions and

publications based on historic records, as well as from gifts and bequests. The Board invests these funds and uses

income to support archival functions such as the preparation of publications that make historic records information

more widely available. Members of the Board are the Archivist of the United States, the Secretary of the Treasury, and

the Chair of the National Endowment for the Humanities.

https://www.archives.gov/files/publications/general-info-leaflets/29-trust-fund.pdf

  For further information, contact the Secretary, National Archives Trust Fund Board. Phone, 301-837-3165.



Presidential Records Act Compliance
NARA operates the Libraries of Presidents Herbert Hoover through George W. Bush. While such records were once

considered personal papers, all Presidential records created on or after January 20, 1981, are declared by law to be

owned and controlled by the United States and are required to be transferred to NARA at the end of an

administration, pursuant to the Presidential Records Act of 1978 (44 U.S.C. 2201 et seq.). The Office of Presidential

Libraries within the National Archives oversees the archival, museum, and education programs of the 14 Presidential

Libraries, including the fully digital Barack Obama Presidential Library.

https://www.obamalibrary.gov/about-us
Through the Presidential Libraries, which are located at sites selected by the Presidents and built with private funds,

NARA preserves and makes available the records, personal papers, and artifacts of a President's administration. Each

Library operates a research room and offers reference services for Presidential papers and other historical materials.

The Libraries display artifacts and other holdings in museum exhibits illustrating the life and times of a President. The

Presidential Libraries also promote citizen engagement by providing programs for students of all ages.

http://www.archives.gov/presidential-libraries
  For further information, contact the Office of Presidential Libraries. Phone, 301-837-3250. Fax, 301-837-
  3199.



Providing Access to Archival Records
NARA maintains the U.S. Government's most historically valuable records, ranging from the Revolutionary War era to

the recent past; arranges and preserves records and prepares finding aids to facilitate their use; makes records publicly

accessible online and in its research rooms; answers requests for information contained in its holdings; and provides,

for a fee, copies of records. NARA holdings include the records of the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate,

which are preserved and administered by the Center for Legislative Archives. Many important records are available in

microfilm and accessible online. Archival records are maintained in NARA facilities in the Washington, DC, area.

Records of exceptional local or regional interest are maintained in NARA archives located in other parts of the country.

There are also nine NARA-affiliated archives facilities that hold NARA-owned records and make them available to the

public.

https://www.archives.gov/research
Research Services provides world-class services to customers seeking access to NARA's accessioned Federal records.

Records are available for research purposes in reading rooms at the National Archives Building (Archives I) in

Washington, DC; the National Archives (Archives II) in College Park, MD; and various regional facilities throughout the

Nation.

https://www.archives.gov/locations#research-facilities

Records Management
To ensure proper documentation of the organization, policies, and activities of the Government, NARA develops

standards and guidelines for nationwide management and disposition of recorded information. It appraises Federal

records and approves disposition schedules. NARA also inspects agency records and management practices, develops

records management training programs, provides guidance and assistance on records management, and stores

inactive records.


The Office of the Chief Records Officer assists Government agencies with their records management programs and the

lifecycle management of Federal records. The Office formulates recommendations for Governmentwide policies,

procedures, regulations, and guidance on the creation, management, and disposition of records in various media. It

conducts inspections, evaluations, and surveys of records and records management programs in agencies; reports its

findings; and recommends improvements or necessary corrective actions. The Office also provides records

management services, including appraisal and scheduling, technical assistance, training, consultation, and analysis

regarding policy matters, as well as identifying permanent records eligible for transfer to the National Archives.

https://www.archives.gov/records-mgmt | Email: rm.communications@nara.gov



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
NARA's website has an alphabetical subject index to help visitors navigate its content.
https://www.archives.gov/global-pages/subject-index.html

Amending the Constitution
NARA's website describes the roles played by the Archivist of the United States and the Office of the Federal Register

in the ratification process of a constitutional amendment.

https://www.archives.gov/federal-register/constitution

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that NARA records have been

assigned to record group 064.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/064.html

Blogs
NARA maintains multiple blogs.

https://www.archives.gov/social-media/blogs

Business Opportunities
Resources for doing business with NARA, as well as an inventory of service contracts awarded by the agency, are

available online.

http://www.archives.gov/contracts

Calendar
NARA maintains a calendar of public events on its website. A recorded announcement of events in Washington, DC,

and College Park, MD, also is available. Phone, 202-357-5000. TDD, 301-837-0482.

http://www.archives.gov/calendar

Career Opportunities
NARA has a nationwide network of facilities. The agency relies on professionals with administrative, archival, editorial,

technical, and other skills to carry out its mission. For more information, visit the "Careers at NARA" web page or

contact the Office of Human Capital in St. Louis, MO. Phone, 800-827-0885.

https://www.archives.gov/careers
In 2020, NARA ranked 17th among 25 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=NQ00

Catalog
The National Archives catalog is accessible online.

https://catalog.archives.gov

Charters of Freedom
The Declaration of Independence, Constitution, and Bill of Rights have secured the rights of Americans for over two

centuries. High resolution images of these three documents, transcriptions of their texts, and articles written on them
are available online.

https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs

Climate Change
As part of NARA's policy statement for its "Climate Action Plan—September 2021," Archivist of the United States David

S. Ferriero wrote that NARA is "committed to integrating climate information that reflects an understanding of global

climate change (based on best available science) into its mission and programs via employee training and

management functions."

https://www.archives.gov/files/about/plans-reports/sustainability/climate-action-plan.pdf

Congressional Affairs
The Congressional Affairs Office maintains liaison with congressional staffs and responds to their inquiries. Phone, 202-

357-5100. Fax, 202-357-5959.

https://www.archives.gov/congress | Email: congress.affairs@nara.gov

Congressional Records
The Center for Legislative Archives houses the official records of the U.S. Congress from 1789 to the present. These

records are in the permanent legal custody of the Senate and House of Representatives, and their rules govern them.

The Center responds to congressional committee requests for records to support congressional business needs. It is a

full-service archive that assists the Senate and House archivists with managing records, that processes congressional

and legislative branch records and provides public access to them, and that creates exhibits, public programs, and

educational materials and workshops on the history of the Congress and representative government. Phone, 202-357-

5350. Fax, 202-357-5911.

http://www.archives.gov/legislative | Email: legislative.archives@nara.gov

Contact Information
Send postal correspondence to the National Archives and Records Administration, 8601 Adelphi Road, College Park,

MD 20740-6001. Phone, 866-272-6272.

https://www.archives.gov/contact | Email: inquire@nara.gov

Democracy Starts Here
The National Archives contains over 9 billion records—some frivolous, some funny, but others serious, even repellent.

More than a national scrapbook, this repository of records gives Americans the opportunity to gain unfiltered,

unmediated glimpses of their shared national history, to consider their Government's achievements and shortcomings,

to reflect on the praiseworthy and shameful, and to engage in the civic responsibilities of renewing their Nation and

fortifying and expanding its democratic institutions. In an 11-minute video, Discovery Channel captures this

fundamental concept that sustains NARA's mission.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7n3ZZ-UpiR4
The National Historical Publications and Records Commission (NHPRC) awards grants for projects that publish the

American story. The Commission also funds projects that preserve and make accessible the records of all types that

are housed in historical repositories across the Nation. The American story is more diverse and unexpected than the
Nation's Founding Fathers and 45 Presidents. It includes abolitionists, civil rights leaders, progressives, radicals, and

reformers like Chief of the Cherokee Nation John Ross, Presidential candidate Eugene V. Debs of the Socialist Party of

America, escaped slave and orator Frederick Douglass, freedom of speech champion and anarchist Emma Goldman,

labor organizer Mary Harris "Mother" Jones, Vice President Henry A. Wallace, and Baptist minister Martin Luther King,

Jr., whose collections and papers the NHPRC has made more accessible.

https://www.archives.gov/publications/prologue/2004/fall/nhprc-sidebar.html

Electoral College
The "U.S. Electoral College" web page offers a trove of information on the Electoral College, as well as external

resources for learning about elections and voting in the United States. Phone, 202-741-6030.

https://www.archives.gov/electoral-college | Email: electoral.college@nara.gov

Exhibits
The National Archives in Washington, DC, and the Presidential Libraries and several regional facilities regularly host

onsite exhibits. NARA also has national traveling exhibits that bring documents and records of the National Archives to

communities nationwide. NARA's website features dozens of online exhibits on a range of topics: gifts that Presidents

received, Government drawings, New Deal-era Federal art projects, work and the workplace in the 19th and 20th

centuries, the influenza epidemic of 1918, and more.

https://www.archives.gov/exhibits | Email: National_Archives_Exhibits_Staff@nara.gov

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that NARA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/national-archives-and-records-administration

Forms
Some of the most commonly used forms for obtaining National Archives historical records—Eastern Cherokee

applications, Federal census records, Federal land entry files, military pension / bounty land warrant applications,

passenger arrival records, post-World War I military records, and pre-World War I military service records—are

available online.

https://www.archives.gov/forms

Founders Online
The National Historical Publications and Records Commission and The University of Virginia Press have collaborated to

create the "Founders Online" website, which gives the public free electronic access to the historical documents of the

Founders of the United States. The site contains over 176,000 searchable and fully annotated documents from the

Founding Fathers Papers projects. These documents include the correspondence and other writings of Benjamin

Franklin, Alexander Hamilton, President John Adams and his family, and Presidents George Washington, Thomas

Jefferson, and James Madison.

https://founders.archives.gov/ | Email: foundersonline@nara.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of
executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded from

disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute.

https://www.archives.gov/foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
NARA posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.archives.gov/faqs

History
In the early 1930s, the Nation had a records management problem: Federal records were being housed in abandoned

buildings, attics, and basements, where security and storage conditions were inadequate. In 1934, the U.S. Congress

acted. To learn what it did to solve the problem, visit the "National Archives History" web page.

https://www.archives.gov/about/history | Email: archives.historian@nara.gov

History Hub
This crowdsourcing platform is a place for asking questions, finding people of particular experiences and interests,

sharing information, and working together. The hub allows citizen archivists, American history enthusiasts, and experts

from NARA and other organizations to pool their knowledge in support of historical research.

https://historyhub.history.gov/docs/DOC-1012 | Email: historyhub@nara.gov

Know Your Records
To assist genealogical and historical researchers with using Federal Government records held at the National Archives,

NARA hosts Know Your Records events. Phone, 202-357-5260.

http://www.archives.gov/calendar/know-your-records/index.html | Email: kyr@nara.gov

Museum Shops
The National Archives Store sells merchandise highlighting the holdings of the National Archives. Document facsimiles,

publications, and souvenirs and gifts are available for sale at each Presidential Library and at the National Archives in

Washington, DC. Phone, 202-357-5271.

https://www.nationalarchivesstore.org/

News
NARA posts press releases on its website.

https://www.archives.gov/press

Open Government
NARA supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

https://www.archives.gov/open

Plain Language
NARA supports the Plain Writing Act of 2010 by "promoting clear Government communication that the public can
understand and use." If a document or web page contains content that is unclear, please contact NARA via email and

suggest a way to enhance clarity.

https://www.archives.gov/open/plain-writing | Email: plainwriting@nara.gov

Publications
The "Publications" web page contains a hyperlinked list of NARA's most requested publications: "Code of Federal

Regulations," "Federal Register," "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States," "Military

Service Records at the National Archives," "Prologue" magazine, and eBooks and more.

https://www.archives.gov/publications
The Office of Records Services in Washington, DC, and the Office of Regional Records Services produce most of the

publications on the "Publications" web page; however, other NARA offices also publish materials and a few of them do

so extensively. These other offices include the Information Security Oversight Office, Office of the Federal Register,

Office of Presidential Libraries, and public affairs staff.

https://www.archives.gov/publications/organization.html
NARA units enter into cooperative arrangements with other organizations to produce and sell publications. To

become acquainted with these partnership publications, visit the "NARA Publications" web page.

https://www.archives.gov/publications/partnerships.html
"Presidential Perspectives from the National Archives" highlights modern American Presidents and the National

Archives Presidential Libraries System.

https://www.archives.gov/publications/presidential-materials.html
Some print versions of NARA publications are no longer in stock. To inquire about a publication, contact the National

Archives Foundation. Phone, 202-357-5271.

https://www.archivesfoundation.org/contact-us

Recorded Utterances of Presidents
The Franklin D. Roosevelt Presidential Library and Museum maintains a collection of digitized recordings of the former

President's speeches and recordings from 1920 to 1945. Each audio file may be streamed or downloaded directly from

the "Utterances" web page. The collection contains the State of the Union address that the President delivered before

the U.S. Congress on January 6, 1941. In the speech, he famously enumerated the four freedoms—of speech and

expression, to worship God, from want, and from fear (32:45)—and defined freedom generally as "the supremacy of

human rights everywhere" (36:17).

http://www.fdrlibrary.marist.edu/archives/collections/utterancesfdr.html
The Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum, and Boyhood Home maintains an audio collection (1943–

1961) of the 34th President's speeches that reflect his accomplishments and values. His "Chance for Peace" speech,

which is also known as the "Cross of Iron" speech, was given a few weeks after the death of Russian Premier Joseph

Stalin on April 16, 1953. In that speech, he said: "Every gun that is made, every warship launched, every rocket fired,

signifies, in the final sense, a theft from those who hunger and are not fed, those who are cold and are not clothed"

(11:15). The collection also contains his "Farewell Address to the American People," which he addressed to the Nation

on January 17, 1961. In that oft quoted address, he spoke of the implications of a growing arms industry and defense

establishment.
https://www.eisenhowerlibrary.gov/eisenhowers/speeches

Records Management
Records management brochures and pamphlets, posters, and publications are available online.

https://www.archives.gov/publications/records-mgmt.html
The national records management training program provides records management instruction to Federal employees

and contractors.

http://www.archives.gov/records-mgmt/training/index.html | Email: NARA.RecordsMgtTraining@nara.gov

Researcher Newsletter
"Researcher News" covers relevant and the most up-to-date information for conducting research at the National

Archives. The newsletter is available online in Portable Document Format (PDF) and also disseminated via email

subscription.

http://www.archives.gov/research/newsletter | Email: kyr@nara.gov

Resources for Educators
NARA's website has a trove of information and resources to assist teachers.

https://www.archives.gov/education
DocsTeach is an online tool that helps educators use National Archives documents for teaching their students.

https://www.docsteach.org | Email: docsteach@nara.gov

Resources for Genealogists
NARA's website has a trove of information and resources to assist genealogy researchers.

https://www.archives.gov/research/genealogy

Service Records
The "Veterans' Service Records" web page explains how to request service records online, to conduct research using

military records, to replace lost medal and awards, and to browse World War II photographs.

https://www.archives.gov/veterans

Social Media
NARA has pages on Facebook.

https://www.archives.gov/social-media/facebook
NARA and its component organizations tweet announcements and other newsworthy items, using their Twitter

accounts.

https://www.archives.gov/social-media/twitter
Organizations within NARA post videos on YouTube channels.

https://www.archives.gov/social-media/youtube

Today's Document
Each day a different American historical document is featured on NARA's website.
     https://www.archives.gov/historical-docs/todays-doc

     Visitors' Information
     The "Visit Us" web page has a nationwide list of NARA facilities—Federal records centers, Presidential Libraries, and

     research facilities. The list includes directions to, hours for, and details on each facility.

     https://www.archives.gov/locations

        The Sources of Information were updated 6–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                           National Capital Planning Commission




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL CAPITAL PLANNING COMMISSION
    401 Ninth Street NW., Suite 500, Washington, DC 20004


    202-482-7200

    http://www.ncpc.gov


      CHAIR                                                                                 L. Preston Bryant, Jr.


      Member                                                                                Arrington Dixon


      Member                                                                                Thomas Gallas
 Member                                                                      Geoffery Griffis


 Member                                                                      Elizabeth White




 Administrator of General Services (ex officio)                              Emily W. Murphy


 Chair, Council of the District of Columbia (ex officio)                     Philip Mendelson


 Chair, House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform (ex officio)      Trey Gowdy


 Chair, Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs (ex
                                                                             Ron Johnson
 officio)


 Mayor of the District of Columbia (ex officio)                              Muriel Bowser


 Secretary of Defense (ex officio)                                           Jim Mattis


 Secretary of the Interior (ex officio)                                      Ryan Zinke




STAFF


 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR                                                          Marcel C. Acosta


 Chief Operating Officer                                                     Barry S. Socks




 Director, Office of Public Engagement / Secretary to the Commission         Julia A. Koster


 Director, Physical Planning                                                 Elizabeth Miller


 Director, Policy and Research                                               Michael A. Sherman


 Director, Urban Design and Plan Review                                      Diane Sullivan


 Director, Office of Administration                                          Debra. Dickson




 General Counsel                                                             Anne R. Schuyler


 [For the National Capital Planning Commission statement of organization, see the Code of Federal
 Regulations, Title 1, Part 456.2]
The National Capital Planning Commission conducts planning and development activities for Federal lands and facilities

in the National Capital Region—the District of Columbia, the City of Alexandria, and all land areas within the boundaries

of Montgomery, Prince George's, Fairfax, Loudoun, Prince William, and Arlington Counties.

Organizational Chart
The National Capital Planning Commission was established as a park planning agency by act of June 6, 1924, as

amended (40 U.S.C. 8701 et seq.). Two years later, its role was expanded to include comprehensive planning. In 1952,

the National Capital Planning Act designated the Commission as the central planning agency for the Federal and

District of Columbia governments.

https://www.ncpc.gov/ncpc/Main(T2)/About_Us(tr2)/About_Us(tr3)/History.html
In 1973, the National Capital Planning Act was amended by the District of Columbia Home Rule Act, which made the

mayor of the District of Columbia the chief planner for the District and gave the Commission specific authority for

reviewing certain District decisions. The Commission continues to serve, however, as the central planning agency for

the Federal Government in the National Capital Region.


The Commission comprises five appointed and seven ex officio members. Three citizen members, including the Chair,

are appointed by the President. The mayor of the District of Columbia appoints the other two members. The

Presidential appointees include one resident from Maryland, one resident from Virginia, and one from anywhere else

in the United States. The two mayoral appointees must be District of Columbia residents.

https://www.ncpc.gov/ncpc/Main(T2)/About_Us(tr2)/AboutUs.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
The Commission posts contracting opportunities on its Web site.

http://www.ncpc.gov/ncpc/Main(T2)/About_Us(tr2)/About_Us(tr3)/Opportunities.html

Career Opportunities
The Commission posts employment opportunities on its Web site.

http://www.ncpc.gov/ncpc/Main(T2)/About_Us(tr2)/About_Us(tr3)/Opportunities.html

Events
The Commission posts upcoming events that are open to the public online.

https://www.ncpc.gov/ncpc/Main(T2)/PublicParticipation(Tr2)/Public%20Participation(Tr3)/UpcomingEvents.html

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
FOIA requests should be addressed to the Chief FOIA Officer, National Capital Planning Commission, 401 9th Street

NW., Suite 500, Washington, DC 20004. Requests also may be submitted by fax or email. Fax, 202-482-7272

https://www.ncpc.gov/open/home.html

Internships
The Commission offers internships for students at accredited colleges and universities. Students with various

educational backgrounds—architecture, communications, community planning, computer aided design, geography

and geographic information systems, historic preservation, landscape architecture, law, urban design—are encouraged

to apply.

http://www.ncpc.gov/ncpc/Main(T2)/About_Us(tr2)/About_Us(tr3)/Opportunities.html

Memorial Map
The Commission, in conjunction with the National Park Service, offers Internet users an interactive map of

commemorative works in the Nation's capital.

https://www.ncpc.gov/memorials

Newsletters
Monthly newsletters are available online.

https://www.ncpc.gov/ncpc/Main(T2)/Publications(Tr2)/Publications(Tr3)/CompleteCatalogue.html?ccpage=1
An archive of quarterly newsletters running from 1998 to 2009 is available online.

https://www.ncpc.gov/ncpc/Main(T2)/Publications(Tr2)/Publications(Tr3)/CompleteCatalogue.html?ccpage=3

News
The Commission posts recent news releases on its Web site. Starting with the year 2001, an online archive contains

releases from previous years.

https://www.ncpc.gov/ncpc/Main(T2)/Media(Tr2)/Media(Tr3)/NewsReleaseArchive.html

Open Government
The Commission supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation,

and transparency.

https://www.ncpc.gov/open/home.html

Plain Language
The Commission's writers and editors are committed to using plain language in new communications and revising

confusing or unclear language in existing material. If a sentence or paragraph's clarity needs improvement, send them

a note using the online form.

https://www.ncpc.gov/open/home.html

Publications
Recently released and frequently requested publications are accessible online.

https://www.ncpc.gov/ncpc/Main(T2)/Publications(Tr2)/Publications.html

Reports
Starting with the year 2004, the Commission's annual reports are accessible online.

https://www.ncpc.gov/ncpc/Main(T2)/Publications(Tr2)/Publications(Tr3)/CompleteCatalogue.html?ccpage=4

Site Map
     Web site visitors may use the site map to look for specific topics or to browse for content that aligns with their

     interests.

     https://www.ncpc.gov/ncpc/Main(T2)/siteMap.html
     https://www.ncpc.gov/ncpc/Main(T2)/About_Us(tr2)/About_Us(tr3)/Contactus.html | Email: info@ncpc.gov

        For further information, contact the National Capital Planning Commission, 401 Ninth Street NW., Suite
        500, Washington, DC 20004. Phone, 202-482-7200. Fax, 202-482-7272.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                           National Credit Union Administration




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL CREDIT UNION ADMINISTRATION
    1775 Duke Street, Alexandria, VA 22314


    703-518-6300

    http://www.ncua.gov




    BOARD OF DIRECTORS
 CHAIR                                         Todd M. Harper


 Vice Chair                                    Kyle S. Hauptman




 Member                                        Rodney E. Hood




 Chief of Staff                                Catherine D. Galicia

https://www.ncua.gov/about/leadership



Officers Reporting to the Chair


 DIRECTORS


 External Affairs and Communications           Elizabeth A. Eurgubian


 Minority and Women Inclusion                  Miguel A. Polanco




Officers Reporting to the Board


 EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR                            Larry Fazio




 Chief Ethics Counsel                          Elizabeth Fischmann


 General Counsel                               Frank Kressman


 Inspector General                             James Hagen




 ASSET MANAGEMENT AND ASSISTANCE CENTER


 President                                     Keith Morton




Officers Reporting to the Executive Director
 DEPUTY DIRECTOR                            Rendell L. Jones




 DIRECTORS


 Examination and Insurance                  Kelly Lay


 National Examinations and Supervision      Scott Hunt




 Ombudsman                                  Shameka Sutton, Acting




 REGIONAL DIRECTORS


 Eastern—Alexandria, VA                     John Kutchey


 Southern—Austin, TX                        Keith Morton


 Western—Tempe, AZ                          Cherie Freed




Officers Reporting to the Deputy Director


 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Economist                                  Andrew Leventis


 Financial                                  Eugene H. Schied


 Human Capital                              Towanda Brooks


 Information                                Robert Foster




 DIRECTORS


 Business Innovation                        (vacancy)


 Consumer Financial Protection              Matthew J. Biliouris


 Continuity and Security Managent           Kelly Gibbs
  Credit Union Resources and Expansion                                                   Martha Ninichuk

http://www.ncua.gov/about/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 4–2022.



The National Credit Union Administration provides a trustworthy credit union system that builds confidence in the

Nation's system of cooperative credit.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 26, 1934, President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved Public Law 73–467, which also is cited as the Federal

Credit Union Act. The U.S. Congress enacted the new law "to establish a Federal Credit Union System, to establish a

further market for securities of the United States and to make more available to people of small means credit for

provident purposes through a national system of cooperative credit, thereby helping to stabilize the credit structure of

the United States" (48 Stat. 1216).

https://catalog.archives.gov/id/299841
The original Federal Credit Union Act was amended 25 years later by Public Law 86–354, an act of September 22,

1959. The new law created a Bureau of Federal Credit Unions within the Department of Health, Education, and Welfare

(73 Stat. 628).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-73/pdf/STATUTE-73-Pg628.pdf
The Federal Credit Union Act was amended further to provide for the "supervision of federally chartered credit unions"

(84 Stat. 49). Public Law 91–206, an an act of March 10, 1970, established the Federal Credit Union Administration

(NCUA) as an independent Federal agency to charter, regulate, and supervise Federal credit unions.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-84/pdf/STATUTE-84-Pg49-2.pdf
The Federal Credit Union Act was amended further by "Title V—Credit Union Restructuring" (92 Stat. 3680) of Public

Law 95–630, an act of November 10, 1978.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-92/pdf/STATUTE-92-Pg3641.pdf
The NCUA regulates and insures all Federal credit unions and insures State-chartered credit unions that apply and

qualify for share insurance. The NCUA Board comprises three members whom the President appoints and whom the

Senate must confirm. Members serve staggered terms of 6 years, and no more than two of them can belong to the

same political party.

https://www.ncua.gov/about-ncua/ncua-board
Title 12 of the United States Code (U.S.C.) is dedicated to the subjects of "Banks and Banking." Chapter 14 of 12 U.S.C.

is dedicated to the subject of "Federal Credit Unions." Statutory material that is associated with the establishment of

the NCUA has been assigned to the "General Provisions" sections of the first subchapter in Chapter 14 (12 U.S.C.

1752a).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title12-section1752a&num=0&edition=prelim
The NCUA's statement of organization has been assigned to Chapter VII of Title 12 of the Code of Federal Regulations

(12 CFR 790.).
https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-12/chapter-VII/subchapter-B/part-790?toc=1
The NCUA posts an organizational chart online for viewing and downloading.

https://www.ncua.gov/files/publications/org-chart-download.pdf

STAUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material that is associated with the subject of "Federal Credit Unions" has been codified and assigned to

Chapter 14 of 12 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title12/chapter14&edition=prelim
Subchapter II (sections 1781–1790e) of Chapter 14 in 12 U.S.C. is dedicated to codified statutory material on the subject

of "Share Insurance."

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title12/chapter14/subchapter2&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that affect credit unions are codified and have been assigned to Subchapter A (Parts 700–761) of

Chapter VII in 12 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-12/chapter-VII/subchapter-A

ACTIVITIES

Access / Education / Protection
The NCUA protects credit union members and consumers, raises awareness of potential frauds, facilitates access to

affordable financial services, and educates consumers on the importance of savings and on ways to improve financial

well-being.

https://www.ncua.gov/consumers

Analyses
NCUA analysts and economists compile data on the credit union system's financial performance, merger activity,

changes in credit union chartering and fields of membership, and on broader economic trends that affect credit

unions. Information on a single credit union, as well as data reflecting broader nationwide trends are available on the

NCUA website.

https://www.ncua.gov/analysis

Regulation / Supervision
The NCUA carries out its supervisory activities through regular examiner contacts and by releasing periodic policy and

regulatory information. It regularly examines Federal credit unions to assess their solvency, to ensure their compliance

with laws and regulations, and to assist credit union management and improve operations. The NCUA also identifies

emerging problems and monitors operations between examinations. NCUA central offices include examination and

supervision programs.

https://www.ncua.gov/regulation-supervision

Support Services
The NCUA provides support services to the credit union system. For example, it provides training, grants and loans,

chartering, and field-of-membership services; maintains the stability of the Share Insurance Fund; manages the assets

of failed credit unions; and provides emergency liquidity.
https://www.ncua.gov/support-services
The NCUA grants Federal credit union charters to groups sharing a common bond of occupation or association or to

groups within a well-defined neighborhood, community, or rural district. Before granting a Federal charter, the NCUA

conducts a preliminary investigation to determine if certain standards have been met.

https://www.ncua.gov/support-services/credit-union-resources-expansion/field-membership-expansion
Public Law 91–468, an act of October 19, 1970, provides for a program of share insurance, in which participation is

mandatory for Federal credit unions.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-84/pdf/STATUTE-84-Pg994.pdf
In some States, State-chartered credit unions must participate in the share insurance program. In other States, State-

chartered credit unions may opt to participate in the insurance program. The National Credit Union Share Insurance

Fund requires each participating credit union to place and maintain a one-percent deposit of its insured savings with

the Fund. Credit union members' accounts are insured up to $250,000.

https://www.mycreditunion.gov/share-insurance



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Activities / Apps
The website MyCreditUnion.gov has an "Activities and Apps" web page.

https://www.mycreditunion.gov/financial-resources/activities-apps

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that NCUA records have been

assigned to record group 413. The guide does not contain, however, a description that is currently associated with this

record group.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/401-to-500.html?
_ga=2.258579148.771890840.1651178272-1283406641.1650907417

Business Opportunities
The NCUA selects vendors who offer value to help the agency fulfill its mission. The Division of Procurement and

Facilities Management is responsible for procuring goods and services. Phone, 703-518-6410. Fax, 703-518-6662.

https://www.ncua.gov/about/business-opportunities | Email: ocfoprocurement@ncua.gov

Career Opportunities
Career information also is available from the Office of Human Resources. Phone, 703-518-6510​. Fax, 703-518-6539.

https://www.ncua.gov/about/careers | Email: ohrmail@ncua.gov
The NCUA relies heavily on credit union examiners to carry out its mission. Watch the video "A Day in the Life of a

Credit Union Examiner" to learn about the training required and the role a fully trained examiner plays in safeguarding

the stability of the Nation's credit union system.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iP-dgprNGnw
In 2020, the NCUA ranked 9th among 25 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=CU00

Climate Change
On 31 March 2021, Chair Todd M. Harper delivered a risk statement on climate change. Among other things, he said:

"The data about extreme weather events and climate risk are clear. Climate change is accelerating and the number—

and costs—of climate-related natural disasters is rising, often hitting disadvantaged communities the hardest."

https://www.ncua.gov/newsroom/speech/2021/ncua-chairman-todd-m-harper-fsoc-climate-risk-statement
The NCUA's 2022–2026 Strategic Plan contains a section with the heading "Longer-Term Risks." On page 13, the

NCUA identifies "Climate-Related Financial Risks" among the longer-term risks. The authors of the plan wrote: "The

physical effects of climate change along with associated transition costs pose significant risks to the U.S. economy and

the U.S. financial system."

https://www.ncua.gov/files/agenda-items/strategic-plan-20220317.pdf

Conserved, Liquidated, and Merged Credit Unions
The Asset Management and Assistance Center conducts credit union liquidations and performs asset management

and recovery. It also participates in the operational phases of a failed credit union’s conservatorship and assists with

record reconstruction. The Center posts up-to-date information on closed, conserved, liquidated, and merged credit

unions on the NCUA website.​

https://www.ncua.gov/support-services/conservatorships-liquidations | Email: amacmail@ncua.gov

Consumer Assistance
For answers to questions on credit union insurance and other consumer matters or to submit a complaint, contact the

NCUA Consumer Assistance Center on weekdays, 8 a.m.–5 p.m., eastern standard time. After regular business hours, a

caller may leave a recorded message. Phone, 800-755-1030.

https://www.mycreditunion.gov/consumer-assistance-center

Debt Collection Practices
Federal law prohibits third-party debt collectors from using unfair, deceptive, or abusive tactics to collect money. The

website MyCreditUnion.gov has a page that is dedicated to "Dealing With Debt Collectors."

https://www.mycreditunion.gov/life-events/debt/collectors

Español
Read Spanish better than English? Visit the Spanish version of the NCUA website.

https://espanol.ncua.gov

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the NCUA recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/national-credit-union-administration
The NCUA encourages the public to submit a comment on its proposed rules. Fax, 703-518-6319.
https://www.ncua.gov/regulation-supervision/rulemakings-proposals-comment | Email: regcomments@ncua.gov

Financial Literacy
The NCUA offers financial literacy and educational resources to help consumers increase their savings and achieve

their financial goals.

https://www.ncua.gov/consumers/Pages/financial-literacy-resources.aspx

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded from

disclosure by any of nine exemptions that are contained within the statute. A FOIA request must be made in writing

and described as a "Freedom of Information Act Request."

https://www.ncua.gov/freedom-information-act-requests | Email: FOIA@ncua.gov
The NCUA operates a FOIA requester service center to answer questions that are related to the FOIA process, to

provide information on the status of a request, and to answer questions about documents that a requester received

from the NCUA. Phone, 703-518-6540. Fax, 703-518-6569.

https://www.ncua.gov/foia/requester-service-centers

Glossaries
The NCUA maintains a glossary of the common terms associated with the corporate system resolution costs. ​

https://www.ncua.gov/support-services/corporate-system-resolution/glossary
The website MyCreditUnion.gov has a web page of "Financial Resources" that include a glossary.

https://www.mycreditunion.gov/financial-resources/glossary/a
The website MyCreditUnion.gov has a glossary of common terms associated with the share insurance coverage.

https://www.mycreditunion.gov/sites/default/page-content/share-insurance-estimator/html/glossary_calculator.html?
tbstyle=green

History
Court reporter Alphonse Desjardins knew loan sharks were charging outrageous rates of interest in Quebec. He did

not like their predatory lending and responded by organizing La Caisse Populaire de Levis, the first credit union in

North America, to provide affordable credit to working class families. Nearly a decade later, on April 6, 1909, with the

assistance of Desjardins, the St. Mary’s Cooperative Credit Association, the first credit union in the United States,

opened its doors in Manchester, New Hampshire. Yet the moniker "Father of U.S. Credit Unions" would be earned by

another. To learn who this person was and what he did for credit unions, visit the NCUA "Historical Timeline" web

page.

https://www.ncua.gov/about-ncua/historical-timeline
The NCUA has posted on YouTube a seven-minute video about its history and the origins of the credit union

movement, whose key principles included volunteerism, self-help, one vote per member, and consideration of one's

character alongside one's net worth.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q7uBLWseqq4
Locate a Credit Union
The MyCreditUnion.gov website features a credit union locator tool that complements the "research a credit union"

tool. Requiring a credit union's address, charter number, or name, the tool generates a list of the relevant credit unions

and pinpoints them on a map. The locator also allows the user to view contact information, the services that a credit

union offers, and directions to it.

https://mapping.ncua.gov

Money 101
The NCUA's "Money 101" web page is dedicated to educating the public about money.

https://www.mycreditunion.gov/financial-resources/money-101

Newsroom
The NCUA posts annual reports, events, press releases, speeches, and testimonies.

https://www.ncua.gov/news

Open Government
NCUA supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency. The NCUA regards openness, in terms of budget, policy, and operations, as essential to fulfilling its

statutory mission and maintaining public trust.

https://www.ncua.gov/about/open-government

Plain Language
The Plain Writing Act of 2010 supports clear Government communication “to improve the effectiveness and

accountability of Federal agencies to the public." Members of the public are welcome to comment on the NCUA’s

compliance with the act and to make suggestions for improving communication. Contact the NCUA via email if

content in a document or on a web page is difficult to understand.

https://www.ncua.gov/about/open-government/plain-writing-act-2010 | Email: PlainWriting@ncua.gov

Publications
The MyCreditUnion.gov website has a "Brochures and Publications" web page.

https://www.mycreditunion.gov/financial-resources/brochures-publications
​Manuals and guides are available online to facilitate compliance with NCUA rules and regulations and with rules and

regulations from other agencies. The manuals and guides are not definitive and should be used in conjunction with

other supervisory guidance and information provided by the NCUA and other Federal financial services regulators.

https://www.ncua.gov/regulation-supervision/manuals-guides

Research a Credit Union
The NCUA website features a credit union research tool, which complements the credit union locator. The research

tool is text-based, and it can find a credit union and its profile by using a variety of search parameters.

https://mapping.ncua.gov/ResearchCreditUnion.aspx

Share Insurance Estimator
     The website MyCreditUnion.gov features a share insurance estimator to help consumers, credit unions, and their

     members know how NCUA share insurance rules apply to member share accounts—what is insured and what portion,

     if any, exceeds coverage limits.

     https://www.mycreditunion.gov/insurance-estimator

     Site Map
     The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse for content that aligns with their interests.

     https://www.ncua.gov/site-map

     Social Media
     The NCUA has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/NCUAgov
     The NCUA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/TheNCUA
     The NCUA posts educational videos, quarterly economic updates, and speeches on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/NCUAchannel

        The above Sources of Information were updated 4–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                 National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities
                                           National Endowment for the Arts
                                       National Endowment for the Humanities
                                      Institute of Museum and Library Services




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL FOUNDATION ON THE ARTS AND THE HUMANITIES

    National Endowment for the Arts
    400 7th Street SW., Washington, DC 20506


    202-682-5400

    TDD, 202-682-5496

    http://www.arts.gov
CHAIR                                                    R. Jane Chu


Senior Deputy Chairman                                   Mary Anne Carter




Chief Information Officer                                Vacant


Chief of Staff                                           Mike Griffin


Deputy Chairman, Management and Budget                   Vacant




Director, Accessibility                                  Beth Bienvenu


Director, Administrative Services                        Kathy Daum


Director, Artist Communities and Presenting and
Multidisciplinary Works / International Activities Michael Orlove
Coordinator


Director, Arts Education                                 Ayanna N. Hudson


Director, Budget                                         John Sotelo


Director, Civil     Rights   and    Equal   Employment
                                                         Mike Griffin
Opportunity


Director, Dance                                          Jennifer Kareliusson, Acting


Director, Design Programs / Visual Arts Division Team
                                                      Vacant
Leader


Director, Finance                                        Heidi Ren


Director, Folk and Traditional Arts                      Clifford Murphy


Director, Grants and Contracts                           Nicki Jacobs


Director, Guidelines and Panel Operations                Jillian L. Miller


Director, Human Resources                                Craig M. McCord, Sr.


Director, Literature                                     Amy Stolls


Director, Local Arts Agencies and Challenge America      Vacant


Director, Media Arts                                     Jax Deluca
  Director, Museums, Visual Arts, and Indemnity               Wendy Clark


  Director, Music and Opera                                   Ann Meier Baker


  Director, Public Affairs                                    Jessamyn Sarmiento


  Director, Research and Analysis                             Sunil Iyengar


  Director, State and Regional Partnerships                   Laura Scanlan


  Director, Theater and Musical Theater                       Greg Reiner




  Federal Partnerships Coordinator                            Tony Tighe


  General Counsel                                             India Pinkney


  Inspector General                                           Ronald Stith



The National Endowment for the Arts supports artistic excellence and promotes creativity and innovation to benefit

individuals and communities.

Organizational Chart
Through its grants and programs, the Arts Endowment brings art to all 50 States and six U.S. jurisdictions,

including rural areas, inner cities, and military bases. The Arts Endowment awards competitive matching grants

to nonprofit organizations, to units of State or local government, and to federally recognized tribal communities

or tribes for projects, programs, or activities in the fields of artist communities, arts education, dance, design, folk

and traditional arts, literature, local arts agencies, media arts, museums, music, musical theater, opera,

presenting, theater, and visual arts. It also awards competitive, nonmatching individual fellowships in literature

and honorary fellowships in jazz, folk and traditional arts, and opera. Forty percent of the Arts Endowment's

grant funds go to the 56 State and jurisdictional arts agencies and their regional arts organizations in support of

arts projects in thousands of communities nationwide.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
Job announcements are posted online.

https://www.arts.gov/about/employment-opportunities-nea

Grants
Application forms and guidelines and listings of grants recently made to individuals and organizations are

accessible online.
http://www.arts.gov/grants

Podcasts
Podcasts feature actors, authors, composers, musicians, playwrights, poets, and other artists and professionals

who support and strengthen the arts.

https://www.arts.gov/podcasts

Publications
Publications, including annual reports and "NEA Arts" magazine, are available online.

http://arts.gov/publications
https://www.arts.gov/about/annual-reports
https://www.arts.gov/NEARTS
https://www.arts.gov/staff
For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, National Endowment for the Arts, 400 7th Street SW.,

Washington, DC 20506-0001. Phone, 202-682-5400. TDD, 202-682-5496.



National Endowment for the Humanities
400 7th Street SW., Washington, DC 20506


202-606-8400

800-634-1121

http://www.neh.gov | Email: info@neh.gov


  CHAIR                                                    Michael McDonald, Acting


  Deputy Chair                                             Vacant




  Assistant Chair, Partnership and Strategic Initiatives   Vacant


  Assistant Chair, Planning and Operations                 Jeffrey Thomas


  Assistant Chair, Programs                                Adam Wolfson




  Chief Information Officer                                Brett Bobley


  Chief of Staff                                           Vacant


  General Counsel                                          Michael McDonald


  Inspector General                                        Laura M.H. Davis
The National Endowment for the Humanities supports research, education, preservation, and public programs in

the humanities.

Organizational Chart
According to the agency's authorizing legislation, the term "humanities" includes, but is not limited to, the study

of the following: language, both modern and classical; linguistics; literature; history; jurisprudence; philosophy;

archeology; comparative religion; ethics; the history, criticism, and theory of the arts; and those aspects of the

social sciences that employ historical or philosophical approaches.


To increase understanding and appreciation of the humanities, the Endowment makes grants to individuals, as

well as to groups and institutions: colleges, libraries, museums, nonprofit private groups, public television

stations and agencies, schools, and universities.

http://www.neh.gov/about

Challenge Grants
The Office of Challenge Grants offers matching funds to help nonprofit institutions develop new sources of long-

term support for educational, scholarly, preservation, and public programs in the humanities.

http://www.neh.gov/divisions/challenge/about

  For further information, call 202-606-8309.



Digital Humanities
The Office of Digital Humanities supports projects that use digital technology or study how it affects education,

preservation, public programming, and research in the humanities.

http://www.neh.gov/divisions/odh/about | Email: odh@neh.gov

  For further information, call 202-606-8401.



Education Programs
The Division of Education Programs strengthens sustained, thoughtful study of the humanities at all educational

levels. It makes grants to educational institutions and gives fellowships to teachers and scholars.

http://www.neh.gov/divisions/education/about

  For further information, call 202-606-8500.



Federal/State Partnership
Humanities committees in each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin and Northern

Mariana Islands, Guam, and American Samoa receive grants from the Endowment. These committees then make

grants to humanities programs at the local level.

http://www.neh.gov/divisions/fedstate/about
  For further information, call 202-606-8254.



Preservation and Access
The Division of Preservation and Access supports creating, preserving, and increasing the availability of

resources that are important for research, education, and public programming in the humanities.

http://www.neh.gov/divisions/preservation/about

  For further information, call 202-606-8570.



Public Programs
The Division of Public Programs supports institutions and organizations that develop and present humanities

programming for general audiences. Its activities center on the Endowment's mandate "to increase public

understanding of the humanities."

http://www.neh.gov/divisions/public/about

  For further information, call 202-606-8268.



Research Programs
The Division of Research Programs promotes original research in the humanities. It provides grants for significant

research projects.

http://www.neh.gov/divisions/research/about

  For further information, call 202-606-8389.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
The National Endowment for the Humanities posts job opportunities on USAJobs, the Federal Government's

official source for Federal job listings and employment opportunity information.

https://www.usajobs.gov

Grants
Information on managing a grant, the application review process, and other topics is available on the "NEH

Grants" Web page.

http://www.neh.gov/grants

Publications
The Endowment's in-house, quarterly magazine "HUMANITIES" is available by subscription from the U.S.
Government Publishing Office, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO 63197–9000. Phone, 202-512-1800.

http://www.neh.gov/humanities/staff | Email: publications@neh.gov
http://www.neh.gov/about/contact | Email: info@neh.gov
For further information, contact the Office of Communications, National Endowment for the Humanities, 400 7th

Street SW., Washington, DC 20506. Phone, 202-606-8400 or 800-634-1121. TDD, 202-606-8282 or 866-372-

2930.


The Institute of Museum and Library Services did not meet the publication deadline for submitting updated

information of its activities, functions, and sources of information as required by the automatic disclosure

provisions of the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552(a)(1)(A)).



Institute of Museum and Library Services
955 L'Enfant Plaza North SW., Suite 4000, Washington, DC 20024-2135


202-653-4657

http://www.imls.gov | Email: imlsinfo@imls.gov


  DIRECTOR                                                 Crosby Kemper




  DEPUTY DIRECTORS


  Library Services                                         Cyndee Landrum


  Museum Services                                          Paula Gangopadhyay


https://www.imls.gov/about-us/leadership-staff/crosby-kemper

  Associate Deputy Director for Library Services           Anthony Smith


  Chief Administrator for Museum Services                  Christopher J. Reich




  CHIEF OFFICERS


  Financial                                                Chris Catignani


  Information                                              Scott Carey


  Operating                                                Chris Catignani, Acting




  Communications Manager                                   Elizabeth Holtan
  Director of Grants Policy and Management                Connie Cox Bodner


  General Counsel                                         Nancy E. Weiss


  Senior Evaluation Officer for Digital and Information
                                                        Matthew Birnbaum
  Strategy


https://imls.gov/contact/staff-directory



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.



The Institute of Museum and Library Services helps libraries and museums enhance cultural and civic engagement,

embrace innovation, and further lifelong learning.


The Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) was established within the National Foundation on the Arts

and the Humanities by the Museum and Library Services Act of September 30, 1996 (110 Stat. 3009), which

amended the Museum Services Act (20 U.S.C. 961 et seq.). The Institute combines the administration of Federal

museum programs, which the Institute of Museum Services formerly managed, and Federal library programs,

which the Department of Education formerly managed. The Institute's Director, whom the President appoints

with the advice and consent of the Senate, is authorized to make grants to museums and libraries. The Director

receives policy advice on museum and library programs from the National Museum and Library Services Board.

Its 20 voting members are appointed by the President; its three nonvoting members include the Director,

Deputy Director for Museum Services, and Deputy Director for Library Services.


The IMLS is the primary source of Federal support for the Nation's 35,000 museums and 123,000 libraries. Its

grant making, policy development, and research help museums and libraries offer services that make people

and their communities prosper. The IMLS awards grants to art, children's, general, history, natural history,

science, and technology museums, as well as to aquariums, arboretums, botanical gardens, nature centers,

planetariums, zoos, and historic houses. It also awards grants to academic, public, research, school, and special

libraries. IMLS grants improve electronic sharing of information and expand public access to information and

services.

https://www.imls.gov/about-us

African American History and Culture Museum Grants
The IMLS awards these grants at two funding levels to improve care of collections, develop professional

management, and provide internship and fellowship opportunities.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/museum-grants-african-american-history-and-culture

Laura Bush 21st Century Librarian Program
This program supports recruitment and education of library students, continuing education for those already

working in the profession, and new programs and curricula.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/laura-bush-21st-century-librarian-program
Museum Assessment Program
The IMLS supports the cost of this program through a cooperative agreement with the American Alliance of

Museums. The program helps museums strengthen operations, plan for the future, and meet national standards

through self-study and a site visit from a peer reviewer.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/museum-assessment-program-map

Museums for America
The IMLS awards grants at two funding levels to help museums expand their role as lifelong learning resources,

increase the vital contributions they make to livable communities, and become better stewards of the Nation's

collections.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/museums-america

National Arts and Humanities Youth Program Awards
This is a project of the President's Committee on the Arts and the Humanities in partnership with the IMLS and

the National Endowments for the Arts and for the Humanities. These awards acknowledge museums and

libraries for their afterschool and out-of-school arts and humanities programs for young Americans.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/national-arts-and-humanities-youth-program-awards

National Leadership Grants for Libraries
These grants help library and archive professionals address the challenges and needs of their fields. Projects

supported by these grants stimulate research, develop new tools, and produce innovative alliances, models,

practices, and services that broadly affect the library and archival fields.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/national-leadership-grants-libraries

National Leadership Grants for Museums
These grants help museum professionals address the challenges and needs of their field. Projects supported by

these grants promote innovation and collaboration and typically produce results that broadly affect the museum

field.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/national-leadership-grants-museums

National Medal for Museum and Library Service
This award acknowledges institutions for providing exceptional and meaningful public service in their

communities.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/national-medal-museum-and-library-service

Native American and Native Hawaiian Museum Services Program
These grants to federally recognized tribes and organizations that represent and serve Native Hawaiians help

sustain indigenous culture, heritage, and knowledge through improved museum services.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/native-americannative-hawaiian-museum-services-program

Native American Library Services: Basic Grants and the Education/Assessment
Option
These noncompetitive grants to federally recognized tribes help them purchase library materials, acquire

computers and provide Internet connectivity, and fund salaries. The Education/Assessment option is

supplemental to the basic grants and also noncompetitive. It funds library staff participation in continuing

education courses, training workshops, and conferences. It also allows libraries to hire a consultant for an onsite

professional assessment.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/native-american-library-services-basic-grants

Native American Library Services: Enhancement Grants
These grants to federally recognized tribes expand services for access to information, learning, and partnerships.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/native-american-library-services-enhancement-grants

Native Hawaiian Library Services
This program supports grants that implement new library services or enhance existing ones.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/native-hawaiian-library-services

Sparks! Ignition Grants for Libraries
These grants promote exploration and expansion of the frontiers of archival and library practices and services.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/sparks-ignition-grants-libraries

Sparks! Ignition Grants for Museums
These grants promote exploration and expansion of the frontiers of museum practices and services.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/sparks-ignition-grants-museums

State Program Grants
The Grants to States program is the largest Federal source of funding to support library services in the United

States. The IMLS uses a population-based formula to distribute annual grants among the State Library

Administrative Agencies—official agencies charged by law with the extension and development of library

services. Each year, thousands of Grants to States projects promote the priorities and assist the purposes of the

Library Services and Technology Act.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/grants-states



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
The IMLS offers a unique opportunity to work with the Nation's libraries and museums at the national level and

in coordination with State and local organizations. The IMLS posts employment and internship opportunities on

its Web site.

https://www.imls.gov/about-us/jobs-imls/employment-opportunities
https://www.imls.gov/about-us/jobs-imls/internship-opportunities

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
     An online guide answers frequently asked FOIA-related questions.

     https://www.imls.gov/about-us/agency-reports/freedom-information-act-foia

     Grants
     Search tools are available online to search for available grants and awarded grants.

     https://www.imls.gov/grants/apply-grant/available-grants
     https://www.imls.gov/grants/awarded-grants

     News
     The IMLS posts news releases and project profiles online, as well as its "UpNext" blog and "Primary Source"

     monthly newsletter.

     https://www.imls.gov/news-events

     Open Government
     The IMLS supports the Governmentwide initiative to promote openness in the work of Federal agencies. It posts

     datasets on Data.gov and maintains a data catalog that makes IMLS data accessible to developers, researchers,

     and to the general public.

     https://www.imls.gov/about-us/open-government

     Publications
     Publications are accessible in Portable Document Format (PDF) on the "Publications List" Web page.

     https://www.imls.gov/publications

     Videos
     A collection of IMLS videos is available online.

     https://www.imls.gov/publications/imls-videos
     http://www.imls.gov | Email: imlsinfo@imls.gov
     For further information, contact the Office of Communications and Government Affairs, Institute of Museum and

     Library Services, 955 L'Enfant Plaza North SW., Suite 4000, Washington, DC 20024. Phone, 202-653-4757.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act
No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                              National Endowment for the Arts




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE ARTS
    400 7th Street SW., Washington, DC 20506


    202-682-5400

    TDD, 202-682-5496

    http://www.arts.gov


      CHAIR                                                                                 R. Jane Chu


      Senior Deputy Chairman                                                                Mary Anne Carter
Chief Information Officer                                                   Vacant


Chief of Staff                                                              Mike Griffin


Deputy Chairman, Management and Budget                                      Vacant




Director, Accessibility                                                     Beth Bienvenu


Director, Administrative Services                                           Kathy Daum


Director, Artist Communities and Presenting and Multidisciplinary Works /
                                                                            Michael Orlove
International Activities Coordinator


Director, Arts Education                                                    Ayanna N. Hudson


Director, Budget                                                            John Sotelo


Director, Civil Rights and Equal Employment Opportunity                     Mike Griffin


Director, Dance                                                             Jennifer Kareliusson, Acting


Director, Design Programs / Visual Arts Division Team Leader                Vacant


Director, Finance                                                           Heidi Ren


Director, Folk and Traditional Arts                                         Clifford Murphy


Director, Grants and Contracts                                              Nicki Jacobs


Director, Guidelines and Panel Operations                                   Jillian L. Miller


Director, Human Resources                                                   Craig M. McCord, Sr.


Director, Literature                                                        Amy Stolls


Director, Local Arts Agencies and Challenge America                         Vacant


Director, Media Arts                                                        Jax Deluca


Director, Museums, Visual Arts, and Indemnity                               Wendy Clark


Director, Music and Opera                                                   Ann Meier Baker


Director, Public Affairs                                                    Jessamyn Sarmiento
  Director, Research and Analysis                                                          Sunil Iyengar


  Director, State and Regional Partnerships                                                Laura Scanlan


  Director, Theater and Musical Theater                                                    Greg Reiner




  Federal Partnerships Coordinator                                                         Tony Tighe


  General Counsel                                                                          India Pinkney


  Inspector General                                                                        Ronald Stith



The National Endowment for the Arts supports artistic excellence and promotes creativity and innovation to benefit

individuals and communities.

Organizational Chart
Through its grants and programs, the Arts Endowment brings art to all 50 States and six U.S. jurisdictions, including

rural areas, inner cities, and military bases. The Arts Endowment awards competitive matching grants to nonprofit

organizations, to units of State or local government, and to federally recognized tribal communities or tribes for

projects, programs, or activities in the fields of artist communities, arts education, dance, design, folk and traditional

arts, literature, local arts agencies, media arts, museums, music, musical theater, opera, presenting, theater, and visual

arts. It also awards competitive, nonmatching individual fellowships in literature and honorary fellowships in jazz, folk

and traditional arts, and opera. Forty percent of the Arts Endowment's grant funds go to the 56 State and jurisdictional

arts agencies and their regional arts organizations in support of arts projects in thousands of communities nationwide.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
Job announcements are posted online.

https://www.arts.gov/about/employment-opportunities-nea

Grants
Application forms and guidelines and listings of grants recently made to individuals and organizations are accessible

online.

http://www.arts.gov/grants

Podcasts
Podcasts feature actors, authors, composers, musicians, playwrights, poets, and other artists and professionals who

support and strengthen the arts.

https://www.arts.gov/podcasts
     Publications
     Publications, including annual reports and "NEA Arts" magazine, are available online.

     http://arts.gov/publications
     https://www.arts.gov/about/annual-reports
     https://www.arts.gov/NEARTS
     https://www.arts.gov/staff

        For further information, contact the Public Affairs Office, National Endowment for the Arts, 400 7th
        Street SW., Washington, DC 20506-0001. Phone, 202-682-5400. TDD, 202-682-5496.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                          National Endowment for the Humanities




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL ENDOWMENT FOR THE HUMANITIES
    400 7th Street SW., Washington, DC 20506


    202-606-8400

    800-634-1121

    http://www.neh.gov | Email: info@neh.gov


      CHAIR                                                                                  Michael McDonald, Acting


      Deputy Chair                                                                           Vacant
  Assistant Chair, Partnership and Strategic Initiatives                                    Vacant


  Assistant Chair, Planning and Operations                                                  Jeffrey Thomas


  Assistant Chair, Programs                                                                 Adam Wolfson




  Chief Information Officer                                                                 Brett Bobley


  Chief of Staff                                                                            Vacant


  General Counsel                                                                           Michael McDonald


  Inspector General                                                                         Laura M.H. Davis



The National Endowment for the Humanities supports research, education, preservation, and public programs in the

humanities.

Organizational Chart
According to the agency's authorizing legislation, the term "humanities" includes, but is not limited to, the study of the

following: language, both modern and classical; linguistics; literature; history; jurisprudence; philosophy; archeology;

comparative religion; ethics; the history, criticism, and theory of the arts; and those aspects of the social sciences that

employ historical or philosophical approaches.


To increase understanding and appreciation of the humanities, the Endowment makes grants to individuals, as well as

to groups and institutions: colleges, libraries, museums, nonprofit private groups, public television stations and

agencies, schools, and universities.

http://www.neh.gov/about

Challenge Grants
The Office of Challenge Grants offers matching funds to help nonprofit institutions develop new sources of long-term

support for educational, scholarly, preservation, and public programs in the humanities.

http://www.neh.gov/divisions/challenge/about

  For further information, call 202-606-8309.



Digital Humanities
The Office of Digital Humanities supports projects that use digital technology or study how it affects education,

preservation, public programming, and research in the humanities.

http://www.neh.gov/divisions/odh/about | Email: odh@neh.gov
  For further information, call 202-606-8401.



Education Programs
The Division of Education Programs strengthens sustained, thoughtful study of the humanities at all educational levels.

It makes grants to educational institutions and gives fellowships to teachers and scholars.

http://www.neh.gov/divisions/education/about

  For further information, call 202-606-8500.



Federal/State Partnership
Humanities committees in each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin and Northern

Mariana Islands, Guam, and American Samoa receive grants from the Endowment. These committees then make

grants to humanities programs at the local level.

http://www.neh.gov/divisions/fedstate/about

  For further information, call 202-606-8254.



Preservation and Access
The Division of Preservation and Access supports creating, preserving, and increasing the availability of resources that

are important for research, education, and public programming in the humanities.

http://www.neh.gov/divisions/preservation/about

  For further information, call 202-606-8570.



Public Programs
The Division of Public Programs supports institutions and organizations that develop and present humanities

programming for general audiences. Its activities center on the Endowment's mandate "to increase public

understanding of the humanities."

http://www.neh.gov/divisions/public/about

  For further information, call 202-606-8268.



Research Programs
The Division of Research Programs promotes original research in the humanities. It provides grants for significant

research projects.

http://www.neh.gov/divisions/research/about

  For further information, call 202-606-8389.
     SOURCES OF INFORMATION

     Employment
     The National Endowment for the Humanities posts job opportunities on USAJobs, the Federal Government's official

     source for Federal job listings and employment opportunity information.

     https://www.usajobs.gov

     Grants
     Information on managing a grant, the application review process, and other topics is available on the "NEH Grants"

     Web page.

     http://www.neh.gov/grants

     Publications
     The Endowment's in-house, quarterly magazine "HUMANITIES" is available by subscription from the U.S. Government

     Publishing Office, P.O. Box 979050, St. Louis, MO 63197–9000. Phone, 202-512-1800.

     http://www.neh.gov/humanities/staff | Email: publications@neh.gov
     http://www.neh.gov/about/contact | Email: info@neh.gov

        For further information, contact the Office of Communications, National Endowment for the Humanities,
        400 7th Street SW., Washington, DC 20506. Phone, 202-606-8400 or 800-634-1121. TDD, 202-606-8282 or
        866-372-2930.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                           Institute of Museum and Library Services




The United States Government Manual




    The Institute of Museum and Library Services did not meet the publication deadline for submitting updated
    information of its activities, functions, and sources of information as required by the automatic disclosure provisions of

    the Freedom of Information Act (5 U.S.C. 552(a)(1)(A)).


     INSTITUTE OF MUSEUM AND LIBRARY SERVICES
    955 L'Enfant Plaza North SW., Suite 4000, Washington, DC 20024-2135


    202-653-4657

    http://www.imls.gov | Email: imlsinfo@imls.gov
  DIRECTOR                                                                           Crosby Kemper




  DEPUTY DIRECTORS


  Library Services                                                                   Cyndee Landrum


  Museum Services                                                                    Paula Gangopadhyay


https://www.imls.gov/about-us/leadership-staff/crosby-kemper

  Associate Deputy Director for Library Services                                     Anthony Smith


  Chief Administrator for Museum Services                                            Christopher J. Reich




  CHIEF OFFICERS


  Financial                                                                          Chris Catignani


  Information                                                                        Scott Carey


  Operating                                                                          Chris Catignani, Acting




  Communications Manager                                                             Elizabeth Holtan


  Director of Grants Policy and Management                                           Connie Cox Bodner


  General Counsel                                                                    Nancy E. Weiss


  Senior Evaluation Officer for Digital and Information Strategy                     Matthew Birnbaum


https://imls.gov/contact/staff-directory



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.



The Institute of Museum and Library Services helps libraries and museums enhance cultural and civic engagement,

embrace innovation, and further lifelong learning.


The Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) was established within the National Foundation on the Arts and

the Humanities by the Museum and Library Services Act of September 30, 1996 (110 Stat. 3009), which amended the

Museum Services Act (20 U.S.C. 961 et seq.). The Institute combines the administration of Federal museum programs,

which the Institute of Museum Services formerly managed, and Federal library programs, which the Department of
Education formerly managed. The Institute's Director, whom the President appoints with the advice and consent of the

Senate, is authorized to make grants to museums and libraries. The Director receives policy advice on museum and

library programs from the National Museum and Library Services Board. Its 20 voting members are appointed by the

President; its three nonvoting members include the Director, Deputy Director for Museum Services, and Deputy

Director for Library Services.


The IMLS is the primary source of Federal support for the Nation's 35,000 museums and 123,000 libraries. Its grant

making, policy development, and research help museums and libraries offer services that make people and their

communities prosper. The IMLS awards grants to art, children's, general, history, natural history, science, and

technology museums, as well as to aquariums, arboretums, botanical gardens, nature centers, planetariums, zoos, and

historic houses. It also awards grants to academic, public, research, school, and special libraries. IMLS grants improve

electronic sharing of information and expand public access to information and services.

https://www.imls.gov/about-us

African American History and Culture Museum Grants
The IMLS awards these grants at two funding levels to improve care of collections, develop professional management,

and provide internship and fellowship opportunities.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/museum-grants-african-american-history-and-culture

Laura Bush 21st Century Librarian Program
This program supports recruitment and education of library students, continuing education for those already working

in the profession, and new programs and curricula.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/laura-bush-21st-century-librarian-program

Museum Assessment Program
The IMLS supports the cost of this program through a cooperative agreement with the American Alliance of Museums.

The program helps museums strengthen operations, plan for the future, and meet national standards through self-

study and a site visit from a peer reviewer.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/museum-assessment-program-map

Museums for America
The IMLS awards grants at two funding levels to help museums expand their role as lifelong learning resources,

increase the vital contributions they make to livable communities, and become better stewards of the Nation's

collections.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/museums-america

National Arts and Humanities Youth Program Awards
This is a project of the President's Committee on the Arts and the Humanities in partnership with the IMLS and the

National Endowments for the Arts and for the Humanities. These awards acknowledge museums and libraries for their

afterschool and out-of-school arts and humanities programs for young Americans.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/national-arts-and-humanities-youth-program-awards

National Leadership Grants for Libraries
These grants help library and archive professionals address the challenges and needs of their fields. Projects supported

by these grants stimulate research, develop new tools, and produce innovative alliances, models, practices, and

services that broadly affect the library and archival fields.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/national-leadership-grants-libraries

National Leadership Grants for Museums
These grants help museum professionals address the challenges and needs of their field. Projects supported by these

grants promote innovation and collaboration and typically produce results that broadly affect the museum field.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/national-leadership-grants-museums

National Medal for Museum and Library Service
This award acknowledges institutions for providing exceptional and meaningful public service in their communities.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/national-medal-museum-and-library-service

Native American and Native Hawaiian Museum Services Program
These grants to federally recognized tribes and organizations that represent and serve Native Hawaiians help sustain

indigenous culture, heritage, and knowledge through improved museum services.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/native-americannative-hawaiian-museum-services-program

Native American Library Services: Basic Grants and the Education/Assessment
Option
These noncompetitive grants to federally recognized tribes help them purchase library materials, acquire computers

and provide Internet connectivity, and fund salaries. The Education/Assessment option is supplemental to the basic

grants and also noncompetitive. It funds library staff participation in continuing education courses, training workshops,

and conferences. It also allows libraries to hire a consultant for an onsite professional assessment.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/native-american-library-services-basic-grants

Native American Library Services: Enhancement Grants
These grants to federally recognized tribes expand services for access to information, learning, and partnerships.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/native-american-library-services-enhancement-grants

Native Hawaiian Library Services
This program supports grants that implement new library services or enhance existing ones.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/native-hawaiian-library-services

Sparks! Ignition Grants for Libraries
These grants promote exploration and expansion of the frontiers of archival and library practices and services.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/sparks-ignition-grants-libraries

Sparks! Ignition Grants for Museums
These grants promote exploration and expansion of the frontiers of museum practices and services.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/available/sparks-ignition-grants-museums
State Program Grants
The Grants to States program is the largest Federal source of funding to support library services in the United States.

The IMLS uses a population-based formula to distribute annual grants among the State Library Administrative

Agencies—official agencies charged by law with the extension and development of library services. Each year,

thousands of Grants to States projects promote the priorities and assist the purposes of the Library Services and

Technology Act.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/grants-states



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
The IMLS offers a unique opportunity to work with the Nation's libraries and museums at the national level and in

coordination with State and local organizations. The IMLS posts employment and internship opportunities on its Web

site.

https://www.imls.gov/about-us/jobs-imls/employment-opportunities
https://www.imls.gov/about-us/jobs-imls/internship-opportunities

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
An online guide answers frequently asked FOIA-related questions.

https://www.imls.gov/about-us/agency-reports/freedom-information-act-foia

Grants
Search tools are available online to search for available grants and awarded grants.

https://www.imls.gov/grants/apply-grant/available-grants
https://www.imls.gov/grants/awarded-grants

News
The IMLS posts news releases and project profiles online, as well as its "UpNext" blog and "Primary Source" monthly

newsletter.

https://www.imls.gov/news-events

Open Government
The IMLS supports the Governmentwide initiative to promote openness in the work of Federal agencies. It posts

datasets on Data.gov and maintains a data catalog that makes IMLS data accessible to developers, researchers, and to

the general public.

https://www.imls.gov/about-us/open-government

Publications
Publications are accessible in Portable Document Format (PDF) on the "Publications List" Web page.

https://www.imls.gov/publications
     Videos
     A collection of IMLS videos is available online.

     https://www.imls.gov/publications/imls-videos
     http://www.imls.gov | Email: imlsinfo@imls.gov

        For further information, contact the Office of Communications and Government Affairs, Institute of
        Museum and Library Services, 955 L'Enfant Plaza North SW., Suite 4000, Washington, DC 20024. Phone,
        202-653-4757.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               National Labor Relations Board




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD
    1015 Half Street SE., Washington, DC 20570


    202-273-1000

    TDD, 202-273-4300

    http://www.nlrb.gov




    BOARD
 CHAIR                                                                 Philip A. Miscimarra




 Member                                                                Marvin E. Kaplan


 Member                                                                Lauren McFerran


 Member                                                                Mark G. Pearce


 Member                                                                (vacancy)

https://www.nlrb.gov/who-we-are/board

 GENERAL COUNSEL                                                       Richard F. Griffin, Jr.


https://www.nlrb.gov/who-we-are/general-counsel/richard-f-griffin-jr

 Deputy General Counsel                                                Jennifer Abruzzo




 Associate General Counsel, Division of Advice                         Jayme Sophir


 Associate General Counsel, Division of Enforcement Litigation         John H. Ferguson


 Associate General Counsel, Division of Legal Counsel                  Barbara O'Neill


 Associate General Counsel, Division of Operations-Management          Anne G. Purcell




 Chief Financial Officer                                               Mehul Parekh


 Chief Information Officer                                             Prem Aburvasamy


 Chief Judge, Division of Judges                                       Robert A. Giannasi




 Director, Division of Administration                                  Lasharn Hamilton


 Director, Office of Congressional and Public Affairs                  Carmen Spell


 Director, Office of Equal Employment Opportunity                      Brenda V. Harris


 Director, Office of Representation Appeals                            (vacancy)
  Executive Secretary                                                                   Gary W. Shinners


  Solicitor                                                                             (vacancy)



  Inspector General                                                                     David P. Berry


https://www.nlrb.gov/who-we-are/inspector-general


The National Labor Relations Board remedies unfair labor practices and safeguards employees' rights to organize and to

determine whether to have unions as their bargaining representative.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) is an independent agency created by Congress to administer the National

Labor Relations Act of 1935 (Wagner Act; 29 U.S.C. 167). The Board is authorized to designate appropriate units for

collective bargaining and to conduct secret ballot elections to determine whether employees desire representation by

a labor organization.

https://www.nlrb.gov/who-we-are/our-history
The NLRB's statement of organization was published on June 14, 1979, in the Federal Register (44 FR 34215).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1979-06-14/pdf/FR-1979-06-14.pdf
The NLRB posts its organization chart online.

https://www.nlrb.gov/about-nlrb/who-we-are/organization-chart

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material that affects the NLRB has been codified in the United States Code (U.S.C.) and assigned to the

subchapter on national labor relations in Chapter 7 of 29 U.S.C. Chapter 7 has the title "Labor-Management Relations"

and runs from section 141 to section 197. The subchapter on national labor relations runs from section 151 to section

169.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title29/chapter7/subchapter2&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that are associated with the NLRB have been codified and assigned to Chapter I, parts 100–199,

of 29 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=8a8e5d024cddda6d70fbfd8264ee49c0&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title29/29chapterI.tpl

ACTIVITIES
In addition to preventing and remedying unfair labor practices, the NLRB conducts secret ballot elections among

employees in appropriate collective-bargaining units to determine whether or not they desire to be represented by a

labor organization in bargaining with employers over wages, hours, and working conditions. It also conducts secret

ballot elections among employees who have been covered by a union-security agreement to determine whether or

not they wish to revoke their union's authority to make such agreements. In jurisdictional disputes between two or

more unions, the Board determines which competing group of workers is entitled to perform the work involved.
The regional directors and their staffs process representation, unfair labor practice, and jurisdictional dispute cases.

They issue complaints in unfair labor practice cases, seek settlement of unfair labor practice charges, obtain

compliance with Board orders and court judgments, and petition district courts for injunctions to prevent or remedy

unfair labor practices. The regional directors conduct hearings in representation cases, hold elections pursuant to the

agreement of the parties or the decisionmaking authority delegated to them by the Board or pursuant to Board

directions, and issue certifications of representatives when unions win or certify the results when they lose employee

elections. The regional directors process petitions for bargaining unit clarification, for amendment of certification, and

for rescission of a labor organization's authority to make a union-shop agreement. They also conduct national

emergency employee referendums.


Administrative law judges conduct hearings in unfair labor practice cases, make findings of fact and conclusions of law,

and recommend remedies for violations found. Their decisions can be appealed to the Board for a final agency

determination. The Board's decisions are subject to review in the U.S. courts of appeals.

https://www.nlrb.gov/what-we-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that NLRB records have been

assigned to record group 025.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/025.html

Business Opportunities
Businessmen and women who seek to sell products and services to the NLRB can find information on procurement

procedures and policies that are generally applicable to NLRB purchasing practices. The NLRB has posted an

electronic document that describes the types of items purchased, who procures them, and where they are purchased.

The document also includes information that is relevant for small, disadvantaged, service-disabled veteran-owned

businesses, and women-owned businesses.

https://www.nlrb.gov/about-nlrb/who-we-are/acquisitions

Career Opportunities
The NLRB appoints administrative law judges from a register that the Office of Personnel Management established.

The NLRB hires attorneys for all its offices, field examiners for its field offices, and administrative personnel for its

Washington and field offices.

https://www.nlrb.gov/about-nlrb/who-we-are/careers
In 2020, the NLRB ranked 24th among 25 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=NL00

Cases / Decisions / Digests
The "Cases and Decisions" web page offers convenient access to cases, decisions, and digests of cases. The NLRB is
also developing a list of special cases for organizations that are of interest to the public. Organizations will be added

or removed as circumstances warrant. At the moment, the list starts with Bridgewater Associates and ends with Yale

University.

http://www.nlrb.gov/cases-decisions
The weekly summary of decisions is a digest of decisions that the NLRB issues each week. The summary includes short

descriptions of the issues and facts of the cases and links to the decisions. It also has a list of case names and links to

decisions by NLRB Administrative Law Judges and to decisions by appellate courts that involve NLRB cases.

https://www.nlrb.gov/cases-decisions/decisions/weekly-summaries-decisions

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page includes links to the NLRB's headquarters, judges division, and regional office directories

and to FOIA, Inspector General, and media sections for inquiries.

https://www.nlrb.gov/contact-us | Email: publicinfo@nlrb.gov

Electronic Filing
Parties or other persons may use the e-filing program to file selected documents in unfair labor practice and

representation cases with the NLRB's Office of Executive Secretary, the Division of Judges, the General Counsel's Office

of Appeals, and regional, subregional, and resident offices.

https://apps.nlrb.gov/MyAccount/#/FileCaseDocument/TermsConditions?type=pdfForm%2F

Employees' Rights
The "What's the Law?" web page provides information on rights during union organizing; the right to form a union

and the right to refrain; strikes, pickets, and protests; concerted activity; social media; enforcing employees' rights;

hiring halls and union dues; and the right to fair representation.

https://www.nlrb.gov/about-nlrb/rights-we-protect/whats-law

Español
A Spanish version of the NLRB website is available for Spanish speakers.

https://www.nlrb.gov/es

Factsheets
Factsheets on significant cases, on issues pending before the NLRB, and on initiatives undertaken by the General

Counsel are posted online.

https://www.nlrb.gov/news-publications/publications/fact-sheets

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the NLRB recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/national-labor-relations-board

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded from
disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute.

https://www.nlrb.gov/guidance/freedom-of-information-act-foia
The NLRB posts materials that are frequently requested or are of general interest to the public. The FOIA requires

agencies to be proactive and make available to the public nonexempt information from certain record categories.

These categories include final agency opinions and orders that have been rendered in the adjudication of cases;

specific policy statements that are not published in the Federal Register; administrative staff manuals and instructions

to staff that affect a member of the public; and frequently requested records or records that are likely to become the

subject of subsequent requests. Before submitting a FOIA request, an information seeker should visit the NLRB's FOIA

electronic library to ensure that the desired information is not already accessible online and free of charge.

https://www.nlrb.gov/guidance/freedom-of-information-act-foia/foia-e-library

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The NLRB posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.nlrb.gov/who-we-are/careers/job-descriptions-and-listings/student-positions-law-non-legal

History
In a time of economic hardship and widespread labor unrest, President Franklin D. Roosevelt created the National

Labor Board (NLB). With limited power, the NLB managed to settle over 1,000 strikes and avert nearly 500 additional

ones by the time that its authority expired in June of 1934. These events are the background from which the NLRB

emerged as part of a new national labor policy trend that began with Senator Robert F. Wagner's National Labor

Relations Act of 1935. To learn more about this important chapter of U.S. labor history, visit the NLRB's "Our History"

web page.

https://www.nlrb.gov/about-nlrb/who-we-are/our-history

News
The NLRB posts announcements and news on its website.

https://www.nlrb.gov/news-publications/news

Open Government
The NLRB supports the Open Government initiative by incorporating the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency in its plans for agency information and systems.

https://www.nlrb.gov/open

Publications
NLRB publications are available online.

https://www.nlrb.gov/news-publications/publications

Recent Charges / Petitions Filings
The NLRB maintains a database of recent charges and petition filings on its website.

https://www.nlrb.gov/reports/graphs-data/recent-filings

Regional Offices
     Contact information for NLRB regional, subregional, and resident offices is available on the "Regional Offices" Web

     pages.

     https://www.nlrb.gov/about-nlrb/who-we-are/regional-offices

     Request a Speaker
     A centralized speakers' bureau schedules requests for NLRB representatives to give presentations on agency activities

     and programs.

     https://www.nlrb.gov/guidance/fillable-forms/request-speaker

     Right To Strike
     Sections 7, 8, and 13 of the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) address issues that protect and limit employees' right

     to strike. “Employees shall have the right . . . to engage in other concerted activities for the purpose of collective

     bargaining or other mutual aid or protection"—strikes are included among "concerted activities" that the NLRA

     protects for employees. More statutory information is available on the "The Right To Strike" web page.

     https://www.nlrb.gov/strikes

     Site Map
     Online visitors may use the site map to look for specific topics on the NLRB website or to browse for content that

     aligns with their interests.

     https://www.nlrb.gov/sitemap

     Social Media
     The NLRB has a Facebook page.

     https://www.facebook.com/NLRBpage/
     The NLRB tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/nlrb

        The above Sources of Information were updated 7–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act
No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                 National Mediation Board




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL MEDIATION BOARD
    1301 K Street NW., Suite 250 East, Washington, DC 20005


    202-692-5000

    http://www.nmb.gov


      BOARD MEMBERS


      CHAIR                                                                                 Linda A. Puchala


      Member                                                                                Harry R. Hoglander
  EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS


  Chief of Staff                                                                          Daniel Rainey


  General Counsel, Office of Legal Affairs                                                Mary L. Johnson




  Assistant Chief of Staff, Administration                                                Samantha T. Jones


  Director, Arbitration Services                                                          Roland Watkins


  Deputy Chief of Staff, Mediation                                                        Michael Kelliher




The National Mediation Board facilitates labor-management relations within the railroad and airline industries.

Organizational Chart
The National Mediation Board (NMB) is an independent agency established by the 1934 amendments to the Railway

Labor Act of 1926 (45 U.S.C. 151-158, 160-162, 1181-1188). The Board comprises three members whom the President

appoints and the Senate confirms. The Board designates a Chair on a yearly basis.


NMB dispute-resolution processes are designed to resolve disputes over the negotiation of new or revised collective

bargaining agreements and the interpretation or application of existing agreements. The Board also effectuates

employee rights of self-organization where a representation dispute exists.

http://www.nmb.gov/about-nmb/nmb-overview



ACTIVITIES

Mediation and Alternative Dispute Resolution
Following receipt of an application for mediation, the NMB assigns a mediator to assist the parties in reaching an

agreement. The NMB is obligated to use its best efforts to bring about a peaceful resolution to the dispute. If such

efforts do not settle the dispute, the NMB advises the parties and offers interest arbitration as an alternative approach

to resolve the remaining issues. If either party rejects this offer, the NMB releases the parties from formal mediation.

This release triggers a 30-day cooling off period. During this period, the NMB continues to work with the parties to

achieve a consensual resolution. If, however, an agreement is not reached by the end of the 30-day period, the parties

are free to exercise lawful self-help, such as carrier-imposed working conditions or a strike by the union or

organization.


In addition to traditional mediation services, the NMB also provides voluntary Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)
services. ADR services include facilitation, training, grievance mediation, and an online dispute resolution component,

which applies technology to the dispute resolution process. The purpose of the ADR program is to assist the parties in

learning and applying more effective, less confrontational methods for resolving their disputes and to help them

resolve more of them without outside intervention.

http://www.nmb.gov/services/mediation

Presidential Emergency Board
If the NMB determines that a dispute threatens to deprive substantially any section of the country of essential

transportation service, it notifies the President. The President, at his discretion, may establish a Presidential Emergency

Board (PEB) to investigate and report back within 30 days. After the PEB has been created and for 30 days after it has

made its report to the President, neither party to the dispute may exercise self-help.


There are also special emergency procedures for unresolved disputes affecting publicly funded and operated

commuter railroads and their employees. If the mediation procedures are exhausted, the parties to the dispute or the

Governor of any State where the railroad operates may request that the President establish a PEB. The President is

required to establish such a board if requested. If no settlement is reached within 60 days following the creation of the

PEB, the NMB is required to conduct a public hearing on the dispute. If there is no settlement within 120 days after the

creation of the PEB, either party or the Governor of any affected state may request a second, final-offer PEB. No self-

help is permitted pending the exhaustion of these emergency procedures.

http://www.nmb.gov/services/pebmenu

Representation
When a labor organization or individual files an application with the NMB to represent employees, the Agency assigns

an investigator to conduct a representation investigation. Should the applicant meet the requirements, the NMB

continues the investigation, usually with a secret telephone or Internet election. The NMB is responsible for ensuring

that the requirements for a fair election process have been maintained. If the employees vote to be represented, the

NMB issues a certification that commences the carrier's statutory duty to bargain with the certified representative.

http://www.nmb.gov/services/representation

Arbitration
The NMB provides both grievance arbitration and interest arbitration. Grievance arbitration is a process for resolving

disputes regarding the interpretation or application of an existing collective bargaining agreement. Grievances must be

handled through grievance arbitration if not otherwise resolved, and they cannot be used by the parties to trigger self-

help actions. The NMB has significant administrative responsibilities for grievance arbitration in the railroad industry,

which includes those before the National Railroad Adjustment Board (NRAB), as well as the two types of arbitration

panels established by the labor-management parties at each railroad: public law boards (PLBs) and special boards of

adjustment (SBAs). Grievance arbitration in the airline industry is accomplished at the various system boards of

adjustment created jointly by labor and management at the parties' expense. The NMB furnishes panels of prospective

arbitrators for the parties' selection in both the airline and railroad industries. The NMB also pays the salary and travel

expenses of the arbitrators for railroad arbitration proceedings. Grievance arbitration decisions are final and binding

with very limited grounds for judicial review.
Interest arbitration is a process to establish the terms of a new or modified collective bargaining agreement through

arbitration rather than through negotiations. Unlike grievance arbitration, its use is not statutorily required. The NMB

offers the parties the opportunity to use binding interest arbitration when the agency has determined that further

mediation efforts will not be successful. In addition, the parties may directly agree to resolve their collective bargaining

dispute or portions of their dispute through interest arbitration. The NMB generally provides the parties with panels of

potential arbitrators from which they choose an individual to resolve their dispute. In some instances, however, the

parties agree to allow the NMB to appoint an arbitrator directly. Interest arbitration decisions are final and binding with

very narrow grounds for judicial appeal.

http://www.nmb.gov/services/arbitration



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Employment
Job openings are posted online.

http://www.nmb.gov/about-nmb/jobs

Knowledge Store
The Knowledge Store contains over 100,000 documents—including arbitration awards, representation decisions,

annual reports, PEB reports, industry contracts, and union constitutions and bylaws—in an easily searchable format.

http://knowledgestore.nmb.gov/ks/build.html

Open Government
The NMB supports the Open Government initiative, which requires Federal executive departments and agencies to

implement principles of collaboration, participation, and transparency.

http://www.nmb.gov/resources/open

Publications
The annual reports of the National Mediation Board are available on its "NMB Documents On-Line" Web page and in

the Knowledge Store.

http://www.nmb.gov/resources/docs

Virtual Reading Room
Copies of collective bargaining agreements between labor and management of various rail and air carriers and NMB

Determinations dating from October 1, 1998, and some even earlier, are available in the Knowledge Store.

http://knowledgestore.nmb.gov/ks/build.html
http://www.nmb.gov/press-and-contacts/key-contacts

  For further information, contact the Public Information Officer, National Mediation Board, Suite 250 East,
  1301 K Street NW., Washington, DC 20005-7011. Phone, 202-692-5050.
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                 National Railroad Passenger Corporation (AMTRAK)




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL RAILROAD PASSENGER CORPORATION (AMTRAK)
    1 Massachusetts Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20001


    202-906-3000

    http://www.amtrak.com




    BOARD OF DIRECTORS
CHAIR                                                                           Anthony R. Coscia


Vice Chair                                                                      Joel Szabat




MEMBERS                                                                         David Capozzi


                                                                                Lanhee Chen


                                                                                Elaine Clegg


                                                                                Christopher C. Koos


                                                                                (vacancy)


                                                                                (vacancy)


EX OFFICIO MEMBERS


Secretary of Transportation                                                     Sean Duffy


Amtrak President / Amtrak Chief Executive Officer                               Stephen J. Gardner


EXECUTIVE LEADERSHIP TEAM


CEO                                                                             Stephen J. Gardner


President                                                                       Roger Harris


Executive Vice President and Chief Human Resources Officer                      Robert Grasty


Executive Vice President Marketing & Chief Commercial Officer                   Eliot Hamlisch


Executive Vice President General Counsel and Corporate Secretary                William Herrmann


Executive Vice President Capital Delivery                                       Laura Mason


Executive Vice President Strategy, Planning, and Accessibility                  Jennifer Mitchell


Executive Vice President and Chief Safety Officer                               Steve Predmore


Executive Vice President Service Delivery and Operations                        Gerhard Williams


Executive Vice President, Business Transformation and Chief Financial Officer   Tracie Winbigler


Executive Vice President Digital Technology and Innovation                      Christian Zacariassen


Vice President Government Affairs and Corporate Communications                  Bruno Maestri
https://www.amtrak.com/board-of-directors



EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE


 PRESIDENT                                         Stephen J. Gardner




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Commercial                                        Roger Harris


 Executive                                         Stephen J. Gardner


 Financial                                         Tracie Winbigler


 Human Resources                                   Qiana Spain


 Safety                                            Steve Predmore




 EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENTS                         Eleanor D. Acheson


                                                   Steve Predmore


                                                   Qiana Spain


                                                   Tracie Winbigler


 Capital Delivery                                  Laura Mason


 Digital Technology and Innovation                 Christian Zacariassen


 Marketing and Revenue                             Roger Harris


 Planning, Technology, and Public Affairs          Stephen J. Gardner


 Service Delivery and Operations                   Scot Naparstek


 Strategy, Planning and Accessibility              Dennis Newman




 VICE PRESIDENT


 Government Affairs and Corporate Communications   Bruno Maestri
  Corporate Secretary                                                                         Eleanor D. Acheson


  General Counsel                                                                             Eleanor D. Acheson

https://www.amtrak.com/about-amtrak/executive-leadership.html

  Inspector General                                                                           Kevin H. Winters


http://www.amtrakoig.gov



  The above list of key personnel was updated 3–2022.




The National Railroad Passenger Corporation provides intercity rail passenger service in the United States.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak) was created by the Rail Passenger Service Act of 1970, as

amended (49 U.S.C. 241), and was incorporated under the laws of the District of Columbia. By developing, operating,

and improving U.S. intercity rail passenger service, Amtrak provides a balanced nationwide transportation system.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-84/pdf/STATUTE-84-Pg1327.pdf
For Amtrak's statement of organization, see 49 CFR Part 700.

https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-49/subtitle-B/chapter-VII/part-700?toc=1

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Title 45 of the United States Code (45 U.S.C.) is dedicated to codified statutory material on the subject of "Railroads."

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title45&edition=prelim
Title 49 of the United States Code (49 U.S.C.) is dedicated to codified statutory material on the subject of

"Transportation." Subtitle IV of that Title is dedicated to subject matter dealing with "Interstate Transportation." Part A

(sections 10101–11908) of that Subtitle is dedicated to the subject of rail transportation.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title49/subtitle4/partA&edition=prelim
Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations (49 CFR) is dedicated to the subject of "Transportation." Codified rules and

regulations that are associated with the "the National Railroad Passenger Corporation (Amtrak)" are assigned to

Chapter VII (sections 700.1–700.3) of that Title (49 CFR 700).

https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-49/subtitle-B/chapter-VII

ACTIVITIES
Amtrak operates approximately 300 trains per day, serving over 500 stations in 46 States, over a system of nearly

21,500 route miles. Of this route system, Amtrak owns about 530 route miles in the Northeast and several other small

track segments elsewhere in the country.

https://www.amtrak.com/about-amtrak/amtrak-facts.html
Amtrak owns or leases its stations and owns its repair and maintenance facilities. The Corporation employs a total

workforce of approximately 17,000 and provides all reservation, station, and onboard service staffs, as well as train and

engine operating crews. Outside the Northeast Corridor, Amtrak has contracts with privately and publicly owned

railroads to operate on their track. These railroads are responsible for the condition of the roadbed and for

coordinating the flow of traffic.

https://www.amtrak.com/about-amtrak
In fiscal year 2021, customers made more than 12 million trips on Amtrak trains. On an average day, customers made

more than 33,300 trips. On behalf of 20 agencies in 17 States, Amtrak is a contract operator for 28 short-distance (less

than 750 miles) routes. It also runs commuter trains under contract with several commuter agencies.

https://www.amtrak.com/content/dam/projects/dotcom/english/public/documents/corporate/nationalfactsheets/Amtr
ak-Company-Profile-FY2021-030922.pdf
Although Amtrak's basic route system was originally designated by the Secretary of Transportation in 1971,

modifications have been made to the Amtrak system and to individual routes that have resulted in more efficient and

cost-effective operations. In 2021, the Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA) was approved. It provides Amtrak

with a $22 billion level of investment to advance state-of-good-repair capital projects and fleet acquisitions. It also

provides the Federal Railroad Administration with $44 billion for grants to Amtrak, States, and others for rail projects.

Together, these provisions represent the largest investment of its kind since Amtrak began operations.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-117publ58/pdf/PLAW-117publ58.pdf



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
Amtrak provides an online procurement portal to foster business partnerships.

https://procurement.amtrak.com

Career Opportunities
Amtrak employs more than 20,000 professionals in a variety of career fields.

https://jobs.amtrak.com

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Amtrak maintains an online FOIA library. Phone, 202-906-3741.

https://www.amtrak.com/servlet/ContentServer?c=Page&pagename=am%2FLayout&cid=1241267362261

Great American Stations
The Great American Stations Project educates communities on the benefits of redeveloping train stations, offers tools

to community leaders for preserving their stations, and provides the appropriate Amtrak resources.

http://www.greatamericanstations.com

History
For a fast way to learn how the U.S. Congress and its passage of key legislation have affected Amtrak, how Amtrak's
    environmental efforts have evolved, and when Amtrak added service to a local or regional community, visit Amtrak's

    "Historic Timeline" web page.

    https://history.amtrak.com/amtraks-history/historic-timeline

    Kids Depot
    "The Kids Depot" website features a learning zone, park, playground, station, treehouse, workshop, and movies!

    https://www.amtrak.com/media/KidsDepot/KidsDepot.html

    Oversight
    Amtrak's Office of the Inspector General posts reports and data on Oversight.gov, a text-searchable repository of

    reports that Federal Inspectors General publish. The Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency

    operates and maintains the website to increase public access to independent and authoritative information on the

    Federal Government.

    https://oversight.gov

    Social Media
    Amtrak has a Facebook account.

    http://www.facebook.com/Amtrak
    Amtrak posts photos on its Instagram web page.

    http://www.instagram.com/amtrak
    Amtrak tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    http://twitter.com/Amtrak

    Store
    Official Amtrak merchandise—adult apparel, calendars, headwear, posters, and toys—may be purchased online.

    http://store.amtrak.com

    Train Tracker
    A train may be tracked online by using the train name, train number, or train station.

    https://www.amtrak.com/trainlocationmap
    http://www.amtrak.com

        For further information, contact the Government Affairs Department, Amtrak, 1 Massachusetts Avenue
        NW., Washington, DC 20001. Phone, 202-906-3918.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                National Science Foundation




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION
    4201 Wilson Boulevard, Arlington, VA 22230


    703-292-5111

    TDD, 800-281-8749

    http://www.nsf.gov | Email: info@nsf.gov




    NATIONAL SCIENCE BOARD
https://www.nsf.gov/nsb/members/index.jsp

 Ex officio member                          France A. Córdova




Terms Expiring in 2020


                                            John L. Anderson


                                            Roger N. Beachy


                                            Vicki L. Chandler


                                            Robert M. Groves


                                            James S. Jackson


                                            Sethuraman Panchanathan


                                            George P. Peterson


 Chair                                      Diane L. Souvaine




Terms Expiring in 2022


                                            Arthur Bienenstock


                                            W. Kent Fuchs


                                            W. Carl Lineberger


                                            Victor R. McCrary


                                            Emilio F. Moran


 Vice Chair                                 Ellen Ochoa


                                            Julia M. Phillips


                                            Anneila I. Sargent




Terms Expiring in 2024
                                                      Maureen L. Condic


                                                      Suresh V. Garimella


                                                      Steven Leath


                                                      Daniel A. Reed


                                                      Geraldine L. Richmond


                                                      S. Alan Stern


                                                      Stephen H. Willard


                                                      Maria T. Zuber

https://www.nsf.gov/nsb/members/terms.jsp

  Executive Officer to the National Science Board     John J. Veysey II




  Inspector General                                   Allison C. Lerner


https://www.nsf.gov/staff/staff_bio.jsp?lan=alerner



NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION

https://www.nsf.gov/staff/execlist.jsp



Office of the Director (OD)


  DIRECTOR                                            France A. Córdova


  Deputy Director                                     (vacancy)




  CHIEF OFFICERS


  Information                                         Dorothy Aronson


  Operating                                           F. Fleming Crim
  OFFICE HEADS


  Diversity and Inclusion                            Rhonda J. Davis


  General Counsel                                    Lawrence Rudolph


  Integrative Activities                             Suzanne Iacono


  International Science and Engineering              Rebecca S. Keiser


  Legislative and Public Affairs                     Amanda H. Greenwell

https://www.nsf.gov/od



OAD Directorates *


  ASSISTANT DIRECTORS


  Biological Sciences                                Joanne S. Tornow


  Computer and Information Science and Engineering   Erwin Gianchandani


  Education and Human Resources                      Karen A. Marrongelle


  Engineering                                        Dawn Tilbury


  Geosciences                                        William E. Easterling


  Mathematical and Physical Sciences                 Anne Kinney


  Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences          Arthur W. Lupia

https://www.nsf.gov/staff/orglist.jsp



OAD Offices *


  CHIEF OFFICERS


  Financial                                          Teresa Grancorvitz


  Human Capital                                      Wonzie L. Gardner




  OFFICE HEADS
  Budget, Finance, and Award Management                                                   Teresa Grancorvitz


  Information and Resource Management                                                     Wonzie L. Gardner




  * OAD is an abbreviation for Office of Assistant Director.


  The above list of key personnel was updated 11–2019.



The National Science Foundation supports research and education to advance science and engineering.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On May 10, 1950, President Harry S. Truman approved "an act to promote the progress of science; to advance the

national health, prosperity, and welfare; to secure the national defense; and for other purposes." This statute, which is

commonly cited as the National Science Foundation Act of 1950 (Public Law 81–507), established the National Science

Foundation (NSF) as an independent and executive branch agency. The NSF consists of a National Science Board

(NSB) and a Director.

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/81st-congress/session-2/c81s2ch171.pdf
Descriptions of the NSF's establishment, composition, functions, purpose, research facilities, and other statutory

information are codified in chapter 16, sections 1861–1887, of 42 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title42/chapter16&edition=prelim
The NSB establishes the policies of the NSF. The President appoints each of the 24 members of the Board to a term of

6 years. Appointees have earned distinguished reputations of service in the fields of agriculture, education,

engineering, research management, public affairs, and the basic, medical, or social sciences. They also have an outlook

that broadly represents that of national science and engineering leadership. The membership is divided into three

groups of eight members; the terms of each group are staggered and expire every 2 years. Any member, other than

the Director, who has served on the Board for 12 consecutive years is ineligible for reappointment during the 2-year

period following the 12th year. The Board elects its Chair and vice chair every 2 years. The election takes place in an

even-numbered year at the annual meeting (42 U.S.C. 1863).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title42-section1863&num=0&edition=prelim
The President, by the advice and with the consent of the Senate, appoints the Director for a term of 6 years. Before

making his or her selection, the President must give the Board an opportunity to recommend candidates for

consideration (42 U.S.C. 1864). As an ex officio member of the Board, the NSF Director is coordinate with the other

Board members, except with respect to compensation and tenure. The Director is a voting member of the Board and

is eligible to serve as its Chair or vice chair if elected (42 U.S.C. 1863).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title42-section1864&num=0&edition=prelim
The NSF publishes its statements of organization in the "Federal Register" as notices:


58 FR 7587–7595 (8 FEB 1993)

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1993-02-08/pdf/FR-1993-02-08.pdf#page=121
58 FR 30819 ( 27 MAY 1993)

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1993-05-27/pdf/FR-1993-05-27.pdf#page=135
59 FR 22690 (2 MAY 1994)

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1994-05-02/pdf/FR-1994-05-02.pdf#page=210
60 FR 52431 (6 OCT 1995)

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1995-10-06/pdf/95-24895.pdf#page=1
The agency's organizational chart is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading on the

"NSF Organization List" web page.

https://www.nsf.gov/staff/organizational_chart.pdf



ACTIVITIES
The NSF initiates and supports fundamental, long-term, merit-selected research in the scientific and engineering

disciplines through grants, contracts, and other agreements that are awarded to universities, colleges, academic

consortia, and nonprofit and small business institutions. Most of this research attempts to answer scientific and

engineering questions of fundamental life processes, natural laws and phenomena, fundamental processes that

influence the human environment, and the forces that affect people as members of society, as well as the behavior of

society as a whole.

https://www.nsf.gov/about
The NSF encourages cooperative efforts involving universities, industries, and government. It also promotes research

and development for better products and services that improve the quality of life and stimulate economic growth.

https://www.nsf.gov/about/what.jsp
The NSF cultivates talent by supporting undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. It

administers special programs to identify and encourage participation of underrepresented groups in science and

technology and to strengthen research capability at small institutions and businesses and at colleges and universities.

https://www.nsf.gov/od/broadeningparticipation/bp.jsp
It supports major national and international science and engineering activities, including the U.S. Antarctic program,

ocean drilling program, and global geoscience studies. Cooperative scientific and engineering research activities

support exchange programs for American and foreign scientists and engineers, execution of jointly designed research

projects, participation in international science and engineering organizational activities, and travel to international

conferences.

https://www.nsf.gov/dir/index.jsp?org=OISE
Contracts and cooperative agreements with national centers allow qualified scientists and engineers access to large

facilities. The NSF supports national centers that are associated with astronomy and atmospheric sciences, biological

and engineering research, science and technology, supercomputers, and long-term ecological research sites.
The agency's science and engineering education activities include grants for research and development of instructional

materials for students and teachers and the application of advanced technologies to education. Grants also are

available for teacher preparation and enhancement and informal science education activities. Funding is provided for

college science instrumentation, course and curriculum improvement, faculty and student activities, and minority

resource centers. The NSF also supports studies of the status of math, science, and engineering education.

https://www.nsf.gov/funding/aboutfunding.jsp
The Vannevar Bush Award is given annually to an outstanding contributor to the welfare of the Nation and mankind

through public service in science and technology. The Alan T. Waterman Award is given annually to a promising

young scientist or engineer to support research and study. The NSF also presents its Public Service Award to one

individual and to one company, corporation, or organization for increasing public understanding of science or

engineering through public service in areas other than research. The NSF administratively supports the President's

Committee on the National Medal of Science.

https://www.nsf.gov/awards/presidential.jsp



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
An A-Z index to find funding opportunities by title is available on the NSF website.

https://www.nsf.gov/funding/azindex.jsp

Archived Records
NSF records are referenced in the "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States." The Guide

is accessible online, and NSF records have been assigned to Record Group 307.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/307.html

At a Glance
The "At a Glance" web page provides a convenient overview of NSF activities, partners, and personnel.

https://www.nsf.gov/about/glance.jsp

Awards
The NSF funds science and engineering research and education through contracts, cooperative agreements, and

grants. The Foundation provides approximately 20 percent of the Federal support that academic institutions receive

for basic research.

http://www.nsf.gov/awards/about.jsp
The abstract, institutions, names, programs, title, and other information associated with an award may be found using

one search box on the NSF website.

https://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch

Board and Committee Meetings
Webcasts of NSB open sessions and committee meetings that are held in Arlington, VA, remain available for at least 1
year after the event. Transcripts of closed sessions of the NSB, its committees, and other subentities are available upon

request by email.

http://www.nsf.gov/nsb/meetings | Email: nationalsciencebrd@nsf.gov

Business Opportunities
The NSF publicizes contracting and subcontracting opportunities in the "Commerce Business Daily" and other

appropriate publications. Organizations seeking contract work should contact either the Division of Acquisition and

Cooperative Support or the Division of Administrative Services, National Science Foundation, Arlington, VA 22230.


Division of Acquisition and Cooperative Support. Phone, 703-292-8240.

http://www.nsf.gov/bfa/dcca/index.jsp
Division of Administrative Services. Phone, 703-292-8190.

http://www.nsf.gov/oirm/das

Career Opportunities
To carry out its mission, the NSF relies on educators, engineers, mathematicians, program directors, and statisticians,

as well as on professionals with administrative, business, and management backgrounds. The NSF also offers career

opportunities—internship and recent graduates programs and the Presidential Management Fellows program—for

students and recent graduates.

http://www.nsf.gov/careers
In 2018, the NSF ranked 8th among 27 midsize Government agencies in the Best Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/NF00

Climate Change
NSF Public Affairs publishes current research news on the effects of climate change on diverse ecosystems like coral

reefs, grasslands, and the Southern Ocean of the Antarctic.


—on coral reefs

https://www.nsf.gov/discoveries/disc_summ.jsp?cntn_id=299144
—on grasslands

https://www.nsf.gov/discoveries/disc_summ.jsp?cntn_id=299102
—on the Southern Ocean

https://www.nsf.gov/discoveries/disc_summ.jsp?cntn_id=297719

Contact
The "Contact NSF" web page has email addresses and phone numbers.

https://www.nsf.gov/help/contact.jsp | Email: info@nsf.gov
The NSF has a separate web page for media inquiries. Phone, 703-292-7090.

https://www.nsf.gov/news/newsroom.jsp | Email: media@nsf.gov

Fellowships
Consult the online "Guide to Programs / Browse Funding Opportunities" and appropriate announcements and

brochures for postdoctoral fellowship opportunities that may be available through some NSF divisions. Beginning

graduate and minority graduate students wanting to apply for fellowships should contact the Directorate for Education

and Human Resources. Phone, 703-292-8600.

http://www.nsf.gov/funding/browse_all_funding.jsp

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
A request for agency records should be submitted in accordance with the NSF's FOIA regulation (45 CFR 612). A

request should be clearly labeled as "FOIA REQUEST" and be addressed to the FOIA Officer, Office of General

Counsel, National Science Foundation, Room 1265, Arlington, VA 22230. Phone, 703-292-8060. Fax, 703-292-9242.

http://www.nsf.gov/policies/foia.jsp | Email: foia@nsf.gov

Grants
The "Grants.gov Application Guide" helps applicants prepare NSF applications and submit them using Grant.gov. The

current guide is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.nsf.gov/publications/pub_summ.jsp?ods_key=grantsgovguide

Mobile Software Applications (Apps)
The NSF Science Zone app and Science360 Radio app are accessible through the NSF website.

https://www.nsf.gov/news/special_reports/apps/index.jsp

Multimedia Gallery
The NSF maintains an online multimedia gallery.

https://www.nsf.gov/news/mmg

News Search
A visitor to the NSF website may search an assortment of news types by keyword or title.

https://www.nsf.gov/news/search.jsp

Office of Inspector General (OIG)
NSF employees, grantees, principal investigators, and others working on NSF programs, grants, or contracts are well-

positioned to detect problems. Providing information about allegations or suspicions of abuse, fraud, mismanagement,

research misconduct, unnecessary Government expenditures, and waste helps the OIG improve management and

reduce fraud.

https://www.nsf.gov/oig/report-fraud | Email: oig@nsf.gov

Open Government
To increase collaboration, public participation, and transparency, the NSF maintains an Open Government web page

and welcomes ideas and suggestions from the public.

https://www.nsf.gov/open

Proposal Status
The proposal status service of Research.gov makes a single online site available for principal investigators and

sponsored projects office staff to check current status information for proposals that have been submitted to the NSF

via Grants.gov or FastLane.

https://www.research.gov/research-portal/appmanager/base/desktop?
_nfpb=true&_pageLabel=research_node_display&_nodePath=/researchGov/Service/Desktop/grantsapplicationstatus.h
tml

Publications
The NSF maintains an online document system to support the electronic dissemination of its documents. The online

library contains thousands of documents that may be downloaded free of charge. Some NSF publications are available

only in print, and others (e.g., the "Grant Proposal Guide" and "Award and Administration Guide") may be inconvenient

to download. To obtain these publications in hardcopy, contact the NSF Publications Clearinghouse in Arlington, VA.

Phone, 703-292-7827.

http://www.nsf.gov/publications | Email: pubinfo@nsf.gov
Search or browse the online document library.

http://www.nsf.gov/publications/ods

Reading Room
NSF policy documents and staff instructions, as well as current indexes, are available to the public for inspection and

copying. To gain access to the collection, a visitor must schedule an appointment in advance with the library, which is

open on weekdays, excluding Federal holidays, 8:00 a.m.–4 p.m. The reading room is located in the National Science

Foundation Library, Room 225, Arlington, VA 22230. Phone, 703-292-7830.

Email: library@nsf.gov

Small Business Support
The Office of Small Business Research and Development informs small businesses with science and technology

research capabilities about NSF support that could benefit them. The Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business

Utilization oversees agency compliance with the provisions of the Small Business Act and the Small Business

Investment Act of 1958, as amended. Phone, 703-292-8050.


The Small Business Innovation Research and Technology Transfer program helps startups and small businesses carry

out scientific research and development.

http://www.nsf.gov/eng/iip/sbir/home.jsp

Social Media
The NSF uses social media sites and tools to disseminate news about research funds, funding opportunities, job

openings, and more. Follow the NSF on Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, OpenNSF, Pinterest, Twitter, Wordpress, and

YouTube.

https://www.nsf.gov/social

Staff Directory
The "Staff Directory" web page has a search box that visitors can use to locate NSF employees in an electronic
     database. A visitor also can browse staff by NSF organization.

     https://www.nsf.gov/staff

        The Sources of Information were updated 11–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                           National Transportation Safety Board




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD
    490 L'Enfant Plaza SW., Washington, DC 20594


    202-314-6000

    http://www.ntsb.gov




    Board Members
 CHAIR                                                              Robert L. Sumwalt III


 Vice Chair                                                         Bruce Landsberg




                                                                    Thomas B. Chapman


                                                                    Michael E. Graham


                                                                    Jennifer L. Homendy

https://www.ntsb.gov/about/board/Pages/default.aspx



Office Heads Reporting to the Board


 Chief Financial Officer                                            Edward Benthall




 DIRECTORS


 Office of Equal Employment Opportunity, Diversity, and Inclusion   Fara D. Guest


 Office of Safety Recommendations and Communications                Dolline Hatchett




 General Counsel                                                    Kathleen Silbaugh




 MANAGING DIRECTOR                                                  Sharon Bryson




Office Heads Reporting to the Managing Director


 CHIEFS


 Administrative Law Judge                                           Alfonso J. Montaño


 Information Officer                                                Michael Anthony




 DIRECTORS
  Office of Administration                                                              Susan Kantrowitz


  Office of Aviation Safety                                                             Dana Schulze


  Office of Highway Safety                                                              Robert J. Molloy


  Office of Marine Safety                                                               Morgan Turrell


  Office of Railroad, Pipeline, and Hazardous Materials Investigations                  Robert J. Hall


  Office of Research and Engineering                                                    James Ritter

https://www.ntsb.gov/about/organization/Pages/default.aspx



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2021.



The National Transportation Safety Board investigates accidents, conducts studies, and makes recommendations on

safety to Government agencies, the transportation industry, and others.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) was established in 1967. On April 1, 1975, the Independent Safety

Board Act of 1974 (49 U.S.C. 1111) reestablished the NTSB as an independent agency outside the Department of

Transportation.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-88/pdf/STATUTE-88-Pg2156.pdf
The NTSB consists of five members whom the President appoints for 5-year terms with the advice and by the consent

of the Senate. The President designates two of these members as Chair and Vice Chair of the Board for 2-year terms.

The President designates the Chair also with the advice and by the consent of the Senate.

https://www.ntsb.gov/about/organization/Pages/default.aspx
The NTSB's statement of organization has been assigned to part 800 of 49 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=276925d8bae986aa729b404e5fe1ac4b&mc=true&node=pt49.7.800&rgn=div5
The NTSB posts its organizational chart (NOV 2020) in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.ntsb.gov/about/organization/Documents/NTSB-org-chart.pdf



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material affecting the NTSB has been codified and assigned to sections 1111–1155 of 49 U.S.C. Chapter 11 of

Title 49 is dedicated to the "National Transportation Safety Board."

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title49/subtitle2/chapter11&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that are associated with the NTSB have been codified and assigned to Chapter VIII of Subtitle B
in 49 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=0f3dbab2ad23e6338a8ed96af83a7895&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title49/49chapterVIII.tpl



ACTIVITIES

Accident Investigation
The NTSB investigates, determines probable cause, makes safety recommendations, and reports the facts and

circumstances of the following types of accidents: U.S. civil aviation and certain public-use aircraft accidents; railroad

accidents involving a fatality, substantial property damage, or a passenger train; pipeline accidents involving a fatality,

substantial property damage, or significant harm to the environment; highway accidents (including railroad grade-

crossing accidents) that the NTSB selects in cooperation with the States; major marine casualties and accidents

involving a public vessel and a nonpublic vessel; certain accidents involving hazardous materials; and other

transportation accidents that are catastrophic, caused by recurring problems, or otherwise should be investigated in

the judgment of the Board.

https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/process/Pages/default.aspx

Certificate, Civil Penalty, and License Appeal
On appeal, the NTSB reviews the suspension, amendment, modification, revocation, or denial of certain certificates,

licenses, and assessments of civil penalties issued by the Secretary of Transportation. The NTSB also reviews, on appeal

from the orders of any administrative law judge, decisions of the Commandant of the Coast Guard that revoke,

suspend, or deny certain licenses, certificates, documents, and registers.

http://www.ntsb.gov/legal/alj/Pages/default.aspx

Disaster Assistance
The NTSB coordinates the resources of the Federal Government and other organizations to support the efforts of local

and State governments and transportation carriers to meet the needs of disaster victims and their families. It assists in

making Federal resources available to local authorities and to air, rail, and other transportation carriers.

https://www.ntsb.gov/tda/Pages/default.aspx

Safety Problem Identification
The NTSB makes recommendations on matters of transportation safety. It reduces the severity and number of

transportation accidents by conducting safety studies and special investigations; assessing accident investigation

techniques and publishing recommended procedures; establishing regulatory requirements for reporting accidents;

evaluating the transportation safety consciousness and efficacy of other Government agencies in accident prevention;

evaluating safeguards and procedures for the transportation of hazardous materials and the performance of other

Government agencies charged with ensuring the safe transportation of such materials; and reporting annually to the

Congress on its activities.

http://www.ntsb.gov/safety/Pages/default.aspx
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Advocacy Priorities
The "Most Wanted List" raises awareness of what may be done to reduce the number of transportation accidents and

the loss of life caused by them.

https://www.ntsb.gov/safety/mwl/Pages/default.aspx

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that NTSB records have been

assigned to record group 400. The guide does not contain, however, a description that is currently associated with this

record group.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/301-to-400.html
The Department of Transportation (DOT) administered the NTSB until the U.S. Congress designated it as an

independent agency by passing the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 on January 3, 1975. General records of the

DOT have been assigned to record group 398.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/398.html

Business Opportunities
Contractors must be registered with the Federal Contractor Registry to do business with the NTSB.

https://www.ntsb.gov/about/organization/Pages/acquisitions.aspx

Career Opportunities
Information on career paths at the NTSB is available on its website. For more information, contact the Human

Resources Division, National Transportation Safety Board, Washington, DC 20594. Phone, 202-314-6230.

http://www.ntsb.gov/about/employment/Pages/Careers.aspx
In 2019, the NTSB ranked 8th among 28 small Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/TB00

Contact Information
The "Contact the National Transportation Safety Board" web page contains general contact information and regional

contact information for aviation safety offices.

https://www.ntsb.gov/about/Pages/OfficeLocation.aspx
The "Media Resources" web page contains contact information and resources for members of the media.

https://www.ntsb.gov/news/Pages/media_resources.aspx

Federal Register
Documents that the NTSB recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/national-transportation-safety-board

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information that the records of

executive branch agencies contain. This right to access is limited, however, when the desired information is shielded

from disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute or three special law enforcement record

exclusions.

https://www.ntsb.gov/about/foia/Pages/default.aspx

History
On December 17, 1903, the Wright "Flyer" became the first powered, heavier-than-air, piloted machine to achieve

flight that was controlled and sustained. Twenty-three years later, the U.S. Congress charged the Department of

Commerce with investigating the causes of aircraft accidents. Today, NTSB investigators are on call around-the-clock,

every day of the year, to investigate significant aviation and surface transportation accidents wherever they may occur.

To learn more of the NTSB's story, visit the "History of the National Transportation Safety Board" web page.

https://www.ntsb.gov/about/history/Pages/default.aspx

Investigations
The NTSB maintains a database of major aviation, highway, marine, pipeline, and railroad investigations, both ongoing

and completed, on its website.

https://www.ntsb.gov/investigations/Pages/All-Investigations.aspx

Open Government
The NTSB supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

https://www.ntsb.gov/about/employment/Pages/open.aspx

Publications
Publications are free of charge for the following categories of subscribers: Federal, State, or local transportation

agencies; international transportation organizations or foreign governments; educational institutions or public libraries;

nonprofit public safety organizations; and the news media. To receive copies of NTSB publications, persons in these

categories should contact the Records Management Division, National Transportation Safety Board, Washington, DC

20594. Phone, 202-314-6551. All other persons may download NTSB publications from the agency’s website, or

purchase NTSB publications from the National Technical Information Service, 5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA

22161. To place an order, call the subscription unit at 703-487-4630 or the sales desk at 703-487-4768. More

information is available on the NTSB website.

http://www.ntsb.gov/publications/Pages/default.aspx

Reading Room
The NTSB's public reference room is available for record inspection and photocopying. It is located on the 6th floor at

the Board's Washington, DC, headquarters and is open on weekdays from 8:45 a.m. to 4:45 p.m. Requests for access

to public records should be made in person at the guard desk. Phone, 202-314-6551 or 800-877-6799.


Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.
     https://www.ntsb.gov/Pages/sitemap.aspx

     Social Media
     The NTSB has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/NTSBgov
     The NTSB tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/ntsb
     The NTSB posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/NTSBgov

     Training Center
     NTSB investigators and others from the transportation community improve their practice of accident investigation

     techniques at the training center. Its curriculum promotes independent, objective, and technically advanced accident

     investigations to raise levels of safety in all modes of transportation. Forums and symposia are open to the public;

     however, certain courses are limited to those who may be involved in an NTSB accident investigation or who are

     members of the emergency response community. Governmental and public organizations may reserve the training

     and conference center for events. Phone, 571-223-3900.

     https://www.ntsb.gov/Training_Center/Pages/TrainingCenter.aspx | Email: TCReservations@ntsb.gov

        The Sources of Information were updated 6–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                              Nuclear Regulatory Commission




The United States Government Manual




     NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION
    Washington, DC 20555


    301-415-7000

    http://www.nrc.gov | Email: opa.resource@nrc.gov


      CHAIR                                                                                 Kristine L. Svinicki


      Commissioner                                                                          Jeffrey M. Baran


      Commissioner                                                                          Stephen G. Burns
 Commissioner                                                                         (vacancy)


 Commissioner                                                                         (vacancy)




 Chief Administrative Judge, Atomic Safety and Licensing Board Panel                  E. Roy Hawkens


 Chief Financial Officer                                                              Maureen E. Wylie


 Chief Information Officer                                                            David Nelson


 Deputy Executive Director for Materials, Waste, Research, State, Tribal and
                                                                                      Fredrick Brown
 Compliance Programs


 Deputy Executive Director for Reactor and Preparedness Programs                      Michael R. Johnson


 Director, Office of Commission Appellate Adjudication                                Brooke Poole Clark


 Director, Office of Congressional Affairs                                            Eugene Dacus


 Director, Office of International Programs                                           Nader L. Mamish


 Director, Office of Public Affairs                                                   David A. Castelveter


 Executive Director, Advisory Committee on Reactor Safeguards                         Andrea Veil


 Executive Director for Operations                                                    Victor M. McCree


 General Counsel                                                                      Margret M. Doane


 Inspector General                                                                    Hubert T. Bell, Jr.


 Secretary of the Commission                                                          Annette L. Vietti-Cook




 [For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations,
 Title 10, Part I]




The above list of key personnel was updated 06–2017.

The Nuclear Regulatory Commission licenses and regulates civilian use of nuclear energy to protect public health and

safety and the environment.

Organizational Chart
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) was established as an independent regulatory agency under the provisions

of the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. 5801 et seq.) and Executive Order 11834 of January 15, 1975. All

licensing and related regulatory functions formerly assigned to the Atomic Energy Commission were transferred to the

Nuclear Regulatory Commission.

http://www.nrc.gov/about-nrc/governing-laws.html
Five Commissioners whom the President appoints and Senate confirms for 5-year terms govern the NRC. The

President appoints one of them to be the Commission's Chair and official spokesperson.


The NRC's major program components are the Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation, the Office of New Reactors, the

Office of Nuclear Material Safety and Safeguards, the Office of Federal and State Materials and Environmental

Management Programs, and the Office of Nuclear Regulatory Research. Headquartered in Rockville, Maryland, the

NRC has four regional offices.


The Commission ensures that nuclear materials and facilities for civilian use are managed in a manner consistent with

public health and safety, environmental quality, national security, and antitrust laws. The NRC centers most of its efforts

on regulating the use of nuclear energy to generate electric power.

http://www.nrc.gov/about-nrc/organization.html



ACTIVITIES
The NRC is primarily responsible for the following functions: licensing the construction, operation, and closure of

nuclear reactors and other nuclear facilities, such as nuclear fuel cycle facilities, low-level radioactive waste disposal

sites under NRC jurisdiction, the geologic repository for high-level radioactive waste, and nonpower test and research

reactors; licensing the possession, use, processing, handling, and export of nuclear material; licensing the operators of

nuclear power and nonpower test and research reactors; inspecting licensed facilities and activities; conducting the

U.S. Government research program on light-water reactor safety; developing and implementing rules and regulations

that govern licensed nuclear activities; investigating nuclear incidents and allegations concerning any matter regulated

by the Commission; maintaining the NRC Incident Response Program; collecting, analyzing, and disseminating

information on the operational safety of commercial nuclear power reactors and certain nonreactor activities;

developing working relationships with the States regarding reactor operations and the regulation of nuclear material;

and assuring that adequate regulatory programs are maintained by States exercising regulatory control over certain

nuclear materials located within their borders.

http://www.nrc.gov/about-nrc/regulatory.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Active Regulatory Guides
Regulatory guides provide guidance to licensees and applicants for implementing parts of the Commission's

regulations, techniques used by NRC staff to evaluate problems or postulated accidents, and data needed by NRC

staff to review applications for permits or licenses. Regulatory guides are issued in 10 broad divisions: antitrust and
financial review, environmental and siting, fuels and materials facilities, materials and plant protection, occupational

health, power reactors, products, research and test reactors, transportation, and general. Active regulatory guides may

be downloaded from the NRC's online library.

http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc-collections/reg-guides

Business Opportunities
The NRC awards contracts to commercial firms, nonprofit organizations, and universities. The agency buys products

and services, including technical assistance and research in nuclear fields, information technology, facility

management, and administrative support.

http://www.nrc.gov/about-nrc/contracting.html

Draft Regulatory Guides
The NRC issues regulatory guides in draft form to solicit public comment and participation in developing regulatory

positions. Draft regulatory guides have not received complete staff review, and, therefore, they do not represent

official NRC staff positions. The public may comment on draft guides and other documents issued in draft form online.

NRC staff considers all comments received during the public comment period. Draft regulatory guides may be

downloaded from the NRC's online library.

http://www.nrc.gov/public-involve/doc-comment.html
http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm.html

Employment
To carry out its mission, the NRC relies heavily on engineers, scientists, and security professionals.

http://www.nrc.gov/about-nrc/employment/opportunities.html
http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/overall/mid

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To request copies of records, use the online "FOIA Request Submittal Form" or contact the FOIA / Privacy Act Officer,

Mail Stop T–5 F09, Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555-0001. Phone, 301-415-7169. Fax, 301-415-

5130.

http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/foia/foia-submittal-form.html

Glossary
The NRC maintains an online glossary.

http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/basic-ref/glossary.html

Microfiche Collections
Selected regional libraries of the U.S. Government Publishing Office Federal Depository Library Program maintain

permanent microfiche collections of Nuclear Regulatory Commission documents released between January 1981 and

October 1999. Contact the Public Document Room for more information. Phone, 301-415-4737 or 800-397-4209. Fax,

301-415-3548.

http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/pdr.html | Email: pdr.resource@nrc.gov

Publications
     The NRC publishes information on licensing and regulation of civilian nuclear facilities and materials, as well as annual

     and periodic reports. Publications and many documents are accessible on the NRC Web site. The U.S. Government

     Publishing Office (GPO) and the National Technical Information Service (NTIS) sell single copies of and subscriptions to

     NRC publications. Contact the GPO bookstore (phone, 202-512-0132) or the NTIS (phone, 888-584-8332 or 703-605-

     6050) for more information.

     http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm.html
     http://www.gpo.gov/about/bookstore.htm | Email: mainbks@gpo.gov
     http://www.ntis.gov | Email: customerservice@ntis.gov

     Public Documents
     The Public Document Room—located on the first floor at One White Flint North, 11555 Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD—

     is open on weekdays, 8 a.m.–4 p.m., except on Federal holidays. The NRC maintains a large collection of documents

     on licensing proceedings and other significant actions. Documents issued prior to October 1999 are available in paper

     or microfiche. After October 1999, documents are available online from the NRC's full-text document management

     system. Most public documents may be reproduced on CD–ROM, microfiche, or paper for a nominal fee. Phone, 301-

     415-4737 or 800-397-4209. Fax, 301-415-3548.

     http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/pdr.html | Email: pdr.resource@nrc.gov
     http://www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/adams.html
     http://www.nrc.gov/about-nrc/contactus.html | Email: opa.resource@nrc.gov

        For further information, contact the Office of Public Affairs, Nuclear Regulatory Commission,
        Washington, DC 20555-0001. Phone, 301-415-8200.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                 Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission




The United States Government Manual




     OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH REVIEW COMMISSION
    1120 Twentieth Street NW., Washington, DC 20036-3457


    202-606-5100

    202-418-3017

    http://www.oshrc.gov




    COMMISSIONERS
  CHAIR                                                                               Cynthia L. Attwood


                                                                                      Amanda W. Laihow


                                                                                      (vacancy)

https://www.oshrc.gov/about/current-commissioners



ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF


  EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR                                                                  Debra A. Hall




  Chief Administrative Law Judge                                                      Covette Rooney


  Executive Secretary                                                                 John X. Cerveny


  General Counsel                                                                     Nadine N. Mancini




  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2021.



The Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission ensures the timely and fair resolution of cases involving the

alleged exposure of American workers to unsafe or unhealthy working conditions.


The Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission is an independent, quasi-judicial agency established by the

Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 U.S.C. 651-678).


The Commission rules on cases when disagreements arise over the results of safety and health inspections performed

by the Department of Labor's Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). Employers have the right to

dispute alleged job safety or health violations that OSHA inspectors find, the penalties that OSHA proposes, and the

time given to correct a hazardous situation.


The Commission posts it organizational chart online in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.oshrc.gov/assets/1/6/Org_Chart_May_12,__2021.pdf
The Occupational Safety and Health Act covers virtually every employer in the country. Its purpose is to reduce

employment-related injuries, illnesses, and deaths of working men and women in the United States. It requires

employers to provide a work environment free from recognized hazards that cause or are likely to cause death or

serious physical harm to their employees. It also requires employers to comply with occupational safety and health

standards promulgated under the act.

http://www.oshrc.gov/about/how-oshrc.html
ACTIVITIES
The Commission adjudicates enforcement actions initiated under the act when they are contested by employers,

employees, or representatives of employees. A case arises when a citation, issued to an employer as the result of an

OSHA inspection, is contested within 15 working days of receipt of the report.


There are two levels of adjudication within the Commission. All cases are first assigned to an administrative law judge.

A hearing is generally held in the community or as close as possible to where the alleged violation occurred. After the

hearing, the judge issues a decision based on findings of fact and conclusions of law.


A substantial number of these decisions become final orders of the Commission. Commission members, however, will

issue the final order if a party petitions the Commission members for review of the judge's decision and the petition is

granted.


After a final order is issued, any party to the case may seek a review of the decision in the U.S. courts of appeals.


The Commission's principal office is in Washington, DC. Administrative law judges are also located in the Atlanta and

Denver regional offices.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
Vacancy announcements are posted online.

http://www.oshrc.gov/job_opportunities/job_opport.html

Decisions
The "Decisions" page contains two online search tools, one for the final decisions of administrative law judges and the

other for the final decisions of the Commission. The administrative law judge decisions start with the year 1993, and

the Commission decisions start with the year 1972. Decisions are available in the form of Hypertext Markup Language

(HTML) and Portable Document Format (PDF) files.

http://www.oshrc.gov/decisions/index.html

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires Federal agencies to disclose records after receiving a proper written request for them. Certain

records, however, are shielded from disclosure by provisions contained within the statute. The Commission's online

FOIA information includes the specific procedures for requesting its records, FOIA-related contact information, and

links to records that are already accessible online. The Commission operates a FOIA requester service center that can

provide information on the status of a submitted request. Phone, 202-606-5724. Fax, 202-606-5417.

http://www.oshrc.gov/foia/index.html

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Commission posts answers to FAQs on its Web site.
    http://www.oshrc.gov/FAQ/index.html

    News
    The Commission posts press releases on its Web site.

    http://www.oshrc.gov/press/press.html

    Open Government
    The Commission supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation,

    and transparency.

    http://www.oshrc.gov/open.html | Email: opengov@oshrc.gov

    Plain Language
    The Plain Writing Act of 2010 requires all Federal agencies to write in a way that produces "clear Government

    communication that the public can understand and use." The Commission solicits public assistance in support of plain

    language: If a document or Web page is unclear, contact the Commission by email and point out the lack of clarity.

    The Commission seeks to ensure that any document that is necessary for obtaining services, that provides information

    on services, or that explains how to comply with a requirement that the Commission administers or enforces is plainly

    written.

    http://www.oshrc.gov/open/plain_writing.html | Email: plain@oshrc.gov

    Publicaciónes en Español
    Publications in Spanish are available online. Phone, 202-606-5400.

    http://www.oshrc.gov/publications/publications_spanish.html

    Publications
    The Commission's publications are accessible online. Copies of them and decisions are also available from the Office

    of the Executive Secretary. Phone, 202-606-5400. Fax, 202-606-5050.

    http://www.oshrc.gov/publications/index.html

    Related Sites
    The Commission posts helpful and informative links to State Internet and other research sites. The Commission is not

    affiliated with the organizations whose links are on its "Related Web Sites" page.

    http://www.oshrc.gov/relatedsites/relatedsites.html
    http://www.oshrc.gov/about/phone-numbers.html

        For further information, contact the Office of the Executive Director, Occupational Safety and Health
        Review Commission, 1120 Twentieth Street NW., Washington, DC 20036-3457. Phone, 202-606-5100. Fax,
        202-418-3017.




Home


The Government of the United States


About
Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                Office of Government Ethics




The United States Government Manual




     OFFICE OF GOVERNMENT ETHICS
    1201 New York Avenue NW., Suite 500, Washington, DC 20005-3917


    202-482-9300

    (TTY) 800-877-8339

    202-482-9237

    http://www.oge.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Emory A. Rounds III
  Chief of Staff / Program Counsel                                                         Shelley K. Finlayson




  Deputy Director, Compliance                                                              Dale A. Christopher


  General Counsel                                                                          David J. Apol




The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.

https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/about_leadership



  [For the Office of Government Ethics statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations,
  Title 5, Part 2600]



The Office of Government Ethics leads and oversees the executive branch program for preventing and resolving conflicts

of interest.


The Office of Government Ethics (OGE) is an executive branch agency established under the Ethics in Government Act

of 1978, as amended (5 U.S.C. app. 401).


With the advice and consent of the Senate, the President appoints the Director for a 5-year term.

https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/Organization



ACTIVITIES
The OGE provides overall leadership and oversight of the executive branch ethics program, which prevents and

resolves conflicts of interest. To carry out its leadership and oversight responsibilities, the Office promulgates and

maintains enforceable standards of ethical conduct for approximately 2.7 million employees in over 130 executive

branch agencies and the White House; oversees a financial disclosure system that reaches approximately 26,000 public

and 380,000 confidential financial disclosure report filers; ensures that executive branch agency ethics programs are in

compliance with applicable ethics laws and regulations; provides education and training to the more than 4,500 ethics

officials throughout the executive branch; conducts outreach to the general public, the private sector, and civil society;

and provides technical assistance to State, local, and foreign governments and international organizations.

https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/Mission+and+Responsibilities



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Advisories
The OGE posts written guidance to executive branch ethics officials and employees online.
https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/All%20Advisories

Education
Educational resources for ethics officials—including Institute for Ethics in Government training videos—are available

online.

https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/Education%20Resources%20for%20Ethics%20Officials

Career Opportunities
The OGE posts vacancy announcements on USAJobs. The Compliance Division seeks agency ethics officials to

participate in rotational details for increasing financial disclosure review proficiency. A detail assignment typically lasts

4–8 weeks, and arrangements can be made to accommodate commitment and schedule.

https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/Careers

Conflict of Interest
The OGE Web site provides links to opinions and other guidance that interpret the conflict of interest laws.

https://www.oge.gov/web/OGE.nsf/Legal%20Interpretation

Dates / Deadlines
The schedule of ethics dates helps executive branch agency ethics officials identify key dates and meet important

deadlines throughout the calendar year.

https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/Dates%20and%20Deadlines

Executive Orders
A list of Executive orders that significantly affected or continue to affect the executive branch ethics program is

available on the OGE's Web site.

https://www.oge.gov/web/OGE.nsf/Executive%20Orders

Financial Disclosure
Appointee, nominee, Presidential, and Vice Presidential public financial disclosure reports and ethics agreements are

available online.

https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/Presidential%20Appointee%20&%20Nominee%20Records
Resources for public financial disclosure are available on the OGE Web site.

https://www.oge.gov/web/OGE.nsf/Public%20Financial%20Disclosure/F8C35F18BF846D1C85257E96006B95B1?
opendocument

Forms
All forms created by the OGE and instructions for downloading them are available online.

https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/OGE+Forms

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Information on how to submit a FOIA request is available online.

https://www.oge.gov/Web/OGE.nsf/Freedom+of+Information+Act+(FOIA)
An electronic reading room contains documents that the OGE has released after multiple FOIA requests or disclosed

proactively. Before making a FOIA request, search the electronic reading room for relevant records that already may

be accessible.

https://www.oge.gov/web/OGE.nsf/Freedom%20of%20Information%20Act%20(FOIA)/B9B880B7B93AF8EF85257EF500
6DAAB6?opendocument

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The OGE answers media FAQs on its Web site.

https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/Media%20Resources/C82EAE759C7C631885257EBC0043366C?opendocument

International Support
The OGE conducts international work under the auspices of the Department of State. In addition to descriptions of its

bilateral and multilateral activities and onsite briefings, the "International Activities" Web pages contain documents that

international visitors most often request, international conference papers and speeches, documents prepared for

anticorruption meetings, links to other information on the fight against public corruption, and a selection of

documents translated into Arabic, Chinese, French, Portuguese, Russian, and Spanish.

https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/International+Activities

Legislative Affairs
The OGE posts budget submissions, correspondence with Congress, information on legislation affecting the executive

branch ethics program, and other legislative materials on its Web site.

https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/Legislative%20Affairs%20&%20Budget

Media
The OGE posts documents and information that members of the media request often. A media liaison is available to

provide additional assistance.

https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/Media%20Resources | Email: ContactOGE@oge.gov

Open Government
The OGE supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/OPEN+GOVERNMENT

Organizational Chart
An organizational chart is available on the "Contact Us" Web page.

https://www.oge.gov/Web/OGE.nsf/Resources/Contact+Us

RSS Feeds
The dates and deadlines RSS feed streams the dates of events like training and deadlines that are relevant to the

management of agency ethics programs. The latest advisories RSS feed streams new education, legal, and program

management advisories.

https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/Resources/RSS%20Feeds
     Site Map
     A site index presents document categories based on their appearance in the Web site's drop-down menus.

     https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/Information/Site+Index?opendocument

     Social Media
     The OGE tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/OfficeGovEthics
     The Institute for Ethics in Government posts videos on the OGE's YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/OGEInstitute
     https://www.oge.gov/web/oge.nsf/Organization/Contact%20Us? | Email: contactoge@oge.gov

        For further information, contact the Office of Government Ethics, Suite 500, 1201 New York Avenue NW.,
        Washington, DC 20005-3917. Phone, 202-482-9300. TTY, 800-877-8339. Fax, 202-482-9237.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                             Office of Personnel Management




The United States Government Manual




     OFFICE OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT
    1900 E Street NW., Washington, DC 20415-0001


    202-606-1800

    TTY, 202-606-2532

    http://www.opm.gov




    Executive Offices
 DIRECTOR                                                                           Charles Ezell, Acting


 Deputy Director                                                                    (vacancy)


 Chief of Staff                                                                     Amanda Scales




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Management                                                                         Katie Malague


 Privacy                                                                            Kirsten Moncada




 DIRECTORS


 Communications                                                                     Laura Goulding, Acting


 Congressional, Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs                           Alan Alonso, Acting


 Executive Secretariat / Resource Management                                        John Pettit, Acting


 Human Capital Data Management and Modernization                                    John Gill




 CHIEF HUMAN CAPITAL OFFICERS COUNCIL


 Executive Director                                                                 Colleen Heller-Stein




 General Counsel                                                                    Andrew Kloster

https://www.opm.gov/about-us/our-people-organization/organizational-contacts/office-of-the-director



Program Offices


 ASSOCIATE DIRECTORS


 Workforce Policy and Innovation                                                    Veronica Hinton


 Human Resources Solutions                                                          Dianna Saxman


 Merit System Accountability and Compliance                                         Ana Mazzi, Acting
 Retirement Services                                                                Margaret Pearson




 DIRECTORS


 Healthcare and Insurance                                                           Danny Stevens


 Suitability Executive Agent Programs                                               Joseph Knouff




Mission Support Services


 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Financial                                                                          Melissa Ford


 Information                                                                        Greg Hogan




 DIRECTORS


 Equal Employment Opportunity                                                       Lashonn M. Woodland


 Facilities, Security and Emergency Management                                      (vacancy)


 Human Resources                                                                    Carmen Garcia




 Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization                                       Desmond Brown




https://www.opm.gov/about-us/our-people-organization/organizational-contacts



Office of the Inspector General


 Inspector General                                                                  Norbert E. Vint, Acting

https://www.opm.gov/about-us/our-people-organization/organizational-contacts/office-of-inspector-general
Federal Prevailing Rate Advisory Committee


  Chair                                                                                (vacancy)

https://www.opm.gov/about-us/our-people-organization/organizational-contacts/federal-prevailing-rate-advisory-
committee



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2025.



OPM assesses human capital management Governmentwide and within agencies to gather information for policy

development and program refinement, ensure compliance with law and regulation, and enhance agency capability for

human resources management accountability. Agency accountability systems help ensure that human capital decisions

are consistent with merit principles and that human capital strategies are aligned with mission accomplishment. OPM

also works with agencies to find better and more strategic ways to manage Federal human capital




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) was created as an independent establishment by Reorganization Plan

No. 2 of 1978, pursuant to Executive Order 12107, which President James E. Carter signed on December 28, 1978. The

Executive order designated January 1, 1979, as the effective date for the establishment of the OPM. The plan and the

order transferred many of the U.S. Civil Service Commission's former functions to the OPM. Reorganization Plan No. 2

of 1978 (92 Stat. 3783) https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-92/pdf/STATUTE-92-Pg3783.pdf Executive

Order 12107 (44 FR 1055–1064) https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1979-01-03/pdf/FR-1979-01-03.pdf The OPM

published its statement of organization as a notice in the Federal Register on January 5, 1979 (44 FR 1501–1502).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1979-01-05/pdf/FR-1979-01-05.pdf The OPM included an organizational

chart on page 12 of its "Annual Performance Report—Fiscal Year 2020," which was published in January of 2021.

https://www.opm.gov/about-us/budget-performance/performance/2020-annual-performance-report.pdf


The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) was created as an independent establishment by Reorganization Plan

No. 2 of 1978, pursuant to Executive Order 12107, which President James E. Carter signed on December 28, 1978. The

Executive order designated January 1, 1979, as the effective date for the establishment of the OPM. The plan and the

order transferred many of the U.S. Civil Service Commission's former functions to the OPM.


Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1978 (92 Stat. 3783)

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-92/pdf/STATUTE-92-Pg3783.pdf
Executive Order 12107 (44 FR 1055–1064)

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1979-01-03/pdf/FR-1979-01-03.pdf
The OPM published its statement of organization as a notice in the Federal Register on January 5, 1979 (44 FR 1501–

1502).
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1979-01-05/pdf/FR-1979-01-05.pdf
The OPM included an organizational chart on page 12 of its "Annual Performance Report—Fiscal Year 2020," which

was published in January of 2021.

https://www.opm.gov/about-us/budget-performance/performance/2020-annual-performance-report.pdf



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1978 has been codified and assigned to the appendix of 5 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title5a-node84-leaf186&num=0&edition=prelim

Statutory material affecting the OPM has been codified and assigned to Chapter 11 (sections 1101–1105) of 5 U.S.C. Title

5 is dedicated to the topic of "Government Organization and Employees," and Chapter 11 of that title deals with the

"Office            of            Personnel               Management."              https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?

path=/prelim@title5/part2/chapter11&edition=prelim Rules and regulations that are associated with the OPM have

been codified and assigned to Chapter I (parts 1–1199) of 5 CFR. Title 5 is dedicated to rules and regulations affecting

"Administrative                            Personnel."                             https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?

SID=c4cab023af8b5d797b0dd7bfa99c9969&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title05/5chapterI.tpl


Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1978 has been codified and assigned to the appendix of 5 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title5a-node84-leaf186&num=0&edition=prelim
Statutory material affecting the OPM has been codified and assigned to Chapter 11 (sections 1101–1105) of 5 U.S.C. Title

5 is dedicated to the topic of "Government Organization and Employees," and Chapter 11 of that title deals with the

"Office of Personnel Management."

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title5/part2/chapter11&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that are associated with the OPM have been codified and assigned to Chapter I (parts 1–1199) of

5 CFR. Title 5 is dedicated to rules and regulations affecting "Administrative Personnel."

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=c4cab023af8b5d797b0dd7bfa99c9969&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title05/5chapterI.tpl



ACTIVITIES
Employee Benefits OPM manages numerous activities that directly affect the well-being of the Federal employee and

indirectly enhance employee effectiveness. These include health benefits, life insurance, and retirement benefits.

https://www.opm.gov/healthcare-insurance Examining / Staffing The OPM provides departments and agencies with

technical assistance and guidance in examining competitive positions in the Federal civil service for General Schedule

grades 1 through 15 and Federal Wage system positions. In addition, OPM is responsible for the following duties:

providing testing and examination services, at the request of an agency, on a reimbursable basis; establishing basic

qualification standards for all occupations; certifying agency delegated examining units to conduct examining;

providing employment information for competitive service positions; and providing policy direction and guidance on

promotions, reassignments, appointments in the excepted and competitive services, reinstatements, temporary and

term employment, veterans preference, workforce planning and reshaping, organizational design, career transition,
and other staffing provisions. https://www.opm.gov/services-for-agencies/recruiting-staffing-solutions/ Executive

Resources OPM leads in the selection, management, and development of Federal executives. OPM provides policy

guidance, consulting services, and technical support on Senior Executive Service (SES) recruitment, selection,

succession planning, mobility performance, awards, and removals. It reviews agency nominations for SES career

appointments and administers the Qualifications Review Boards that certify candidates' executive qualifications. It

manages SES, senior-level, and scientific and professional space allocations to agencies, administers the Presidential

Rank Awards program, and conducts orientation sessions for newly appointed executives. In addition, OPM manages

three   interagency     residential   development      and    training   centers      for   executives   and   managers.

https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/senior-executive-service Investigations The Office of the Inspector

General conducts comprehensive and independent audits, investigations, and evaluations relating to OPM programs

and operations. It is responsible for administrative actions against health care providers who commit sanctionable

offenses with respect to the Federal Employees' Health Benefits Program or other Federal programs.

https://www.opm.gov/our-inspector-general/ For further information, contact the Office of the Inspector General.

Phone, 202-606-1200.


Employee Benefits
OPM manages numerous activities that directly affect the well-being of the Federal employee and indirectly enhance

employee effectiveness. These include health benefits, life insurance, and retirement benefits.

https://www.opm.gov/healthcare-insurance

Examining / Staffing
The OPM provides departments and agencies with technical assistance and guidance in examining competitive

positions in the Federal civil service for General Schedule grades 1 through 15 and Federal Wage system positions. In

addition, OPM is responsible for the following duties: providing testing and examination services, at the request of an

agency, on a reimbursable basis; establishing basic qualification standards for all occupations; certifying agency

delegated examining units to conduct examining; providing employment information for competitive service positions;

and providing policy direction and guidance on promotions, reassignments, appointments in the excepted and

competitive services, reinstatements, temporary and term employment, veterans preference, workforce planning and

reshaping, organizational design, career transition, and other staffing provisions.

https://www.opm.gov/services-for-agencies/recruiting-staffing-solutions/

Executive Resources
OPM leads in the selection, management, and development of Federal executives. OPM provides policy guidance,

consulting services, and technical support on Senior Executive Service (SES) recruitment, selection, succession planning,

mobility performance, awards, and removals. It reviews agency nominations for SES career appointments and

administers the Qualifications Review Boards that certify candidates' executive qualifications. It manages SES, senior-

level, and scientific and professional space allocations to agencies, administers the Presidential Rank Awards program,

and conducts orientation sessions for newly appointed executives. In addition, OPM manages three interagency

residential development and training centers for executives and managers.

https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/senior-executive-service
Investigations
The Office of the Inspector General conducts comprehensive and independent audits, investigations, and evaluations

relating to OPM programs and operations. It is responsible for administrative actions against health care providers

who commit sanctionable offenses with respect to the Federal Employees' Health Benefits Program or other Federal

programs.

https://www.opm.gov/our-inspector-general/

  For further information, contact the Office of the Inspector General. Phone, 202-606-1200.



Oversight
OPM assesses human capital management Governmentwide and within agencies to gather information for policy

development and program refinement, ensure compliance with law and regulation, and enhance agency capability for

human resources management accountability. Agency accountability systems help ensure that human capital decisions

are consistent with merit principles and that human capital strategies are aligned with mission accomplishment. OPM

also works with agencies to find better and more strategic ways to manage Federal human capital.

https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/oversight-activities

Personnel Systems
OPM provides leadership and guidance to agencies on systems to support the manager's personnel management

responsibilities. These include the following: white- and blue-collar pay systems, including SES and special

occupational pay systems; geographical adjustments and locality payments; special rates to address recruitment and

retention problems; allowances and differentials, including recruitment and relocation bonuses, retention allowances,

and hazardous duty/environmental pay; and premium pay; annual and sick leave, court leave, military leave, leave

transfer and leave bank programs, family and medical leave, excused absence, holidays, and scheduling of work,

including flexible and compressed work schedules; performance management, covering appraisal systems,

performance pay and awards, and incentive awards for suggestions, inventions, and special acts; classification policy

and standards for agencies to determine the series and grades for Federal jobs; labor-management relations,

including collective bargaining, negotiability, unfair labor practices, labor-management cooperation, and consulting

with unions on Governmentwide issues; systems and techniques for resolving disputes with employees; quality of

work-life initiatives, such as employee health and fitness, work and family, AIDS in the workplace, and employee

assistance programs; human resources development, including leadership and administration of the Human Resources

Development Council and the Government Performance and Results Act interest group; the Training and

Management Assistance program, to help agencies develop training and human resources management solutions,

including workforce planning and succession management strategies, e-learning applications, traditional classroom

training materials, compensation and performance management systems, and other customized products; information

systems to support and improve Federal personnel management decisionmaking; and Governmentwide instructions

for personnel processing and recordkeeping and for release of personnel data under the Freedom of Information Act

and the Privacy Act.


OPM also provides administrative support to special advisory bodies, including the Federal Prevailing Rate Advisory

Committee, the Federal Salary Council, and the Presidential Advisory Committee on Expanding Training Opportunities.
OPM provides leadership, direction, and policy for Governmentwide affirmative recruiting programs for women,

minorities, individuals with disabilities, and veterans. It also provides leadership, guidance, and technical assistance to

promote merit and equality in systemic workforce recruitment, employment, training, and retention. In addition, OPM

gathers, analyzes, and maintains statistical data on the diversity of the Federal workforce and prepares evaluation

reports for Congress and others on individual agency and Governmentwide progress toward full workforce

representation for all Americans in the Federal sector.

https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/diversity-and-inclusion/



OTHER PROGRAMS
OPM coordinates the temporary assignment of employees between Federal agencies and State, local, and Indian tribal

governments, institutions of higher education, and other eligible nonprofit organizations for up to 2 years, for work of

mutual benefit to the participating organizations. It administers the Presidential Management Intern Program, which

provides 2-year, excepted appointments with Federal agencies to recipients of graduate degrees in appropriate

disciplines. In addition, the Office of Personnel Management administers the Federal Merit System Standards, which

apply to certain grant-aided State and local programs.


Other Programs

Federal Executive Boards
Federal Executive Boards (FEBs) were established by Presidential memorandum on November 10, 1961, to improve

internal Federal management practices and to provide a central focus for Federal participation in civic affairs in major

metropolitan centers of Federal activity. They carry out their functions under OPM supervision and control.


FEBs serve as a means for disseminating information within the Federal Government and for promoting discussion of

Federal policies and activities of importance to all Federal executives in the field. Each Board is composed of heads of

Federal field offices in the metropolitan area. A chairman is elected annually from among the membership to provide

overall leadership to the Board's operations. Committees and task forces carry out interagency projects consistent with

the Board's mission.


Located in places where Federal activity is concentrated, FEBS can be found in 28 metropolitan areas. Federal

executive associations or councils, which are locally organized, can be found in approximately 65 other metropolitan

areas. They perform functions similar to the FEBs, but on a lesser scale of organization and activity.

https://www.feb.gov/board-locations

  For further information, contact the Director for Federal Executive Board Operations. Phone, 202-606-
  1000.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION
A–Z Index
The OPM's website has an alphabetical subject index to help visitors navigate its content.

https://www.opm.gov/a-z-index/

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that OPM records have been

assigned to record group 478.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/478.html
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that U.S. Civil Service

Commission records have been assigned to record group 146.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/146.html
Staff contact information is available online.

https://www.opm.gov/about-us/doing-business-with-opm/contact-us/

Career Opportunities
To help fulfill its mission, the OPM relies on a professional workforce with energy, expertise, personality, and skill.

https://www.opm.gov/about-us/careers-at-opm/

Contact Information
General contact information is available online. Contact information for specific OPM organizations also is posted.

https://www.opm.gov/about-us/contact-us

Federal Holidays
Federal law (5 U.S.C. 6103) establishes the public holidays for Federal employees. Most Federal employees work on

weekdays. For these employees, when a holiday falls on a nonworkday—Saturday or Sunday—the Federal holiday

usually is observed on Friday or Monday.

https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/snow-dismissal-procedures/federal-holidays/#url=Overview

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the OPM recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/personnel-management-office

Forms
The "Forms" web page serves as the single source of information for forms belonging to and used by the OPM. Links

are also available to browse forms used by other Federal agencies.

https://www.opm.gov/forms | Email: formsmanager@opm.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
To any person, the FOIA gives a statutory right for obtaining access to Government information in the records of

executive branch agencies. This right to access is limited, however, when the requested information is shielded from

disclosure by any of nine exemptions contained within the statute. A FOIA request must be made in writing and clearly
labeled "Freedom of Information Act Request." Instructions for making a request are available online.

https://www.opm.gov/information-management/freedom-of-information-act
The electronic reading room contains documents that the FOIA identifies for inclusion. This electronic collection also

contains records that FOIA users have requested multiple times.

https://www.opm.gov/information-management/freedom-of-information-act#url=Electronic-Reading-Room

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The OPM posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.opm.gov/FAQs

Glossaries
A glossary is available on the "Healthcare—Reference Materials" web page.

https://www.opm.gov/healthcare-insurance/healthcare/reference-materials/reference/glossary/
A glossary is available on the "Benefits Officers Center—Reference Materials" web page.

https://www.opm.gov/retirement-services/benefits-officers-center/reference-materials/#url=Glossary
An insurance glossary of terms that are used on the "Federal Benefits Programs" website is available online. If a term is

absent from the glossary, please email a request for its inclusion.

https://www.opm.gov/healthcare-insurance/insurance-glossary | Email: fehb@opm.gov

Insurance
Information on the Federal health benefits open season; flexible spending accounts; and dental and vision, health, life,

and long-term care insurance programs, is available online.

https://www.opm.gov/healthcare-insurance

Integrity / Efficinecy
The OPM's Office of the Inspector General posts reports and data on Oversight.gov, a text-searchable repository of

reports that Federal Inspectors General publish. The Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency

operates and maintains the website to increase public access to independent and authoritative information on the

Federal Government.

https://www.oversight.gov

Open Government
The OPM supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency. The agency is committed to increasing accountability, effectiveness, efficiency, and innovation; building

trust with American citizens; empowering the public; fostering a culture in which everyone's contribution is valued;

making better decisions; and tracking how agency money is used.

https://www.opm.gov/about-us/open-government

Operating Status
The "Current Status" web page provides the operating status of Federal offices nationwide.

https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/snow-dismissal-procedures/current-status
     Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS) information on retirement eligibility is posted online.

     https://www.opm.gov/retirement-services/csrs-information/eligibility
     Federal Employees Retirement System (FERS) information on retirement eligibility is posted online.

     https://www.opm.gov/retirement-services/fers-information/eligibility

     Salaries / Wages
     General schedule locality pay tables are posted online.

     https://www.opm.gov/policy-data-oversight/pay-leave/salaries-wages/2018/general-schedule/

     Social Media
     The OPM maintains pages on Facebook, tweets on X.com, and posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.opm.gov/news

     Telework
     The OPM maintains the Federal Government's official telework program website.

     https://www.telework.gov/about/ | Email: teleworkpolicy@opm.gov
     The above Sources of Information were updated 6-2025.


        The above Sources of Information were updated 8–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                    Search
                                                                                            Search




                                       Office of the Director of National Intelligence




The United States Government Manual




     OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE
    Washington, DC 20511


    703-733-8600

    http://www.dni.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                                Tulsi Gabbard


      Principal Deputy Director                                                               Stacey A. Dixon
 Advisor for Military Affairs                                                        Lt. Gen. Jeffrey Kruse


 Chief Operating Officer                                                             Lora Shiao


https://www.dni.gov/index.php/who-we-are/leadership



CHIEF AGENCY OVERSIGHT OFFICERS


 Civil Liberties, Privacy, and Transparency                                          Benjamin T. Huebner


 Equal Employment Opportunity and Diversity                                          (vacancy)


 Legal                                                                               Christopher Fonzone




 General Counsel                                                                     Christopher Fonzone

https://www.odni.gov/index.php/who-we-are/organizations



DIRECTORATES:




Policy and Capabilities


 Deputy Director of National Intelligence                                            Dustin Gard-Weiss




 ASSISTANT DIRECTORS OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE / CHIEF OFFICERS


 Finance                                                                             James D. Treadwell


 Human Capital                                                                       Sherry Van Sloun


 Information                                                                         Adele J. Merritt

https://www.dni.gov/index.php/who-we-are/organizations/policy-capabilities/policy-capabilities-who-we-are



Mission Integration
 Deputy Director of National Intelligence                                          Morgan Muir

https://www.dni.gov/index.php/who-we-are/organizations/mission-integration/mission-integration-who-we-are



NATIONAL MISSION CENTERS:




Counterproliferation


 Director                                                                          Alan S. MacDougall

https://www.dni.gov/index.php/ncpc-home



Counterintelligence and Security


 Director                                                                          Michael J. Orlando, Acting

https://www.dni.gov/index.php/ncsc-home



Counterterrorism


 Director                                                                          Christine Abizaid

https://www.dni.gov/index.php/nctc-home



OFFICES:




Assistant Directors of National Intelligence


 Legislative Affairs                                                               Matthew Rhoades


 Strategic Communications                                                          Timothy Barrett




Intelligence Community Chief Officers


 Information                                                                       Adele J. Merritt
  Financial                                                                                James D. Treadwell




INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY OVERSIGHT


  Inspector General                                                                        Thomas A. Monheim

https://www.dni.gov/index.php/who-we-are/organizations/icig/icig-who-we-are | Email: ICIGHotline@dni.gov



  The above list of key personnel was updated 3–2022.



The Office of the Director of National Intelligence oversees and coordinates the foreign and domestic activities of the

Intelligence Community across the Federal Government.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On December 17, 2004, President George W. Bush approved Public Law 108–458, which is also cited as the Intelligence

Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004. This Act established the Office of the Director of National Intelligence

(ODNI), which opened on April 22, 2005.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-118/pdf/STATUTE-118-Pg3638.pdf
The President appoints the Director of National Intelligence by the advice and with the consent of the Senate. The

Director is required to "have extensive national security expertise" and "shall not be located within the Executive Office

of the President." The President exercises authority, control, and direction over the Director, who serves as head of the

Intelligence Community and who acts as the principal adviser to the President, to the National Security Council, and to

the Homeland Security Council for intelligence matters involving national security (118 Stat. 3644).


While serving as the Director of National Intelligence, the head of the Intelligence Community may not serve

concurrently as "the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency or as the head of any other element of the Intelligence

Community" (118 Stat. 3644).


Officers from across the Intelligence Community staff the ODNI. The ODNI is organized into directorates, centers, and

oversight offices, each of which supports the agency's role as head of the Intelligence Community and manager of the

National Intelligence Program.

https://www.dni.gov/index.php/who-we-are/organizations
On its "Organization" web page, the ODNI posts an organizational chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for

viewing and downloading.

https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/ODNI_Org_Chart_Final_For_Web_2020_1.pdf



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
The Law Revision Counsel editorially reclassified section 102 of the National Security Act of 1947. The reclassified

statutory material remains part of 50 U.S.C., but has been moved from Chapter 15 to Chapter 44, Subchapter I—

Coordination for National Security (sections 3021–3058).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title50/chapter44/subchapter1&edition=prelim
National Defense rules and regulations that have been published in the Federal Register are codified in 32 CFR. Parts

1700–1799 of Chapter XVII contain codified material that is associated with the ODNI.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=1122b31df7e7a61c659b0cb96027c179&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title32/32chapterXVII.tpl



ACTIVITIES
The ODNI provides executive branch agency and department heads, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and

senior military commanders, and the U.S. Congress and President with timely and objective national intelligence. The

agency also establishes goals and priorities for collection, analysis, production, and dissemination of national

intelligence; ensures the availability of and access to intelligence information within the Intelligence Community;

develops the annual budget for the National Intelligence Program; oversees coordination of relationships with the

intelligence or security services of foreign governments and international organizations; ensures that accurate analysis

of intelligence information is derived from all sources that are relevant for supporting national security needs; develops

personnel policies and programs to increase the capacity for joint operations and to facilitate staffing of community

management functions; and jointly oversees, with the Secretary of Defense, the development and implementation of

an acquisition program management plan.

https://www.dni.gov/index.php/who-we-are/mission-vision



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that ODNI records have been

assigned to record group 576. ODNI records belong to the "Homeland Security" cluster.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/501-to-600.html

Biological and Chemical Warfare / Nuclear Weapons
The National Counterproliferation Center has web pages that introduce readers to the current challenges of

containing the spread of equipment, information, material, and technologies that are used for producing weapons of

mass destruction and their delivery systems.

https://www.dni.gov/index.php/ncpc-features

Career Opportunities
The ODNI hires acquisitions and financial managers, engineers, foreign language experts, scientists, security experts,

software and hardware developers, technology specialists, and other career professionals.

https://www.dni.gov/index.php/careers
In 2019, the Intelligence Community ranked third among 17 large agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best

Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/IC00

Climate Change
On April 14, 2021, DNI Avril Haines delivered remarks before the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence. The remarks

were an opening statement for the U.S. Intelligence Community's 2021 assessment of global threats to national

security. Director Haines said, "Ecological degradation and a changing climate will continue to fuel disease outbreaks,

threaten food and water security, and exacerbate political instability and humanitarian crises. Although much of the

effect of a changing climate on U.S. security will play out indirectly in a broader political and economic context,

warmer weather can generate direct, immediate impacts—for example, through more intense, frequent, and variable

extreme weather events, in addition to driving conflicts over scarce natural resources. The changing climate, conflict,

and economic deprivation will drive vulnerable populations from their homes, heightening humanitarian needs and

increasing the risk of political upheaval."

https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/Newsroom/Testimonies/2021-04-14-ATA-Opening-Statement-FINAL.pdf
"Climate Change and International Responses Increasing Challenges to US National Security Through 2040" is a 21-

page report that the National Intelligence Council published in 2021. According to the report: "Risks to US national

security interests through 2040 will increase as countries respond to the intensifying physical effects of climate change.

Global temperatures most likely will surpass the Paris Agreement goal of 1.5 [degrees] Celsius by around 2030, and the

physical effects are projected to continue intensifying." As part of its Key Takeaway section, the report says: "As a

baseline, the [Intelligence Community] uses the US Federal Scientific community's high confidence in global

projections of temperature increase and moderate confidence in regional projections of the intensity of extreme

weather and other effects during the next two decades. Global temperatures have increased 1.1 [degrees] Celsius since

pre-industrial times and most likely will add 0.4 [degree] Celsius to reach 1.5 [degrees] Celsius around 2030." The

report also predicts that climate change will afflict the Nation with excessive heat, extreme storms, and flooding that

"will prove increasingly costly, require some military shifts, and increase demands for humanitarian assistance and

disaster relief operations."

https://www.dni.gov/files/ODNI/documents/assessments/NIE_Climate_Change_and_National_Security.pdf
"Global Trends: Paradox of Progress," which the National Intelligence Council published in January of 2017, addressed

climate change as part of the report's global trends and key implications: "A range of global hazards pose imminent

and longer-term threats that will require collective action to address—even as cooperation becomes harder. More

extreme weather, water and soil stress, and food insecurity will disrupt societies. Sea-level rise, ocean acidification,

glacial melt, and pollution will change living patterns. Tensions over climate change will grow. Increased travel and

poor health infrastructure will make infectious diseases harder to manage."

https://www.dni.gov/files/images/globalTrends/documents/GT-Main-Report.pdf

Contact Information
The "Contact ODNI" web page has postal and electronic mail addresses for contacting the agency.

https://www.dni.gov/index.php

Economic Espionage
The National Counterintelligence and Security Center's "Economic Espionage" web page introduces visitors to the

efforts of foreign intelligence services, criminals, and private sector spies to compromise American industrial and

private sector intellectual property, technology, and trade secrets. Their efforts, which are increasingly carried out

within the cyber environment, undermine the Nation's security and long-term prosperity.

https://www.odni.gov/index.php/ncsc-what-we-do/ncsc-threat-assessments-mission/ncsc-economic-espionage

Election Security
The ODNI partners with Federal departments and agencies, State and local governments, election officials, and others

to protect U.S. elections and to maintain public transparency about its efforts. Related content and links are accessible

on the "Election Security" web page.

https://www.odni.gov/index.php/who-we-are/organizations/mission-integration/es/election-security-who-we-are

Factsheets
The ODNI has posted a factsheet (FEB 2017) online.

https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/FACTSHEET_ODNI_History_and_Background_2_24-17.pdf
The National Counterterrorism Center posted a factsheet on its "NCTC At a Glance" web page.

https://www.dni.gov/index.php/nctc-features/1542-nctc-at-a-glance
The Cyber Threat Intelligence Integration Center posted "quick facts" about its activities on the "CTIIC Quick Facts" web

page.

https://www.dni.gov/index.php/ctiic-features/1722-ctiic-quick-facts

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the ODNI recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/national-intelligence-office-of-the-national-director

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Enacted in 1966, the FOIA took effect on July 4, 1967. The Act gives a right for accessing Federal agency records to any

person, except a fugitive from the law. Some records, or portions of them, are, however, shielded from disclosure by

one or more of nine statutory exemptions or by specific harm that disclosure could cause. The Electronic Freedom of

Information Act Amendments of 1996 require Federal agencies to use electronic information technology to expand

access to and availability of FOIA documents.

https://www.dni.gov/index.php/foia

History
A Director of National Intelligence for coordinating the overall intelligence effort is an idea that predates the

establishment of the ODNI by five decades. The attacks of September 11, 2001, against the World Trade Center and the

subsequent report by the National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States (better known as the 9/11

Commission) increased the momentum for major intelligence reform. To learn more of the story, visit the "History"

web page.

https://www.odni.gov/index.php/who-we-are/history
    Kids
    The "Information for Kids" web page has a collection of links that lead to portals on other Intelligence Community

    websites: Central Intelligence Agency, Departments of Energy and State, Department of the Treasury, Federal Bureau

    of Investigation, National Reconnaissance Office, and National Security Agency.

    https://www.odni.gov/index.php/for-kids

    Newsroom
    The ODNI posts congressional testimonies, news articles, press releases, recent news, reports and publications, and

    speeches and interviews online.

    https://www.dni.gov/index.php/newsroom

    Private Sector Engagement
    The ODNI promotes collaboration with the private sector to advance national security interests, while protecting the

    freedoms, civil liberties, and privacy rights that the U.S. Constitution guarantees.

    https://www.dni.gov/index.php/who-we-are/organizations/national-security-partnerships/ps-engagement       |   Email:
    DNI-NSP-PrivateSector-Info@dni.gov

    Reports / Publications
    Reports and other ODNI publications are available online.

    https://www.dni.gov/index.php/newsroom/reports-publications
    National Intelligence Council publications are available online.

    https://www.dni.gov/index.php/who-we-are/organizations/mission-integration/nic/nic-related-menus/nic-related-
    content/nic-publications

    Social Media
    The ODNI has a Facebook account.

    https://www.facebook.com/dni.gov
    The ODNI tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/odnigov
    The ODNI posts videos on its YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/user/ODNIgov

        The Sources of Information were updated 3–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                          Overseas Private Investment Corporation




The United States Government Manual




     OVERSEAS PRIVATE INVESTMENT CORPORATION
    1100 New York Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20527


    202-336-8400

    202-336-7949

    http://www.opic.gov


      PRESIDENT / CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER                                                    Dev J. Jagadesan, Acting


      Executive Vice President                                                               (vacancy)
 Chief Information Officer                                                               Robert DeLuca


 Chief of Staff                                                                          Cameron Alford, Acting


 Director, Office of Accountability                                                      William Kennedy


 Vice President, Department of Legal Affairs / General Counsel                           Cindy Shepard, Acting


 Vice President, Department of Management and Administration                             Michele Perez


 Vice President, Financial and Portfolio Management                                      Mildred Callear


 Vice President, Human Resources                                                         Michele Perez, Acting


 Vice President, Investment Funds                                                        Lynn Nguyen, Acting


 Vice President, Office of External Affairs                                              Edward Burrier


 Vice President, Office of Investment Policy                                             Merryl Burpoe, Acting


 Vice President, Small and Medium Enterprise Finance                                     James C. Polan


 Vice President, Structured Finance and Insurance                                        Tracey Webb




 [For the Overseas Private Investment Corporation statement of organization, see the Code of Federal
 Regulations, Title 22, Chapter VII]




The above list of key personnel was updated 07–2017.

The Overseas Private Investment Corporation promotes economic growth and job opportunities both at home and

abroad by encouraging U.S. private investment in developing countries and emerging markets.


The Overseas Private Investment Corporation (OPIC) was established in 1971 as an independent agency by the Foreign

Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act (112 Stat. 2681-790). The Corporation helps U.S. businesses invest overseas,

fosters economic development in new and emerging markets, complements the private sector in managing risks

associated with foreign direct investment, and supports U.S. foreign policy. It charges market-based fees for its

products and operates on a self-sustaining basis at no net cost to American taxpayers.

https://www.opic.gov/who-we-are/overview



ACTIVITIES
The agency serves as the U.S. Government's development finance institution. It mobilizes private capital to help solve

critical development challenges. This mobilization of capital advances U.S. foreign policy and national security

objectives. Working with the U.S. private sector, the agency helps U.S. businesses gain footholds in emerging markets

thereby catalyzing revenues, jobs, and growth opportunities both at home and abroad. Consistent with its mission, the

Corporation provides financing guarantees, insures against political risk, and supports private equity investment funds

to stimulate investment.

https://www.opic.gov/what-we-offer/overview
OPIC projects adhere to high environmental and social standards and uphold human rights. By its adherence to high

standards, the agency tries to raise the industry and regional standards of the countries where it operates. OPIC

services are available for new and expanding business enterprises in more than 160 countries.

https://www.opic.gov/opic-action/overview



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Eligibility
To determine whether a business owner or company is eligible for OPIC insurance or finance products, visit the online

applicant screener. Some eligibility requirements are the same across all OPIC products; however, some vary by

product.

https://www.opic.gov/doing-business-us/applicant-screener

Employment
Most OPIC career opportunities fall within the following professional categories: attorney-advisors, business

development specialists, economists, finance specialists, and managers. New hires must be U.S. citizens.

https://www.opic.gov/who-we-are/careers
In 2015 and 2016, the OPIC was ranked number two among small Government agencies in the Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/overall/small

Media
Annual reports, newsletters, and public notices, as well as the OPIC blog and media library are available online.

https://www.opic.gov/media-events/media-library

Workshops
Participants learn how American small businesses use OPIC finance and insurance products to gain access to

emerging markets overseas, as well as how they can take advantage of OPIC products to expand their businesses

abroad and support growth at home.

https://www.opic.gov/outreach-events/upcoming-workshops
https://www.opic.gov/doing-business-us/contact-us | Email: info@opic.gov

  For further information, contact the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, 1100 New York Avenue
  NW., Washington, DC 20527. Phone, 202-336-8400. Fax, 202-336-7949.
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                        Peace Corps




The United States Government Manual




     PEACE CORPS
    1111 Twentieth Street NW., Washington, DC 20526


    855-855-1961

    202-692-2000

    202-692-2231

    http://www.peacecorps.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Josephine K. Olsen
 Deputy Director                                            (vacancy)


 Chief of Staff                                             Michelle K. Brooks


https://files.peacecorps.gov/documents/jody-olsen-bio.pdf

 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Financial                                                  Richard Swarttz


 Information                                                Scott Knell




 DIRECTOR


 Civil Rights and Diversity                                 John W. Burden


 Victim Advocacy                                            Da Shawna Townsend




 General Counsel                                            Robert Shanks


 White House Liaison                                        Matthew McKinney



 ASSOCIATE DIRECTORS


 Global Operations                                          Patrick Young


 Health Services                                            Karen Becker


 Safety and Security                                        Shawn Bardwell


 Volunteer Recruitment and Selection                        David Walker




 DIRECTORS


 Global Health and HIV                                      Marie McLeod


 Overseas Programming and Training Support                  Stephanie Rust


 Peace Corps Response                                       Kweku Boafo


 Strategic Information, Research, and Planning              Jeffrey Kwiecinski, Acting
  REGIONAL DIRECTORS


  Africa                                                                                   Johnathan Miller


  Europe, Mediterranean and Asia                                                           Jeannette Windon


  Inter-America and the Pacific                                                            Gregory Huger



  ASSOCIATE DIRECTORS


  External Affairs                                                                         Rachel Kahler


  Management                                                                               Jeffrey Harrington




  Chief Compliance Officer                                                                 Anne Hughes




  DIRECTORS


  Communications                                                                           Matthew Sheehey


  Congressional Relations                                                                  Nancy Herbolsheimer


  Grants and Gifts Management                                                              Karen Roberts


  Strategic Partnerships and Intergovernmental Affairs                                     Shannon Kendrick


  Third Goal and Returned Volunteer Services                                               Keith Honda




  Executive Secretary                                                                      Sylvie Mortimer, Acting


https://www.peacecorps.gov/about/leadership

  Inspector General                                                                        Kathy A. Buller


https://www.peacecorps.gov/about/inspector-general



The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2019.

The Peace Corps gives the peoples of host countries increased access to volunteers who are qualified, skilled, and trained,
and it strengthens mutual understanding between Americans and the peoples of the countries served.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
President John F. Kennedy approved the Peace Corps Act on September 22, 1961. This Public Law became effective on

that same day. Its declaration of purpose states: "It is the policy of the United States and the purpose of this Act to

promote world peace and friendship through a Peace Corps, which shall make available to interested countries and

areas men and women of the United States qualified for service abroad and willing to serve, under conditions of

hardship if necessary, to help the peoples of such countries and areas in meeting their needs for trained manpower,

and to help promote a better understanding of the American people on the part of the peoples served and a better

understanding of other peoples on the part of the American people."

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-75/pdf/STATUTE-75-Pg612.pdf
The Peace Corps Act has been amended since its enactment (22 U.S.C. 2501). Title VI of the International Security and

Development Cooperation Act of 1981 (22 U.S.C. 2501–1) made the Peace Corps an independent agency.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2017-title22/pdf/USCODE-2017-title22-chap34.pdf
The President appoints the Director and Deputy Director of the agency by the advice and with the consent of the

Senate.




ACTIVITIES
The Peace Corps consists of a Washington, DC, headquarters, six regional offices, and overseas operations in 62

countries, relying on more than 7,350 volunteers and trainees.


To fulfill the Peace Corps mandate, men and women are trained for a 9- to 14-week period in the appropriate local

language, the technical skills necessary for their particular jobs, and the cross-cultural skills needed to adjust to a

society with traditions and attitudes different from their own. Volunteers serve for a period of 2 years, living among the

people with whom they work. Volunteers are expected to become a part of the community through their service.


Thousands of volunteers serve worldwide and work in six program areas: agriculture, business development,

education, environment, health and HIV/AIDS, and youth development. Community-level projects are designed to

match the skills of volunteers with the resources of host-country agencies and other international assistance

organizations to solve specific development problems, often in conjunction with private volunteer organizations.


In the United States, the Peace Corps is working to promote an understanding of people in other countries. Through

its World Wise Schools program, volunteers partner with elementary and junior high school students in the United

States to encourage an exchange of letters, pictures, music, and artifacts. Participating students increase their

knowledge of geography, languages, and different cultures, while gaining an appreciation for voluntarism.


The Peace Corps offers other domestic programs that rely on former volunteers. Working together with universities,

local public school systems, and private businesses and foundations, these former volunteers help solve some of our

Nation's most pressing domestic problems.
http://www.peacecorps.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Age Limit
The Peace Corps does not have an upper age limit, and spouses and partners can serve together. To learn more, visit

the "Volunteering at 50–Plus" web page.

https://www.peacecorps.gov/volunteer/is-peace-corps-right-for-me/50plus

Becoming a Volunteer
The volunteer program has an online application portal.

http://www.peacecorps.gov/apply

Career Opportunities
Peace Corps vacancy announcements are posted online. Additional information is available from the Office of Human

Resource Management. Phone, 202-692-1200.

http://www.peacecorps.gov/about/jobs
The Peace Corps consistently ranks high among midsize agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings. In 2018, it ranked 6th among 27 midsize agencies.

http://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/PU00

Climate Change / Sustainability
The 2016 Strategic Sustainability Performance Plan identifies greenhouse gas reduction as one of its principal goals

and includes an appendix on climate change resilience.

https://files.peacecorps.gov/documents/open-government/2016_Strategic_Sustainability_Performance_Plan.pdf

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has key phone numbers and email addresses for contacting the Peace Corps.

https://www.peacecorps.gov/contact/#email_form | Email: dcinfo@peacecorps.gov

Countries
Peace Corps volunteers serve in more than 60 countries.

https://www.peacecorps.gov/countries

Donate
The "Donate" web page lists and describes projects that donors can support.

https://www.peacecorps.gov/donate

Educator Resources
The Paul D. Coverdell World Wise Schools program provides online educational resources based on the Peace Corps

experience.
https://www.peacecorps.gov/educators/resources/?search_text=climate&list=educators-resources

Events
The "Events" web page has a search tool for locating a nearby event by ZIP Code.

https://www.peacecorps.gov/events

Facts
Curious to know how many Americans have been in the Peace Corps? On which continent most volunteers serve? To

learn the answers to these questions and others, visit the "Fast Facts" web page.

https://www.peacecorps.gov/news/fast-facts

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA (5 USC 552) gives the public right to request records from a Federal agency. An agency must disclose the

requested record as long as one of the law's nine exemptions does not shield the information from public disclosure.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2017-title5/pdf/USCODE-2017-title5-partI-chap5-subchapII.pdf
The Peace Corps posts certain types of records that it creates on its website. A formal FOIA request is not necessary to

access them. The Peace Corps also maintains a FOIA requester service center that can provide information on the

status of a person's FOIA request.

https://www.peacecorps.gov/about/open-government/foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Peace Corps posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.peacecorps.gov/faqs/all

Global Initiatives
These programs promote AIDS relief, work to eliminate malaria, help local people assure their own food security,

economically empower women, and support development projects in local communities.

https://www.peacecorps.gov/about/global-initiatives

History
At 2 a.m., before a crowd of 10,000 students, then Senator and Presidential candidate John F. Kennedy launched a new

experiment in public service from the steps of the Michigan Union at the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor. To learn

more about what happened early that morning of October 14, 1960, visit "The Founding Moment" web page.

https://www.peacecorps.gov/about/history/founding-moment

News
The Office of Press Relations posts news—agency statements, media advisories, and press releases—on the Peace

Corps website.

https://www.peacecorps.gov/news | Email: pressoffice@peacecorps.gov

Open Government
The Peace Corps supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation,

and transparency.
     https://www.peacecorps.gov/about/open-government

     Oversight
     The Office of the Inspector General from the Peace Corps posts reports and data on Oversight.gov, a text-searchable

     repository of reports that Federal Inspectors General publish. The Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and

     Efficiency operates and maintains the website to increase public access to independent and authoritative information

     on the Federal Government.

     https://oversight.gov/reports

     Recruitment Offices
     Contact information for Peace Corps recruitment offices is available online.

     http://www.peacecorps.gov/recruiters/offices

     Social Media
     The Peace Corps tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/peacecorps
     The Peace Corps has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/peacecorps
     The Peace Corps posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/peacecorps

     Stories
     Peace Corps volunteers have stories to tell. Read and listen to them on the Peace Corps' website.

     https://www.peacecorps.gov/stories

        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                           Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation




The United States Government Manual




     PENSION BENEFIT GUARANTY CORPORATION
    445 12th Street SW, Washington, DC 20024


    202-229-4000

    800-400-7242

    http://www.pbgc.gov




    BOARD OF DIRECTORS
 CHAIR (Secretary of Labor)                                           Lori Chavez-DeRemer


 Member (Secretary of the Treasury)                                   Scott Bessent


 Member (Secretary of Commerce)                                       Howard Lutnick




OFFICIALS


 ACTING DIRECTOR                                                      Alice Maroni


 Chief, Benefits Administration                                       David Foley


 General Counsel                                                      Karen Morris


 Chief Financial Officer                                              Patricia Kelly


 Chief Information Officer                                            Robert Scherer


 Chief Investment Officer                                             David Mudd


 Chief Management Officer                                             Alice Maroni


 Chief, Negotiations and Restructuring                                John Hanley


 Chief of Staff                                                       (vacancy)


 Acting Chief Policy Officer                                          Michael Rae


 Deputy Chief, Benefits Administration                                Janice Brown-Taylor


 Deputy Chief, Negotiations and Restructuring                         (vacancy)


 Deputy Chief Policy Officer                                          Michael Rae


 Deputy General Counsel                                               Craig T. Fessenden


 Deputy General Counsel, Bankruptcy, Transactions, and Terminations   Kartar Khalsa


 Deputy General Counsel, General Law, and Operations                  Paul Chalmers


 Deputy General Counsel, Program Law, and Policy                      Dan Liebman


 Office of Equal Employment Opportunity                               (vacancy)


 Director, Department of Budget                                       Kimberly Mayo
  Director, Department of Financial Operations                                     Theodore Winter


  Director, Department of Communications Outreach, and Legislative Affairs         David Wycinsky, Jr.


  Director, Department of Corporate Controls, and Reviews                          Lisa Carter


  Director, Department of Financial Operations                                     Steve Young


  Director, Department of Corporate Finance, and Restructuring                     Adi Berger


  Director, Department of Negotiations, and Restructuring Actuarial                Julie Cameron


  Director, Department of Plan Compliance                                          Rossi Marcelin


  Director, Department of Actuarial Services, and Technology                       Scott Young


  Director, Department of Participant Services                                     Jennifer Messina


  Director, Department of Plan Asset, and Data Management                          Michael Hutchins


  Inspector General                                                                Robert A. Westbrooks


  Director, Department of Human Resources                                          Arrie Etheridge


  Director, Department of Business Innovation Services                             Vidhya Shyamsunder


  Director, Department of Information Technology Infrastructure Operations         Joshua Kossoy


  Director, Department of Enterprise Governance                                    Melanie Carter


  Director, Department of Enterprise Cybersecurity                                 Tim Hurr


  Director, Department of Policy Research and Analysis                             Christopher Bone


  Director, Department of Procurement                                              Damon McClure


  Director, Department of Quality Management                                       Bridget Wilson


  Director, Department of Workplace Solutions                                      Alisa Cottone


  Participant and Plan Sponsor Advocate                                            Anne Henderson


  Inspector General                                                                Nicholas J. Novak

The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation protects the retirement incomes of American workers in private-sector

defined benefit pension plans.

Organizational Chart
The Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) is a self-financing, wholly owned Government corporation subject

to the Government Corporation Control Act (31 U.S.C. 9101-9109). The Corporation, established by title IV of the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 U.S.C. 1301-1461), operates in accordance with policies

established by its Board of Directors.


The Board comprises the Secretaries of Labor, Commerce, and the Treasury. The Secretary of Labor serves as Chair of

the Board. A seven-member advisory committee, comprising two labor, two employer, and three general public

representatives whom the President appoints, advises the PBGC on investment issues. The President also appoints the

PBGC's Director, whom the Senate then confirms.

http://www.pbgc.gov/about/who-we-are.html



ACTIVITIES

Coverage
The Corporation insures most private sector defined-benefit pension plans that provide a pension benefit based on

factors such as age, years of service, and salary.


It administers two insurance programs, separately covering single-employer and multiemployer plans. More than 40

million workers and retirees participate in nearly 24,000 covered plans.


Single-Employer Insurance
Under the single-employer program, the Corporation guarantees payment of basic pension benefits if an insured plan

terminates without sufficient assets to pay those benefits. The law limits, however, the total monthly benefit that the

PBGC may guarantee for one individual to $5,011.36 per month for a 65-year-old individual in a pension plan that

terminates in 2015. The law also sets other restrictions on PBGC's guarantee, including limits on the insured amount of

recent benefit increases. In certain cases, the Corporation may pay some benefits above the guaranteed amount

depending on the funding level of the plan and amounts recovered from employers.


A plan sponsor may terminate a single-employer plan in a standard termination if the plan has sufficient assets to

purchase private annuities to cover all benefit liabilities. If a plan does not have sufficient assets, the sponsor may seek

to transfer the pension liabilities to the PBGC by demonstrating that it meets the legal criteria for a distress termination.

In either termination, the plan administrator must inform participants in writing at least 60 days prior to the date the

administrator proposes to terminate the plan. Only a plan that has sufficient assets to pay all benefit liabilities may

terminate in a standard termination. The Corporation also may institute termination of underfunded plans in certain

specified circumstances.

http://www.pbgc.gov/wr/benefits/guaranteed-benefits.html

Multiemployer Insurance
Under title IV, as revised in 1980 by the Multiemployer Pension Plan Amendments Act (29 U.S.C. 1001 note), which

changed the insurable event from plan termination to plan insolvency, the Corporation provides financial assistance to

multiemployer plans that are unable to pay nonforfeitable benefits. The plans are obligated to repay such assistance.

The act also made employers withdrawing from a plan liable to the plan for a portion of its unfunded vested benefits.

http://www.pbgc.gov/prac/multiemployer.html
Premium Collections
All defined-benefit pension plans insured by the PBGC are required to pay premiums to the Corporation according to

rates set by Congress. The per-participant flat-rate premium for plans starting in 2015 is $57.00 for single-employer

plans and $26.00 for multiemployer plans. Underfunded single-employer plans must also pay an additional premium

equal to $24 per $1,000 of unfunded vested benefits. A termination premium of $1,250 per participant per year applies

to certain distress and involuntary plan terminations, payable for 3 years after the termination.

http://www.pbgc.gov/prac/prem/premium-rates.html

Special Financial Assistance (SFA) Program

Special Financial Assistance (SFA) Program
In 2021, the American Rescue Plan Act amended ERISA to mandate that PBGC provide Special Financial Assistance

(SFA) to eligible financially troubled multiemployer defined benefit pension plans. Unlike PBGC’s historical programs,

SFA provides one-time assistance funds to plans directly from the Treasury rather than from pension-related

resources. The SFA Program was designed to provide approved applicant plans special financial assistance over a

relatively short period with all applicants required to submit at least an initial application by the end of calendar 2025

and any revised applications by the end of 2026. As of January 2025, $70.9 billion has already been approved for plans

with 1,336,000 participants, and more than half of the anticipated plans are fully processed. Payments must be made

by September 30, 2030.

https://www.pbgc.gov/american-rescue-plan-act-of-2021



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
PBGC tries to give a fair share of its procurement awards and subcontracting opportunities to small businesses. PBGC

regularly procures accounting, actuarial, auditing, benefits administration, legal, and information technology services.


The agency uses various types of contract vehicles that are outlined in the “Federal Acquisition Regulation. These types

of contract vehicles include agreements, commercial contracts, major contracts, orders against other government

contracts, and purchase orders.

https://www.pbgc.gov/about/procurement

Career Opportunities
The PBGC relies on accountants, actuaries, administrative personnel, analysts, attorneys, auditors, employee benefits

law specialists, information technology experts, public affairs specialists, and other professionals to carry out its mission.

https://www.pbgc.gov/about/jobs

Fraud Alerts
The PBGC, with support from its Office of the Inspector General, posts fraud alerts to spread awareness of scams.

https://oig.pbgc.gov/fraud-alerts.html
Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The PBGC participates in FOIAonline, which allows information seekers to submit electronic FOIA requests, to track the

status of requests, to search for requests submitted by others, to access released records, and to generate agency-

specific processing reports.

https://www.pbgc.gov/about/pg/footer/foia
FOIA requests must be in writing and may be submitted also by email, fax, or by regular mail to the Disclosure Officer,

Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, 445 12th Street SW., Washington, DC 20024. Fax, 202-229-4042.

https://www.pbgc.gov/about/pg/footer/foia | Email: disclosure@pbgc.gov

Glossary
The PBGC maintains a glossary of terms with simplified definitions. Some terms and their definitions are PBGC-specific

in usage.

https://www.pbgc.gov/glossary

Insured Pension Plans
A list of pension plans that recently paid premiums to the PBGC is available online.

https://www.pbgc.gov/wr/find-an-insured-pension-plan/pbgc-protects-pensions

Open Government
The PBGC posts datasets that are useful for increasing agency accountability, public knowledge of the agency and its

operations, and economic opportunity.

https://www.pbgc.gov/open/index | Email: opengov@pbgc.gov

Plain Language
PBGC writers and editors are committed to using plain language in new communications and revising confusing or

unclear language in existing material. Send them a note via email if a sentence or paragraph's clarity could be

improved.

https://www.pbgc.gov/about/pbgc-in-plain-english | Email: webmaster@pbgc.gov

Press Room
The PBGC posts press releases on its website.

https://www.pbgc.gov/news/press
An online subscription form is available to sign up for the latest news, delivered via email, from PBGC.

https://www.pbgc.gov/about/stay-connected
PBGC website Web site visitors may use the site map to look for specific topics or to browse for content that aligns

with their interests.

https://www.pbgc.gov/sitemap
http://www.pbgc.gov/about/pg/contact/contact.html
http://www.pbgc.gov/about/pg/contact/contact.html

  For further information, contact the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, 1200 K Street NW.,
  Washington, DC 20005-4026. Phone, 202-326-4000 or 800-400-7242 .
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Postal Regulatory Commission




The United States Government Manual




     POSTAL REGULATORY COMMISSION
    901 New York Avenue NW., Suite 200, Washington, DC 20268-0001


    202-789-6800

    202-789-6861

    http://www.prc.gov


      CHAIR                                                                                 Robert G. Taub


      Vice Chair                                                                            Mark Acton
  Commissioner                                                                                   Nanci E. Langley


  Commissioner                                                                                   Tony Hammond


  Commissioner                                                                                   (vacancy)




  Director, Office of Accountability and Compliance                                              Margaret Cigno


  Director, Office of Public Affairs and Government Relations                                    Ann Fisher


  Director, Office of Secretary and Administration                                               Stacy L. Ruble


  General Counsel                                                                                David A. Trissell


  Inspector General                                                                              John F. Callender




  [For the Postal Regulatory Commission statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations,
  Title 39, Part 3002]




The above list of key personnel was updated 06–2017.

The Postal Regulatory Commission develops and implements a modern system of postal rate regulation.


The Postal Regulatory Commission is the successor agency to the Postal Rate Commission, which was created by the

Postal Reorganization Act, as amended (39 U.S.C. 101 et seq.). The Commission was established as an independent

agency in the executive branch of Government by the Postal Accountability and Enhancement Act (39 U.S.C. 501). It

comprises five Commissioners, appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate, one of whom is

designated as Chair.


The Commission promulgates rules and regulations, establishes procedures, and takes other actions necessary to carry

out its obligations. It considers complaints received from interested persons relating to United States Postal Service

rates, regulations, and services. The Commission also has certain reporting obligations, including a report on universal

postal service and the postal monopoly.

http://www.prc.gov/about



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Case Information
Active cases and daily listings are accessible online. A docket search tool is also available.
     http://www.prc.gov/dockets/active
     http://www.prc.gov/dockets/daily
     http://www.prc.gov/dockets/search | Email: prc-dockets@prc.gov

     Employment
     The Commission relies on the professional services of accountants, attorneys, economists, industrial engineers,

     marketing specialists, statisticians, and administrative and clerical personnel to fulfill its mission.

     http://www.prc.gov/employment-opportunities

     Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
     A FOIA request form is available online.

     http://www.prc.gov/foia/onlinerequest

     Newsroom
     The Commission posts congressional submissions, papers, press releases, speeches, and upcoming events online.

     http://www.prc.gov/press-releases

     Reading Room
     Facilities for inspection and copying of records, viewing automated daily lists of docketed materials, and accessing the

     Commission's Web site are located at 901 New York Avenue NW., Suite 200, Washington, DC. The room is open on

     weekdays, excluding legal holidays, 8 a.m.–4:30 p.m.


     Practice / Procedure
     Practice and procedure rules governing the conduct of proceedings before the Commission may be found in parts

     3001, 3010, 3015, 3020, 3025, 3030, 3031, 3050, and 3060 of title 39 of the "Code of Federal Regulations."

     http://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=a34266c229a4a7b3c470845f8da08605&node=39:1.0.2.15.2&rgn=div5
     http://www.prc.gov/offices/osa

        For further information, contact the Secretary, Postal Regulatory Commission, 901 New York Avenue
        NW., Suite 200, Washington, DC 20268-0001. Phone, 202-789-6840.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act
No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                 Railroad Retirement Board




The United States Government Manual




     RAILROAD RETIREMENT BOARD
    844 North Rush Street, Chicago, IL 60611-1275


    312-751-4777

    312-751-7154

    http://www.rrb.gov | Email: opa@rrb.gov




      BOARD
 CHAIRMAN                                                     Erhard R. Chorlé




 MEMBERS


 Labor                                                        John Bragg


 Management                                                   Thomas R. Jayne


https://www.rrb.gov/OurAgency/TheBoard



 BUREAUS




Actuary


 CHIEF                                                        Keith T. Sartain

https://www.rrb.gov/OurAgency/BureauofActuary



Field Service


 DIRECTOR                                                     Mark Blythe

https://www.rrb.gov/OurAgency/BureauofFieldService/Director



Fiscal Operations


 CHIEF                                                        Shawna R. Weekley




 DIVISIONS


 Accounting and Budget                                        Erin Dorritie


 Audit Affairs and Compliance                                 Danielle Clark


 Accounting, Financial Operations, and Systems                Mario Moreno, Jr.

https://rrb.gov/OurAgency/bfo_org
Information Services


 CHIEF                                                       Robert De Luca




 DIVISIONS


 Enterprise Applications                                     Faheem Naushad


 Information Technology Strategy and Technology Management   Robert LaBerry


 Infrastructure Services                                     Tony Nguyen


 Policy and Compliance                                       (vacancy)

https://rrb.gov/OurAgency/BureauofInformationServices



 OFFICES




Administration


 DIRECTOR                                                    Daniel J. Fadden *




 COMPONENTS


 Acquisition Management                                      Paul T. Ahern


 Human Resources                                             Nancy L. Bitzer


 Public Affairs                                              Michael P. Freeman


 Real Property Management                                    Scott L. Rush




 * also serves as the Senior Executive Officer

https://rrb.gov/OurAgency/OfficeofAdministration



Equal Opportunity
 DIRECTOR                                              Pamela M. Tate

https://rrb.gov/OurAgency/OfficeofEqualOpportunity



General Counsel


                                                       Ana M. Kocur




 COMPONENTS


 Hearings and Appeals                                  Spiridoula Mavrothalasitis


 Law                                                   Ana M. Kocur


 Legislative Affairs                                   Beverly Britton-Fraser




 Secretary to the Board                                Stephanie Hillyard

https://www.rrb.gov/OurAgency/OfficeofGeneralCounsel



Programs


 DIRECTOR                                              (vacancy)




 COMPONENTS


 Disability Benefits                                   Sherita P. Boots


 Policy and Systems                                    Kimberly Price


 Program Evaluation and Management Services            Janet M. Hallman


 Retirement–Survivor Benefits                          Valerie Allen


 Unemployment and Programs Support                     Micheal T. Pawlak

https://rrb.gov/OurAgency/OfficeofPrograms
Inspector General


                                                                                              Martin J. Dickman

https://www.rrb.gov/OurAgency/InspectorGeneral/OIG



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2021.



The Railroad Retirement Board administers comprehensive retirement-survivor and unemployment-sickness benefit

programs for the Nation's railroad workers and their families.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 27, 1934, President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved Public Law 73–485, which is commonly cited as the

Railroad Retirement Act, "to provide a retirement system for railroad employees" (48 Stat. 1283).

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/73rd-congress/session-2/c73s2ch868.pdf
President Roosevelt's approval "established as an independent agency in the executive branch of the Government a

Railroad Retirement Board, to be composed of three members appointed by the President, by and with the advice and

consent of the Senate" (48 Stat. 1287). One member of the Board, representatives of the railroad employees

recommend for appointment; another member, representatives of the carriers (i.e., railroad employers) recommend

for appointment. The Chair of the Board, neither representatives of the employees nor representatives of the carriers

recommend. The Chair is a public member of the Board and cannot have a pecuniary or other interest in any

employee organization or carrier.


The RRB's statement of organization has been assigned to part 200 in 20 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=3afc816f2022258c6f160753cdceb5a7&mc=true&node=pt20.1.200&rgn=div5
The RRB posts an "Organization Chart" on its website.

https://www.rrb.gov/OurAgency/OrganizationChart

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
The RRB derives statutory authority from the Railroad Unemployment Insurance Act of 1938 (PL 75–772) and

administers its provisions.

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/75th-congress/session-3/c75s3ch680.pdf
The RRB also derives statutory authority from the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (PL 93–445) and administers its

provisions.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-88/pdf/STATUTE-88-Pg1305.pdf
The RRB participates in the administration of the Social Security Act and the Health Insurance for the Aged Act. Certain

provisions of these two Acts affect railroad retirement beneficiaries.


Statutory material that emanates from the Railroad Retirement Acts of 1934, 935, 1937, and 1974, has been codified

and assigned to Chapter 9 of 45 U.S.C. Title 45 is dedicated to the subject of "Railroads."
https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title45/chapter9&edition=prelim
Statutory material that deals with railroad unemployment insurance is codified and and has been assigned to Chapter

11 of 45 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title45/chapter11&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that are associated with the RRB are codified and have been assigned to Chapter II of 20 CFR.

Chapter II includes parts 200–399.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=b110236db6c2db55807fc3d0edf12814&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title20/20chapterII.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The RRB's activities center on administering comprehensive retirement-survivor and unemployment-sickness benefit

programs for the Nation's railroad workers and their families in accordance with the provisions of railroad retirement

and railroad unemployment insurance laws. The RRB also administers certain benefit payments and Medicare

coverage that the Social Security Act provides.


RRB field offices manage a placement service for unemployed railroad personnel.

https://www.rrb.gov/OurAgency/AgencyOverview



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that RRB records have been

assigned to record group 184.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/184.html

Automatic Increases
The RRB posts automatic increases—cost of living adjustments and wage indexed amounts—that are associated with

Medicare, the Railroad Retirement Act, and the Railroad Unemployment Insurance Act on its website.

https://www.rrb.gov/FinancialReporting/FinancialActuarialStatistical/EarningLimits/COLAs#medicare

Benefits
The "Benefits" web page has sections on benefits that are associated with disability, Medicare, retirement, sickness,

survivorship, and unemployment. The "Benefits" page also has secure service options for conducting personal business

with the RRB online and information on Federal income taxes that are withheld form railroad retirement benefit

payments.

https://www.rrb.gov/Benefits
Some information on benefits is available in Spanish.

https://www.rrb.gov/Benefits/Espanol

Career Opportunities
Contact the RRB's Bureau of Human Resources. Phone, 312-751-4580.

Email: recruit@rrb.gov
In 2019, the RRB ranked 18th among 28 small agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/RR00
The RRB maintains a job vacancy list of openings that hiring railroad employers report. The list includes job postings

that are not expected to be filled locally.

https://www.rrb.gov/Resources/Jobs

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has an email directory and phone numbers.

https://www.rrb.gov/ContactUs
The RRB's Director of Public Affairs coordinates responses to inquiries from members of the media.

https://www.rrb.gov/NewsRoom/MediaContact | Email: opa@rrb.gov

Data
The RRB posts datasets on the website Data.gov.

https://catalog.data.gov/organization/rrb-gov

External Links
An extensive collection of links to Government, railroad industry, railroad union, and other websites is available on the

RRB website.

https://www.rrb.gov/ExternalLinks

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the RRB recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/railroad-retirement-board

Field Offices
Field offices are located throughout the country. Staff members answer questions about Medicare and Social Security

benefits for railroad workers and their families, retirement benefits, sickness and unemployment benefits, survivor

benefits, and tax withholding and statements. A Zip Code locator is available online for finding the nearest field office.

https://www.rrb.gov/Field-Office-Locator

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA requires the RRB to disclose records to which a person has requested access in writing. Note, however, that

certain exemptions and exclusions that the statute contains shield certain records, or parts of them, from disclosure.

The FOIA applies to Federal agencies and does not create a right of access to records that are held by the U.S.

Congress, the courts, or by State or local government agencies.

https://www.rrb.gov/FOIA
Before submitting a formal FOIA request in writing, browse the electronic FOIA reading room or search specific
    documents that are part of its collection to confirm that the desired information is not immediately and freely

    available.

    https://www.rrb.gov/Resources/FOIA%20Reading%20Room | Email: LAW@rrb.gov

    Glossary
    A glossary of RRB terms is available online.

    https://www.rrb.gov/Resources/GlossaryofRailroadRetirementTerms

    Hotline
    The illegal receiving of RRB benefits or suspected misconduct affecting or involving the RRB, its programs, or its

    employees, should be reported to the Office of Inspector General.

    https://www.rrb.gov/OurAgency/InspectorGeneral/Hotline | Email: hotline@oig.rrb.gov

    News
    The RRB posts news items on its website.

    https://www.rrb.gov/NewsRoom/NewsReleases

    Open Government
    The USAGM supports the Open Government initiative by promoting collaboration, participation, and transparency.

    https://www.rrb.gov/OpenGov

    Publications
    The "Publications" web page provides convenient access to the employer exchange newsletter, program and circular

    letters, and additional published information.

    https://www.rrb.gov/Employers/Publications

    Resources
    RRB online resources include information on appeals, equal opportunity and civil rights, legal opinions and Board

    decisions, rules and regulations, and paying debts electronically. The "Resources" web page also provides convenient

    access to a glossary, reading room, retirement handbook, video library, and opportunities for railroad employment.

    https://www.rrb.gov/Resources

    Site Map
    The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

    https://www.rrb.gov/sitemap

       The above Sources of Information were updated 5–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States
About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                           Securities and Exchange Commission




The United States Government Manual




     SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
    100 F Street NE., Washington, DC 20549


    202-551-7500

    http://www.sec.gov


      CHAIR                                                                                 Mark T. Uyeda, Acting




                                                                                            Caroline A. Crenshaw
                                                                                    Hester M. Peirce


                                                                                    (vacancy)


                                                                                    (vacancy)


https://www.sec.gov/Article/about-commissioners.html



DIVISIONS


 DIRECTORS


 Corporation Finance                                                                Cicely LaMothe, Acting


 Economic and Risk Analysis                                                         Robert Fisher *, Acting


 Enforcement                                                                        Samuel Waldon, Acting


 Examinations                                                                       Keith Cassidy, Acting


 Investment Management                                                              Natasha Vij Greiner


 Trading and Markets                                                                David Saltiel, Acting


 * In addition to serving as a Division Director, also serves in the role of the Chief Economist




OFFICES


 CHIEFS


 Accountant                                                                         Ryan Wolfe, Acting


 Administrative Law Judge                                                           Dean C. Metry


 Data Officer                                                                       Austin Gerig


 Operating Officer                                                                  Kenneth A. Johnson




 COUNSEL
 Ethics                                                                             Danae Serrano


 General                                                                            Jeffrey Finnell, Acting




 OFFICES


 Credit Ratings                                                                     Lori H. Price


 Equal Employment Opportunity                                                       Rita Sampson


 International Affairs                                                              Kathleen Hutchinson, Acting


 Investor Advocate                                                                  Cristina Martin Firvida


 Investor Education and Advocacy                                                    Lori J. Schock


 Legislative and Intergovernmental Affairs                                          Natalia Diez Riggin, Acting


 Minority and Women Inclusion                                                       Nathaniel H. Benjamin


 Municipal Securities                                                               Dave A. Sanchez


 Public Affairs                                                                     Stephanie Allen, Acting


 Small Business Capital Formation Advocacy                                          Stacy Bowers


 Strategic Hub for Innovation and Financial Technology                              Valerie A. Szczepanik


 Secretary                                                                          Vanessa Countryman


 * In addition to serving as an Office Director, also serves in the role of an Advocate


https://www.sec.gov/divisions.shtml



Independent Office


 Inspector General                                                                  Deborah J. Jeffrey

https://www.sec.gov/oig | Email: oig@sec.gov



Operational Offices


 CHIEF OPERATIONAL OFFICER                                                          Kenneth A. Johnson
 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Financial                                               Caryn E. Kauffman


 Human Capital                                           Mark Reinhold


 Information                                             David Bottom




 DIRECTORS


 Acquisitions                                            Vance Cathell


 EDGAR Business                                          Jeffrey Hickman


 Human Resources                                         Mark Reinhold


 Strategic Hub for innovation and Financial Technology   Valerie A. Szczepanik


 Support Operations                                      Olivier A. Girod

https://www.sec.gov/page/directors-biographies



Regional Offices


 DIRECTORS


 Atlanta                                                 Nekia H. Jones


 Boston                                                  Paul Levenson


 Chicago                                                 Daniel R. Gregus


 Denver                                                  Kurt L. Gottschall


 Fort Worth                                              David L. Peavler


 Los Angeles                                             Michele W. Layne


 Miami                                                   Eric I. Bustillo


 New York                                                Lara S. Mehraban, Acting


 Philadelphia                                            Joy G. Thompson, Acting *
                                                                                            Scott A. Thompson, Acting *


  Salt Lake                                                                                 Tanya G. Beard, Acting


  San Francisco                                                                             Monique C. Winkler, Acting


  * Codirector


https://www.sec.gov/page/sec-regional-offices



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The Securities and Exchange Commission protects investors, facilitates capital formation, and maintains efficient, fair,

and orderly markets.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 6, 1934, President Franklin D. Roosevelt approved Public Law 73–291, which is also cited as the Securities

Exchange Act of 1934 (48 Stat. 881). It sought "to provide for the regulation of securities exchanges and of over-the-

counter markets operating in interstate and foreign commerce and through the mails, to prevent inequitable and

unfair practices on such exchanges and markets, and for other purposes" (p. xviii). To help regulate exchanges and

markets and to make them more equitable and fair, the new law "established a Securities and Exchange Commission"

(48 Stat. 885). The establishment of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) belongs to a part of the law that

became effective on July 1, 1934 (48 Stat. 905).

https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/llsl//llsl-c73/llsl-c73.pdf
By the advice and with the consent of the Senate, the President appoints five Commissioners to serve on the

Commission. Not more than three Commissioners may be members of the same political party (48 Stat. 885).


The SEC's statement of organization has been assigned to Subpart A of Part 200 in Title 17 of the Code of Federal

Regulations (17 CFR 200).

https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-17/chapter-II/part-200/subpart-A?toc=1
The SEC posts an organization chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.sec.gov/about/secorg.pdf

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
The SEC website Investor.gov has a web page that is dedicated to "The Laws That Govern the Securities Industry."

https://www.investor.gov/introduction-investing/investing-basics/role-sec/laws-govern-securities-industry
When an issuer of a security and its controlling persons make a public offering of a security in interstate commerce or

via mail, the Securities Act of 1933 (PL 73–22) (48 Stat. 74) requires them to file a registration statement with the SEC. A

registration statement contains information on the issuer and on the security that is being offered. (Limited exemptions

to this requirement include Government securities, intrastate offerings, nonpublic offerings, and certain offerings that

do not exceed $1.5 million.) A registration statement containing material misstatements or omissions may have its
effectiveness refused or suspended. A refusal or suspension of effectiveness bars the sale of a security. Once the

registration statement has been appropriately amended, the security may be sold.

https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/llsl//llsl-c73/llsl-c73.pdf
Statutory material on the subject of securities exchanges has been codified and assigned to Chapter 2B of Title 15 of

the United States Code (15 U.S.C.). Title 15 is dedicated to the subjects of commerce and trade. Material from the

Securities and Exchange Act of 1934 has been assigned to Chapter 2B.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title15/chapter2B&edition=prelim
Statutory material on the subject of protection for securities investors has been codified and assigned to Chapter 2B–1

of Title 15 of 15 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title15/1&edition=prelim
Rules and regulations that deal with commodity and securities exchanges are codified and have been assigned to Title

17 of the Code of Federal Regulations (17 CFR).

https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-17
The Bretton Woods Agreements Act of 1945 (PL 79–171) (59 Stat. 512) provided for the participation of the United

States in the International Monetary Fund and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development. Four years

later, a subsequent act amended The Bretton Woods Agreements Act by adding section 15.

https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/llsl//llsl-c79s1/llsl-c79s1.pdf
The Act (PL 81–142) (63 Stat. 298) to amend the Bretton Woods Agreements Act gave additional responsibilities to the

SEC. The new section dealt with securities (i.e., exempted securities) that the International Bank for Reconstruction and

Development (IBRD) either issued or guaranteed. The Act assigned to the SEC the role of determining the

appropriateness of certain securities for requiring that the IBRD file annual and other reports on them.

https://tile.loc.gov/storage-services/service/ll/llsl//llsl-c81s1/llsl-c81s1.pdf
The content of section 15 was codified and assigned to its own section of Title 22 of the United States Code (22 U.S.C.

286k-1).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title22-section286k-1&num=0&edition=prelim
The Internal Revenue Code of 1954 (PL 83–591) (68A Stat. 3) gave additional responsibilities to the SEC. These

responsibilities dealt with investment companies, development corporations, and capital that these companies furnish

to these corporations (68A Stat. 270). The relevant section and paragraph are 851(e) of "Subchapter M—Regulated

Investment Companies."

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-68/pdf/STATUTE-68A-Pg3.pdf
The content of section 851 was codified and assigned to an identical section of Title 26 of the United States Code (26

U.S.C. 851(e)).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title26/subtitleA/chapter1/subchapterM&edition=prelim



ACTIVITIES
The SEC activities affect the Nation's economy, capital markets, and the lives of average Americans. For more than 85

years, since its founding at the height of the Great Depression, the SEC has been facilitating capital formation,
protecting large and small investors, and maintaining markets that are efficient, fair, and orderly.

https://www.sec.gov/about/what-we-do

ENFORCING FEDERAL SECURITIES LAWS
The enforcement staff conducts investigations into possible violations of the Federal securities laws and litigates the

SEC's civil enforcement proceedings in the Federal courts and in administrative proceedings.

https://www.sec.gov/enforce/Article/enforce-about.html
In civil suits, the SEC seeks injunctions (i.e., orders that prohibit future violations). A person who violates an injunction is

subject to fines or imprisonment for contempt. The Commission can also seek civil money penalties and the

disgorgement of illegal profits. In certain circumstances, it may seek a court order barring or suspending an individual

from acting as a corporate officer or director. Releases that describe litigation in Federal district court are posted on

the SEC website.


The SEC can bring a variety of administrative proceedings, which are heard by hearing officers and Commissioners. A

proceeding for a cease and desist order may be instituted against any person who violates the Federal securities laws.

With respect to regulated persons—brokers, dealers, and investment advisers, as well as to their employees—the

Commission may institute administrative proceedings to revoke or suspend registration or to impose bars or

suspensions from employment. In both cease-and-desist proceedings and administrative proceedings against

regulated persons, the Commission is authorized to order the payment of civil penalties and disgorgement of ill-

gotten gains. Certain associational, conduct-related, and industry bars may also be available. Releases related to

recently-instituted or settled cease-and-desist proceedings and administrative proceedings are posted on the SEC

website. Initial decisions that are issued by hearing officers in contested cases and Commission opinions on appeal

from enforcement actions and disciplinary proceedings by self-regulatory organizations (e.g., the Financial Industry

Regulatory Authority or the New York Stock Exchange) are also posted on the website.

https://www.sec.gov/#section-6

FACILITATING CAPITAL FORMATION
The SEC regulatory regime provides companies and entrepreneurs with ways to access America's capital markets. That

access helps them create jobs, develop life-changing innovations and technology, and provide financial opportunities

for investors. Even more critical for small businesses, access to capital enables them to grow and scale up their

operations and services.

https://www.sec.gov/about/what-we-do#section2

INFORMING AND PROTECTING INVESTORS
American households own trillions of dollars worth of equities, either directly or indirectly, through mutual funds,

retirement accounts, and other investments. The Federal securities laws that the SEC oversees are based on a simple

and straightforward idea: every investor should be treated fairly and have access to certain facts regarding his or her

investments and those who sell investments.


The SEC requires public companies, fund and asset managers, investment professionals, and other market participants

to disclose significant financial and other information on a regular basis. These requirements empower investors to

make informed investment decisions because they have access to accurate, complete, and timely information.
The SEC protects investors by enforcing the Federal securities laws. Effective enforcement holds wrongdoers

accountable and deters future misconduct. The Office of Investor Education and Advocacy also provides investors with

educational materials and other resources and tools.

https://www.sec.gov/about/what-we-do#section1

MAINTAINING AND REGULATING MARKETS
U.S. capital markets are deep, dynamic, and highly liquid. They also have evolved to become increasingly fast and

extraordinarily complex.


In the face of market developments and trends, the SEC must be responsive and innovative. Technological

advancements and commercial developments have changed the operations of securities markets. To remain an

effective regulator, the SEC continuously monitors the market environment and, when appropriate, adjusts and

modernizes its activities, expertise, oversight tools, regulations, and rules.

https://www.sec.gov/about/what-we-do#section3



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that SEC records have been

assigned to record group 266.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/266.html

Background Search Tools
Check the professional background of an investment professional or someone who is selling an investment before

entrusting him or her with hard-earned money. The SEC website has search tools that make conducting a background

check a simple task.

https://www.investor.gov/introduction-investing/getting-started/working-investment-professional/check-out-your-
investment

Business Opportunities
The Office of Acquisitions' web page features links to help those who seek business opportunities with the SEC. Phone,

202-551-2200.

https://www.sec.gov/about/divisions-offices/office-acquisitions

Career Opportunities
The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) employs accountants, attorneys, economists, examiners, industry

specialists, and other professionals to fulfill its mission. While applicants generally must apply for a specific vacancy and

undergo a competitive selection process, the SEC also utilizes various non-competitive hiring flexibilities, allowing the

agency to make hires without a specific job posting. Additionally, the Commission actively recruits for a robust

temporary internship program from colleges, universities, and law schools nationwide.

http://www.sec.gov/careers
In 2024, the SEC ranked 4th among 25 midsize Government agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places

To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/?c=SE00

Climate
On March 21, 2022, the SEC proposed rule changes requiring registrants to include certain climate-related disclosures

in their registration statements and periodic reports, including information about climate-related risks and certain

climate-related financial statement metrics in a note, as part of their audited financial statements. The required

information about climate-related risks also would include disclosure of a registrant's greenhouse gas emissions.

Commenting on the proposal, SEC Chair Gary Gensler said, "If adopted, [the rule] would provide investors with

consistent, comparable, and decision-useful information for making their investment decisions, and it would provide

consistent and clear reporting obligations for issuers . . . . Our core bargain from the 1930s is that investors get to

decide which risks to take, as long as public companies provide full and fair disclosure and are truthful in those

disclosures. Today, investors representing literally tens of trillions of dollars support climate-related disclosures because

they recognize that climate risks can pose significant financial risks to companies, and investors need reliable

information about climate risks to make informed investment decisions."

https://www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2022-46
Proposed rule (87 FR 21334) on the enhancement and standardization of climate-related disclosures:

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-2022-04-11/pdf/2022-06342.pdf

Contact Information
The SEC posts email addresses and phone numbers on its "Contact Information" web page.

https://www.sec.gov/about/contact-sec
The SEC’s Office of Investor Education and Advocacy (OIEA) provides a variety of services and tools to address the

problems and questions investors may face. https://www.investor.gov/contact-us | Email: Help@sec.gov Members of

the news media may contact the Office of Public Affairs by email or phone for press inquiries. Phone, 202–551–4120.

Email: news@sec.gov

Data
The "SEC Data Resources" web page has a comprehensive list that brings together links to various SEC data resources.

https://www.sec.gov/data-research/sec-data-resources

Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval (EDGAR)
Domestic and foreign companies are required to file reports, statements, and other forms. This information is free to

access and free to download.

https://www.sec.gov/search-filings

Enforcement / Litigation
The SEC posts information on its website, including litigation releases in Federal court actions, orders and opinions

issued by the Commission, legal briefs filed by the Commission in cases before the U.S. Court of Appeals, trading

suspensions, and information concerning distributions to harmed investors.
https://www.sec.gov/enforcement-litigation

Events
A schedule of upcoming SEC meetings, public appearances by SEC officials, and public hearings is available online.

https://www.sec.gov/newsroom/meetings-events

Additional Resources
The "Related Sites" web page has a convenient list of hyperlinked websites that online visitors may find helpful.

https://www.sec.gov/about/related-sites
The website Investor.gov has an "Additional Resources" page. It gives investors easy access to a list of hyperlinked

websites that belong to consumer groups, Federal agencies, self-regulatory organizations, and State regulators.

https://www.investor.gov/additional-resources

Fast Answers
https://www.investor.gov/introduction-investing/investing-basics/glossary

Federal Register
Documents that the SEC recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/securities-and-exchange-commission

Financial Planning Tools
The website Investor.gov has a "Free Financial Planning Tools" web page that has links to online analyzers, calculators,

and estimators.

https://www.investor.gov/free-financial-planning-tools

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The Office of Freedom of Information Act Services makes SEC records available to the public to the greatest extent

possible under the FOIA. The Office generally receives over ten thousand requests per year for Commission

documents and records. For more information, see https://www.sec.gov/foia-services. You can also contact the SEC’s

Office of FOIA Services at foiapa@sec.gov or 202-551-7900. Records such as no-action and interpretive letters, public

comments on proposed rules, registration statements and reports, and SEC decisions and releases can be read and

printed for free by using the SEC online search feature. An electronic request form is available for obtaining nonpublic

records. The SEC releases nonpublic records, except when a record comes within one or more of the FOIA’s nine

statutory exemptions or three law enforcement exclusions. An electronic request form also may be used for obtaining

older public records (usually dated before 1996) that the SEC has not posted on its website. For more information on

requesting records, see https://www.sec.gov/foia-services/foia-reference-guide#foia1.

https://www.sec.gov/page/office-foia-services | Email: foiapa@sec.gov
Records such as no-action and interpretive letters, public comments on proposed rules, registration statements and

reports filed, SEC decisions and releases, and staff manuals, can be read and printed for free by using the SEC online

search feature. An electronic request form is available for obtaining nonpublic records such as consumer complaints,

records compiled in investigations, and staff comment letters. The SEC releases nonpublic records, except when they

are shielded from disclosure by a FOIA exemption. An electronic request form also may be used for obtaining older
records that the SEC has not posted on its website. These records usually are dated before 1996.

https://www.sec.gov/page/foia-library

Glossary
The website Investor.gov has an online glossary.

https://www.investor.gov/introduction-investing/investing-basics/glossary

Distribution to Harmed Investors
“Distributions to Harmed Investors page contains information about certain SEC enforcement actions. In some of these

actions, funds have been paid by defendants or respondents to satisfy a judgment and the SEC, in its discretion, may

seek to distribute these funds for the benefit of harmed investors. Some of the distributions in these cases are

administered by SEC staff, and in other cases, a third-party Fund Administrator/Distribution Agent has been appointed

by the Commission or court to administer the distribution.

https://www.sec.gov/enforcement-litigation/distributions-harmed-investors

Securities Topics
The "Securities Topics" web page highlights topics of current interest at the SEC.

https://www.sec.gov/securities-topics

Newsroom
The SEC posts press releases, public statements, speeches, testimonies, and webcasts on its website. A subscription

form is available online to receive news alerts via email.

https://www.sec.gov/newsroom | Email: news@sec.gov

Performance / Budgets / Planning
The SEC posts annual performance and financial reports, budget reports, and strategic plans on its website.

https://www.sec.gov/about/budget-performance

Plain Language
Like other Federal agencies, the SEC must compose documents in plain writing. According to the Plain Writing Act of

2010, writing should be "clear, concise, well-organized" and follow" other best practices appropriate to the subject or

field and intended audience." SEC writers and editors would appreciate the public's help to assess our progress on

plain writing. If you have comments or suggestions about our implementation plan, or have difficulty understanding

our documents or the pages on our website, please contact us.

https://www.sec.gov/about/plain-writing-initiative | Email: PlainWriting@sec.gov

Reports / Publications
The SEC posts periodic SEC reports and publications on its website.

https://www.sec.gov/reports
The website Investor.gov has a "Publications" web page.

https://www.investor.gov/additional-resources/general-resources/publications-research/publications
   Site Map
   The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

   https://www.sec.gov/sitemap

   Small Business Capital Formation
   The SEC has a page dedicated to resources for small businesses to help equip small businesses, from startup to small

   cap, and their investors with the tools needed to navigate capital raising.

   https://www.sec.gov/resources-small-businesses

   Social Media
   The SEC uses social media to communicate with the general public. It maintains a presence on LinkedIn, YouTube, X,

   and has Facebook and Instagram pages.

   https://www.sec.gov/newsroom/social-media

   Tips / Complaints
   Members of the public can inform the SEC of possible violations of U.S. securities laws by completing the online

   questionnaire.

   https://www.sec.gov/submit-tip-or-complaint

   Understanding Fees
   Fees and costs are associated with investment products and services. A fee may be small; however, it can affect an

   investment portfolio's performance and returns over time. To learn more about fees, visit the website Investor.gov.

   https://www.investor.gov/introduction-investing/getting-started/understanding-fees

   Veterans
   The website Investor.gov has investing tips for veterans and advice on how they can recognize investment fraud.

   https://www.investor.gov/additional-resources/information/veterans

   Violations / Investigations
   The "How Investigations Work" web page lists common violations that can lead to an SEC investigation. It also explains

   the difference between an administrative action and civil action.

   https://www.sec.gov/about/divisions-offices/division-enforcement/how-investigations-work

   Votes
   The final votes of SEC Commissioners on decisions, orders, rules, and the votes authorizing district court proceedings

   and other actions are posted online.

   https://www.sec.gov/about/commission-votes.shtml

       The above Sources of Information were updated 4–2022.




Home
The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                  Selective Service System




The United States Government Manual




     SELECTIVE SERVICE SYSTEM
    National Headquarters, Arlington, VA 22209-2425


    703-605-4100

    http://www.sss.gov




    National Headquarters—Arlington, VA
 DIRECTOR                                       Donald M. Benton


 Deputy Director                                John P. Prigmore




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Financial                                      Roderick R. Hubbard


 Information Security                           Anthony Clark




 Chief of Staff                                 Wadi A. Yakhour


 General Counsel                                Rudy G. Sanchez, Jr.

https://www.sss.gov/About/Directors-Biography

 ASSOCIATE DIRECTORS


 Information Technology                         Anthony Clark


 Operations                                     Craig T. Brown


 Public and Intergovernmental Affairs           Matthew H. Tittmann


 Support Services                               Roderick R. Hubbard




Data Management Center—Palatine, IL


 Manager                                        Nicole F. Harris




Regional Headquarters


 DIRECTORS


 Region I—North Chicago, IL                     Thomas J. Kenney


 Region II—Marietta, GA                         Carlos M. Perez


 Region III—Denver, CO                          John J. Wilber
https://www.sss.gov/About



  The above list of key personnel was updated 7–2019.



The Selective Service System supplies the Armed Forces with manpower in an emergency and operates an Alternative

Service Program for men classified as conscientious objectors.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On June 24, President Harry Truman approved the Selective Service Act of 1948, which established the Selective

Service System.

https://www.loc.gov/rr/frd/Military_Law/Morgan-Papers/Vol-I_PL-759.pdf
The SSS is an independent agency within the executive branch. The President appoints the Director, who is directly

responsible to the President. The agency is not part of the Department of Defense. The agency's statement of

organization is found in the Code of Federal Regulations (32 CFR 1605).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CFR-2018-title32-vol6/pdf/CFR-2018-title32-vol6-part1605.pdf
By the enactment of a later amendment, the original Act became known as the Military Selective Service Act (50 U.S.C.

3801 et seq.). It requires the registration of male U.S. citizens and other male persons who are in the United States. The

Act exempts members of the active Armed Forces and nonimmigrant aliens.

https://www.sss.gov/About/Agency-Mission/Military-Selective-Service-Act
From 1948 until 1973, men were drafted to fill Armed Forces vacancies that could not be filled through voluntary

means. When the authority of induction expired in 1973, the SSS continued and maintained readiness to support the

all-volunteer force in case an emergency should require Congress to authorize a resumption of inductions.

Registration was suspended early in 1975, and the SSS assumed a standby posture. Beginning in late 1979, efforts were

made to upgrade the System's capability for rapid mobilization in an emergency. In the summer of 1980, the

registration requirement was reinstated.

https://www.sss.gov/About/History-And-Records/Background-Of-Selective-Service
Proclamation 4771 of July 20, 1980 (45 FR 45247), requires, unless exempted by the Military Selective Service Act, male

citizens and other males residing in the country born on or after January 1, 1960, and who have attained age 18, but

have not attained age 26, to register. A young man may register at a post office within the United States and at a U.S.

Embassy or consulate outside the United States. Today, registering online at the SSS's website is also possible.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1980-07-03/pdf/FR-1980-07-03.pdf#page=1



ACTIVITIES
The Selective Service System (SSS) is a proven way to expand the U.S. Armed Forces in a national emergency. The SSS

operates at low cost; it ensures that a future draft will be fair and equitable; and it can respond to the Nation’s needs

for manpower in a timely manner. Registration is the only mission component that is publicly visible during peacetime;
however, readiness to respond is crucial. It fosters timeliness, fairness, and the equity that is expected of the agency if it

is directed to reestablish conscription.


The Military Selective Service Act imposes liability for training and service in the Armed Forces upon registrants who

are ages 18–26, except those who are exempt or deferred. Persons who have been deferred remain liable for training

and service until age 35. Aliens are not liable for training and service until they have remained in the United States for

more than 1 year. Conscientious objectors who are opposed to all service in the Armed Forces are required to perform

civilian work in lieu of induction into the Armed Forces.

https://www.sss.gov/About

Readiness
The SSS maintains readiness to manage a conscription program for the U.S. Armed Forces if authorized by Congress

and directed by the President. The agency must be ready to execute a national draft lottery, to issue induction orders

to those registrants who are selected through the lottery, and to arrange transportation to relocate them to a military

entrance processing station for testing and evaluation before induction into military service. The agency also must

maintain the ability to operate an alternative service program for the men who request and are granted conscientious

objector status.


Three regional headquarters keep the agency connected with its hundreds of part-time employees and thousands of

volunteers throughout the country and U.S. Territories. The regional headquarters maintain the SSS's readiness at the

grassroots level. They manage the activities of the agency’s 56 State directors; conduct training for them, regional field

offices, and civilian board members; and ensure that the local and district appeals boards have sufficient numbers of

people serving on them. They also directly support the agency’s goal of increasing registration compliance through

local registration awareness programs.


The board member program relies on uncompensated civilian volunteers who serve as local, district, and national

appeals board members. The SSS trains board members to prepare them for adjudicating claims filed by registrants

seeking postponements, exemptions, and deferments in accordance with the Military Selective Service Act, the Code

of Federal Regulations, and other policies and procedures. Readiness training, operational planning, and policies for

the agency are continually updated to reflect changes that may be occurring in real-time.


Registration
Registration is a critical component of readiness. The agency is responsible for providing trained and untrained

manpower to the Department of Defense in the event of a national emergency. If conscription becomes necessary, the

maximum number of eligible men must be registered to assure the public of a fair and equitable lottery and induction

process. By registering, male citizens comply with Federal law and remain eligible for student financial aid, job training,

and Government employment opportunities. Immigrant men protect their eligibility for U.S. citizenship by being

registered.


Data Management Center employees process registrations and operate the agency’s database system. If directed by

Congress and the President, the SSS's registration database would be used to facilitate the induction of men into the

U.S. Armed Forces. The agency’s database is constantly maintained to ensure accuracy, accessibility, and network

security.
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Alternative Service
The "Alternative Service Program" brochure is available online.

https://www.sss.gov/Portals/0/PDFs/ASP%20Brochure%20-%20Web.pdf

Annual Reports
The SSS posts it annual reports to the U.S. Congress online.

https://www.sss.gov/Reports/Annual-Report-to-Congress

Career Opportunities
The Selective Service System offers competitive wages, the Thrift Savings Plan with matching funds, health care

benefits, paid vacation time, and work-life benefit options that include telework, as well as alternate and flexible work

schedules for most positions.

https://www.sss.gov/Careers
In 2018, the SSS ranked 26th among 29 small agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/SS00

Contact Information
The SSS posts helpful email addresses and phone numbers for contacting the agency.

https://www.sss.gov/About/ContactInformation | Email: information@sss.gov

Facts / Figures
Quick facts and figures are available online.

https://www.sss.gov/About/Quick-Facts-and-Figures

Forms
Frequently requested forms are available online.

https://www.sss.gov/Forms

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Enacted in 1966, the FOIA took effect on July 4, 1967. The law gives a right to obtain access to Federal agency records

to any person, except a fugitive from the law. Some records, or portions of them, are, however, shielded from

disclosure by one or more of nine statutory exemptions or by specific harm that disclosure may cause.

https://www.sss.gov/Reports/FOIA
The electronic reading room contains documents that the SSS has posted proactively. Before making a FOIA request,

search the electronic reading room for relevant records that may be accessible without a formal FOIA request.

https://www.sss.gov/Reports/FOIA/FOIA-Electronic-Reading-Room
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The SSS posts answers to FAQs.

https://www.sss.gov/QA

Newsletter
The SSS posts its quarterly newsletter "The Register" online.

https://www.sss.gov/Public-Affairs/The-Register-Newsletter

Noncitizens / Dual Nationals
U.S. noncitizens and dual nationals are required by law to register with the SSS. More information is available on the

"Non-Citizens and Dual Nationals" web page.

https://www.sss.gov/About/History-And-Records/Non-Citizens-and-Dual-Nationals

Performance / Accountability
The agency's performance and accountability reports are available online.

https://www.sss.gov/Reports/Financial-Reports/Performance-Accountability-Report

Plain Language
The Selective Service System adheres to Federal plain language guidelines. If a document or web page contains poorly

written prose or is difficult to understand, contact the agency by email.

https://www.sss.gov/Reports-and-Notices/Plain-Language | Email: Information@sss.gov

Registration
Men, age 18–25, with a valid social security number, may register online using an electronic form. A fillable registration

form that can be returned by mail is also available for immigrant males (documented or undocumented), for men who

cannot use the online registration form because of a faulty social security number, and for men without a social

security number.

https://www.sss.gov/Home/Registration
Registration resources that have been adapted for various audiences and made suitable for blogs, websites, and

electronic and print newsletters, are available on the agency's website.

https://www.sss.gov/Resources/Resources

Return to the Draft
Learn how the SSS would conduct a return to the draft.

https://www.sss.gov/About/Events-after-Draft

Social Media
The SSS has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/SSSregistration?ref=ts&fref=ts
The SSS tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/SSS_gov
     The SSS posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/SelectiveServ?feature=watch

     Women
     Women are not required to register with the SSS. To learn the reasons for their exemption, visit the "Women and the

     Draft" web page.

     https://www.sss.gov/Registration/Women-And-Draft

        The Sources of Information were updated 7–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Small Business Administration




The United States Government Manual




     SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION
    409 Third Street SW., Washington, DC 20416


    202-205-6600

    202-205-7064

    http://www.sba.gov




    SBA Headquarters
 ADMINISTRATOR                                     Kelly Loeffler


 Deputy Administrator                              (vacancy)




 Chief Counsel                                     Major Clark, Acting


 Senior Advisor                                    Patricia Gibson

https://www.sba.gov/person/chris-pilkerton

 ASSOCIATE ADMINISTRATORS


 Capital Access                                    William Manger


 Communications and Public Liaison                 Jimmy F. Billimoria


 Congressional and Legislative Affairs             Michael Hershey


 Disaster Assistance                               James Rivera


 Entrepreneurial Development                       Allen Gutierrez


 Field Operations                                  Michael Vallante, Acting


 Government Contracting and Business Development   Robb Wong


 International Trade                               David M. Glaccum


 Investment and Innovation                         Joseph Shepard


 Small Business Development Centers                George Koklanaris


 Veterans Business Development                     Larry Stubblefield




 ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR


 Hearings and Appeals                              Delorice Price Ford




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Financial                                         Dorrice Roth


 Information                                       Maria A. Roat
 Operating                                                                     (vacancy)




 General Counsel                                                               Christopher M. Pilkerton


 National Ombudsman                                                            Stefanie Wehagen


https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/organization/sba-leadership



Regional Administrators


 REGIONS


 I                                                                             Wendell G. Davis


 II                                                                            Steve Bulger


 III                                                                           Michelle Christian


 IV                                                                            Ashley Daniel Bell


 V                                                                             Robert Scott


 VI                                                                            Justin Crossie


 VII                                                                           Thomas Salisbury


 VIII                                                                          Daniel Nordberg


 IX                                                                            Michael Vallante


 X                                                                             Jeremy Field

https://www.sba.gov/local-assistance/find/?type=SBA%20Regional%20Office&pageNumber=1



Office of Inspector General


 Inspector General                                                             H. Mike Ware

https://www.sba.gov/content/hannibal-mike-ware



The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2019.
The Small Business Administration aids, assists, and counsels entrepreneurs and protects their business interests;

preserves free and competitive enterprise; and maintains and strengthens the overall economy.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On July 30, 1953, President Dwight D. Eisenhower approved Public Law 83–163, which is also cited as the "Small

Business Act of 1953." This Act created the Small Business Administration (SBA), whose present existence and authority

are derived from the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 631 et seq.) and the Small Business Investment Act of 1958 (15 U.S.C.

661).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-67/pdf/STATUTE-67-Pg230.pdf
For the SBA statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 13, Part 101.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=d38ae405ec8120025c2a65388e249f57&mc=true&node=pt13.1.101&rgn=div5
The SBA included an organizational chart in its "Agency Financial Report—Fiscal Year 2018" on page 12.

https://www.sba.gov/sites/default/files/2018-11/SBA%20FY%202018%20AFR.pdf



ACTIVITIES

Advocacy
The Office of Advocacy (OA) promotes the views and elevates the concerns of small business before Congress, White

House officials, representatives of Federal agencies, Federal court judges, and policymakers on the State level. Within

the Federal government, the OA speaks independently on behalf of small business and is the source of small business

statistics. The OA also has watchdog responsibilities, ensuring that small business receives the support and

consideration that the "Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980" (Public Law 96–354), as amended, provides.

https://advocacy.sba.gov | Email: advocacy@sba.gov

  For further information, contact the Office of Advocacy. Phone, 202-205-6533.



Bonding for Contractors
The Surety Bond Guarantee program helps small and emerging contractors obtain the bonding necessary for bidding

on and receiving non-Federal contracts up to $6.5 million and Federal contracts up to $10 million. The SBA guarantees

bonds that participating surety companies issue and reimburses between 70–90 percent of losses and expenses

incurred should a business default on the contract. Construction, service, and supply contractors are eligible for the

program if they meet certain standards.

https://www.sba.gov/funding-programs/surety-bonds

  For further information, contact the Office of Surety Guarantees. Phone, 202-205-6540.
Business Development
The Office of Business Development (OBD) oversees the 8(a) Business Development program. The Office assists with

contracts and loans, counsels, expands access to capital and credit, gives technical guidance, and offers training

workshops. Eligible 8(a) program participants may receive Federal surplus property on a priority basis. One of the

OBD's principal development tools is the Mentor-Protégé program, which allows participants to benefit from business

development assistance provided by successful companies.

https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/obd/resources

  For further information, contact the Office of Business Development. Phone, 202-205-5852.



Capital Access
The Office of the Associate Administrator for Capital Access increases the availability of capital through banks and

other lending partners. It oversees SBA programs that help small businesses gain access to capital. These programs

include the 7(a) general business guarantee, 504 Certified Development Company, SBA surety bond guarantee, and

microlending.

https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/oca

  For further information, contact the Office of Capital Access. Phone, 202-205-6657.



Disaster Assistance
The SBA serves as the Federal disaster bank for nonfarm, private sector losses. It lends money to disaster survivors for

repairing or replacing their most damaged property. The agency makes direct loans with subsidized interest rates to

individuals, homeowners, businesses of all sizes, and nonprofit organizations.

https://www.sba.gov/content/disaster-assistance | Email: disastercustomerservice@sba.gov

  For further information, contact the Office of Disaster Assistance. Phone, 202-205-6734.



Field Operations
The Office of Field Operations is responsible for the provision of SBA services and availability of its products: It serves

as the critical link between SBA policymakers and businessmen and women who operate small businesses. The Office

provides policy guidance and oversight to regional administrators and district directors for achieving agency goals and

objectives and for solving problems in specific operational areas. It plays a liaison role and expedites issues for the

regional and district offices when dealing with the central office, coordinating the presentation of views from the field.

It also establishes and monitors district performance goals and organizes reviews of the field offices.

https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/sba-locations

  For further information, contact the Office of Field Operations. Phone, 202-205-6808.



Financial Assistance
The SBA does not lend money directly to owners of small businesses, but it supports lenders in their efforts to make

loans to them. The SBA sets guidelines for loans made by lending partners, community development organizations,

and micro-lending institutions. The SBA reduces the risk of lending and makes it easier for lenders to access capital,

which allows owners and operators of small business to receive loans more easily. The SBA gives its guarantee to

lending institutions and certified development companies that make loans to small businesses. Small businesses use

the borrowed money for working capital and financing the acquisition of land and buildings, for constructing new and

improving existing facilities, and for purchasing equipment and machinery.

https://www.sba.gov/funding-programs/loans

  For further information, contact the nearest Small Business Administration district office.



Government Contracting
Through various programs and services, the SBA assists small businesses—including HUBZone certified firms and

disadvantaged, women-owned, and service-disabled veteran-owned small businesses—with receiving Government

procurement. The contracting liaison helps small-scale entrepreneurs secure an equitable share of the natural

resources that the Federal Government sells. The Administration also works with the Office of Management and

Budget and other Federal agencies to establish policy and regulations affecting small business access to Government

contracts.

https://www.sba.gov/category/navigation-structure/contracting

  For further information, contact the nearest Office of Government Contracting. Phone, 202-205-6460.



Historically Underutilized Business Zone Development
The Historically Underutilized Business Zone (HUBZone) program was part of the Small Business Reauthorization Act

of 1997. The program fosters economic development and employment in HUBZones, which include Indian

reservations, through the establishment of preferences. The program provides greater access to Federal contracting

opportunities for qualified businesses. The SBA regulates and implements the program, determining which businesses

are eligible to receive contracts, maintaining a list of qualified businesses that Federal agencies may use for locating

vendors, adjudicating protests of eligibility, and reporting to the Congress on the program's effect on employment

and investment.

https://www.sba.gov/content/understanding-hubzone-program | Email: HUBZone@sba.gov

  For further information, contact the HUBZone Help Desk. Phone, 202-205-8885.



International Trade
The Office of International Trade (OIT) makes American small businesses more competitive worldwide by developing

international trade opportunities for them. It collaborates with other Federal agencies and with public and private

sector groups to promote the exports of small businesses and to help entrepreneurs who seek export opportunities.

Through 21 U.S. Export Assistance Centers, SBA district offices, and service-provider partners, the OIT coordinates and
directs the Administration's export initiatives.

https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/oit

  For further information, contact the Office of International Trade. Phone, 202-205-6720.



Local Assistance
The SBA supports business centers for women (WBCs), business outreach centers for veterans (VBOCs), small-business

development centers (SBDCs), and the Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE). These programs and others help

the SBA further its reach beyond the regional, to the local level.

https://www.sba.gov/local-assistance

  For further information, contact the Small Business Administration. Phone, 202-205-6600.



Native American Affairs
The Office of Native American Affairs assists and encourages the creation, development, and expansion of small

businesses that Native Americans own. It develops and implements initiatives designed to address specific business

challenges encountered by Native American entrepreneurs.

https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/naa

  For further information, contact the Office of Native American Affairs. Phone, 202-205-7364.



Regulatory Fairness
Congress established the National Ombudsman and 10 Regulatory Fairness (RegFair) Boards in 1996 as part of the

Small Business Regulatory Enforcement Fairness Act. The National Ombudsman assists owners of small businesses

when they experience excessive or unfair Federal regulatory enforcement action. The National Ombudsman receives

comments from small businesses and acts as a liaison between them and Federal agencies. These comments are

forwarded to the appropriate Federal agencies for review and consideration of the fairness of the enforcement actions.

The National Ombudsman sends a copy of an agency's response to the business owner. In some cases, fines are

reduced or eliminated and decisions changed in favor of the owner.


Each of the RegFair Boards comprises five volunteer members who are owners, operators, or officers of small

enterprises. The SBA Administrator appoints board members for 3-year terms. Each RegFair Board meets at least

annually with the Ombudsman, reports to the Ombudsman on substantiated instances of excessive or unfair

enforcement, and comments on the annual report to Congress prior to its publication.

https://www.sba.gov/ombudsman | Email: ombudsman@sba.gov

  For further information, contact the Office of the National Ombudsman. Phone, 888-734-3247.



Research Investment / Technology Transfer
The Office of Investment and Innovation manages the Small Business Investment Research (SBIR) and Small Business

Technology Transfer (STTR) programs. Together, they provide billions of dollars each year for small enterprises to

participate in federally funded research and development and to cooperate with Government agencies and research

institutions and universities. The SBIR and STTR programs stimulate the creation of intellectual property with potential

for commercialization and with applications in a broad range of sectors in the Nation's economy.

https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/ooi/about-us

  For further information, contact the Office of Investment and Innovation. Phone, 202-205-6510.



Small Business Development
The Office of Small Business Development Centers funds, oversees, and supports the nationwide Small Business

Development Center (SBDC ) network. The SBDC program provides one-stop management assistance to current and

prospective owners of small businesses in central and easily accessible branch locations. The program relies on the

cooperation of the private sector, the educational community, and Federal, State, and local governments.


The SBDC program delivers up-to-date counseling, technical help, and training in all aspects of managing a small

business. Its services include assistance with feasibility studies and with engineering, financial, marketing, organization,

production, and technical challenges. SBDC activities include international trade assistance, procurement assistance,

rural development, venture capital information, and technical assistance.

https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/osbdc

  For further information, contact the Office of Small Business Development Centers. Phone, 202-205-6766.



Venture Capital
The Small Business Investment Company (SBIC) program was created in 1958 to connect venture capital with the

needs of startups and expanding small businesses. SBICs are privately owned and managed venture capital funds,

which the SBA licenses and regulates. They use their own capital, combined with SBA guaranteed funds, to make

equity and debt investments in qualifying small businesses. Fund managers may invest up to 75 percent of total capital

in small businesses that have no more than 49 percent of their employees oversees, a tangible net worth of between

$6 and $19.5 million, and an aftertax income averaged over the previous 2 years of between $2 and $6.5 million. At

least 25 percent of the fund's total capital must be invested in smaller U.S. enterprises that have no more than 49

percent of their employees oversees, a tangible net worth of less than $6 million, and an aftertax income averaged

over the previous 2 years of less than $2 million.

https://www.sba.gov/partners/sbics/apply-be-sbic#section-header-6 | Email: askSBIC@sba.gov

  For further information, contact the Investment Division. Phone, 202-205-6510.



Veterans Business Development
The Office of Veterans Business Development (OVBD) formulates, executes, and advances policies and programs that

provide assistance to small businesses that veterans own and control. Exclusively promoting veteran entrepreneurship,
the OVBD helps veterans, service-disabled veterans, reservists, active-duty servicemembers, transitioning

servicemembers, and their dependents or survivors, to avail themselves of all SBA programs and their benefits. The

OVBD is involved in each SBA program, ensuring that veterans receive special consideration in each program's

operation. The Veterans Business Outreach Program is an OVBD initiative that oversees Veterans Business Outreach

Centers nationwide.

https://www.sba.gov/content/veteran-service-disabled-veteran-owned

  For further information, contact the Office of Veterans Business Development. Phone, 202-205-6773.



Women's Business Empowerment
The Office of Women's Business Ownership (OWBO) enables and empowers female entrepreneurs through advocacy,

education, outreach, and support. OWBO programs provide business training and counseling, access to credit and

capital, and marketing opportunities, including Federal contracts. The Women's Business Center (WBC) program offers

SBA services in almost every State. A WBC tailors its services according to the needs of its individual community. Each

WBC provides training in finance, management, marketing, and the Internet, as well as offering access to all financial

and procurement assistance programs of the SBA.

https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/wbo | Email: owbo@sba.gov

  For further information, contact the Women's Business Ownership representative in your SBA district
  office. Phone, 202-205-6673.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Blog
The SBA blog offers information, news, and perspectives that deal with doing business on a small scale.

https://www.sba.gov/blogs

Business Opportunities
Information on selling to the Government and qualifying for Government contracts is available online. The SBA also

provides online resources for small businesses and posts information on Government contracting programs on its Web

site.

https://www.sba.gov/contracting

Career Opportunities
To carry out its mission, the SBA relies on professionals who are culturally astute, have strong communication and

presentation skills, can write effectively, and posses technological proficiency.

https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/sba-team/jobs-sba
In 2018, the SBA ranked 20th among 27 midsize agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.
http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/SB00

Climate / Sustainability
The SBA's Strategic Sustainability Performance Plan (effective, 30 June 2017 ) presents a blueprint and a framework for

the agency to carry out its mission in a way that helps the biosphere and demonstrates a commitment to the creation

of a clean energy economy The plan addresses reducing greenhouse gases, pollution, waste, and water use. It also

discusses strategies, targets, and metrics for climate change adaptation and resilience planning.

https://www.sba.gov/document/support--strategic-sustainability-performance-plan

Contact Information
Email addresses and phone numbers are available on the "Contact the SBA" web page (and on the "SBA Locations"

web page).

https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/organization/contact-sba?interiorpage2015
The SBA public affairs team responds to questions from the media and general public, arranges interviews with

appropriate program staff, and provides referrals and other information. To find an SBA local or regional

spokesperson, visit the "Regional and Local Media" web page.

https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/sba-newsroom/regional-local-media
The Press Office team's contact information is available on the "Press Office Contacts" web page. That team includes

staff from the Office of Communications and Public Liaison, Office of Advocacy, Office of Inspector General, and the

Freedom of Information Act Office.

https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/sba-newsroom/press-office-contacts

Events
The "Find Events" page lists upcoming SBA events nationwide.

https://www.sba.gov/events/find/?dateRange=all&distance=200&pageNumber=1

Glossary
The SBA maintains an online glossary.

https://www.sba.gov/offices/headquarters/obd/resources/13240

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Enacted in 1966, the FOIA took effect on July 4, 1967. The statute makes all existing Federal Government records

available to the public; however, a record may be shielded from disclosure by one or more of nine exemptions or by

specific harm that its disclosure may cause. Any person, except a fugitive from the law, has a right to request access to

Federal agency records.

https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/sba-performance/open-government/foia | Email: FOIA@sba.gov

Introduction to the SBA
A short video explaining the SBA's principal services is available online.

https://www.sba.gov/videos/introduction-sba?interiorpage2015

Learning Center
The SBA offers online courses to help entrepreneurs start and run businesses.

https://www.sba.gov/learning-center

Locations
The "SBA Locations" page helps visitors find contact and other information for disaster offices, district offices,

headquarters offices, regional offices, and loan and guaranty centers.

https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/sba-locations

Newsroom
The SBA newsroom features congressional testimonies, disaster press releases, media advisories and other press

releases, speeches, and weekly lending reports.

https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/sba-newsroom

Open Data
The SBA makes data resources and application programming interfaces (APIs) available to the public. The "Open Data

Sources" web page lists all the SBA datasets that the general public can access.

https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/sba-performance/open-government/digital-sba/open-data/open-data-sources

Open Government
The SBA supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/sba-performance/open-government

Plain Language
SBA writers and editors are committed to communicating in plain language. If a document or web pages lacks clarity

or is difficult to understand, contact the SBA by email.

https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/sba-performance/open-government/other-plans-reports/plain-language-page                 |
Email: plain.language@sba.gov

Resource Guide
The Winter 2019 edition of the "Small Business Resource Guide" is available online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/what-we-do/resource-guides

Site Map
The Web site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.sba.gov/sitemap

Social Media
The SBA maintains social media accounts on Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, Twitter, and YouTube.

https://www.sba.gov/about-sba/open-government/about-sbagov-website/social-media

Videos
The SBA has a collection of online videos. The collection includes a 2-minute video series and other videos that are
     grouped by topic: financing, Government contracting, managing a business, marketing, and starting a business.

     https://www.sba.gov/videos

        The Sources of Information were updated 6–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Social Security Administration




The United States Government Manual




     SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION
    6401 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD 21235


    410-965-1234 / 800-772-1213

    800-325-0778 (TTY)

    http://www.socialsecurity.gov


      COMMISSIONER                                                                          Leland Dudek, Acting


      Deputy Commissioner                                                                   (vacancy)
  Chief of Staff                              Beatrice M. Disman, Acting


  Counselor to the Commissioner               (vacancy)


  Director, Equal Employment Opportunity      Claudia J. Postell, Acting


  Executive Secretary                         Darlynda K. Bogle


https://www.ssa.gov/org/coss.htm



Offices


  Chief Actuary                               Stephen C. Goss


  General Counsel                             Asheesh Agarwal




  DEPUTY COMMISSIONERS


  Analytics, Review, and Oversight            Patricia A. Jonas


  Budget, Finance, Quality, and Management    Michelle A. King


  Communications                              James C. Borland, Acting


  Hearings Operations                         Theresa L. Gruber


  Human Resources                             Marianna LaCanfora


  Legislation and Congressional Affairs       Royce B. Min, Acting


  Operations                                  Mary L. Horne, Acting


  Retirement and Disability Policy            Mark J. Warshawsky


  Systems / Chief Information Officer         Rajive K. Mathur

https://www.ssa.gov/org/ssachart_access.pdf

  Inspector General                           Gale S. Stone, Acting


http://oig.ssa.gov
The above list of key personnel was updated 02–2018.


  [For the Social Security Administration statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations,
  Title 20, Part 422]



The Social Security Administration manages the retirement, survivors, and disability insurance programs that are known
as Social Security; it administers the Supplemental Security Income program for the aged, blind, and disabled; and it

assigns Social Security numbers to U.S. citizens and maintains earnings records based on those numbers.


The Social Security Administration (SSA) was established by Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1946 (5 U.S.C. app.), effective

July 16, 1946. It became an independent agency in the executive branch by the Social Security Independence and

Program Improvements Act of 1994 (42 U.S.C. 901), effective March 31, 1995.

https://www.ssa.gov/history
The SSA is headed by a Commissioner whom the President appoints with the advice and consent of the Senate.


The Deputy Commissioner assists in administering the programs necessary to accomplish the Administration's mission.

The Deputy Commissioner performs duties that the Commissioner, Chief Financial Officer, Chief Information Officer,

General Counsel, Chief Actuary, and Inspector General assign or delegate to him or her.

https://www.ssa.gov/OP_Home/ssact/title07/0702.htm
The Administration's operations are decentralized to provide local services. Each of the 10 SSA regions has a network

of field offices and call centers. These offices and centers provide liaison between the SSA and public. The

Administration operates 10 regional offices, approximately 1,230 field offices, 33 teleservice centers, 15 Social Security

card centers, 6 processing centers, and 2 additional processing centers in its central office.

https://www.ssa.gov/org/index.htm



ACTIVITIES

Black Lung
By agreement with the Department of Labor, the SSA assists in the administration of the black lung benefits provisions

of the Federal Coal Mine Health and Safety Act of 1969, as amended (30 U.S.C. 901).

https://www.ssa.gov/OP_Home/rulings/di/09/SSR73-24-di-09.html

Hearings and Appeals
The SSA administers a nationwide hearings and appeals program that offers a way for those who are dissatisfied with

determinations affecting their rights to and amounts of benefits or their participation in programs to seek remedy

through the Social Security Act. The act allows for administrative appeals of these determinations in accordance with

the requirements of the Administrative Procedure and Social Security Acts. The SSA operates approximately 166

hearing offices, including 2 satellite offices; 5 national hearing centers; and 4 national case assistance centers within in

its 10 administrative regions.

http://www.ssa.gov/appeals/about_odar.html
Medicare
While the administration of Medicare is the responsibility of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the SSA

provides Medicare assistance to the public through SSA field offices and call centers. It adjudicates requests for

hearings and appeals of Medicare claims.

http://www.ssa.gov/medicare

Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance
The SSA administers social insurance programs that provide monthly benefits to retired and disabled workers, to their

spouses and children, and to survivors of insured workers. Financing is under a system of contributory social insurance,

whereby employees, employers, and the self-employed pay contributions that are pooled in special trust funds. When

earnings stop or decrease because the worker retires, dies, or becomes disabled, monthly cash benefits are paid to

supplement the family's reduced income.

https://faq.ssa.gov/ics/support/splash.asp

Supplemental Security Income
The SSA administers this needs-based program for the aged, blind, and disabled. A basic Federal monthly payment is

financed by general revenue, rather than from a special trust fund. Some States, choosing to provide payments to

supplement the benefits, have agreements with the Administration under which it administers the supplemental

payments for those States.

http://www.ssa.gov/disabilityssi/ssi.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
The Office of Acquisition and Grants serves as the SSA's principal procurement office.

http://www.ssa.gov/oag

Career Opportunities
The SSA offers opportunities for various career paths: acquisitions, contracts, and grants; administrative support;

facilities and physical security; finance and accounting; human resources; information technology; law enforcement;

legal; and public contact.

http://www.ssa.gov/careers
In 2017, the SSA ranked 12th among 18 large agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/SZ00

Fraud Hotline
The Office of the Inspector General (OIG) operates a toll-free hotline, 10 a.m.–4 p.m., eastern standard time, for

reporting allegations of abuse, fraud, and waste affecting SSA programs and operations. Phone, 800-269-0271. TTY,

866-501-2101. Fax, 410-597-0118.
https://oig.ssa.gov/report-fraud-waste-or-abuse
An online form also is available to file a report.

https://www.ssa.gov/fraudreport/oig/public_fraud_reporting/form.htm

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
An online guide discusses important FOIA-related topics: how to request information and records, information that the

SSA cannot disclose, and the fees associated with making a request.

https://www.ssa.gov/foia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The SSA posts answers to FAQs and offers information on popular help-topics.

https://faq.ssa.gov/ics/support/default.asp?deptID=34019&_referrer=https://www.ssa.gov/ask

Glossary
A glossary of Social Security terms is available online.

https://www.ssa.gov/agency/glossary

History
In 1795, the unflagging colonial and revolutionary pamphleteer Thomas Paine wrote about Americans entering

adulthood and their welfare in retirement. To the new Republic, he issued a challenge: Establish a public system of

economic security that would give a one-time stipend to each citizen upon attaining age 21, as well as annual benefits

starting at age 50. To learn more about this patriot's bold proposal, see the "Historical Background and Development

of Social Security" web page.

https://www.ssa.gov/history/briefhistory3.html

Multilanguage Gateway
The SSA tries to eliminate or reduce, as much as possible, barriers of language that impede the delivery of its services.

Social Security information is available on the SSA website in the following languages: American Sign Language,

Arabic, Armenian, Chinese, Farsi, French, Greek, Haitian Creole, Hmong, Italian, Korean, Polish, Portuguese, Russian,

Somali, Spanish, Tagalog, and Vietnamese. The SSA provides free interpreter services for conducting Social Security-

related business.

https://www.ssa.gov/multilanguage

News
The SSA posts press releases online.

https://www.ssa.gov/news/press/releases
An online newsletter also is available.

https://www.ssa.gov/news/newsletter

Online Services
The SSA offers a growing number of services electronically through its website.
    https://www.ssa.gov/onlineservices

    Open Government
    The SSA supports the Open Government initiative to create a more open and transparent Government by promoting

    the principles of collaboration, participation, and transparency.

    https://www.ssa.gov/open | Email: open.government@ssa.gov

    Organizational Chart
    The SSA's organizational chart is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

    https://www.ssa.gov/org/ssachart.pdf

    Plain Language
    The Plain Writing Act of 2010 requires Federal agencies to communicate in a manner that the public can understand

    and use. SSA writers and editors welcome suggestions for improving agency forms, notices, pamphlets, or pages from

    its website.

    https://www.ssa.gov/agency/plain-language | Email: PlainWriting@ssa.gov

    Publications
    Many SSA publications in English, Spanish, and other languages are accessible online.

    http://www.socialsecurity.gov/pubs

    Site Map
    The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

    https://www.ssa.gov/sitemap.htm

    Speakers
    Under certain circumstances, the SSA can provide a speaker free of charge, generally available during business hours,

    to explain benefits, programs, and services. An online form is available to initiate a request.

    http://www.ssa.gov/agency/ask-for-a-speaker.html
    https://www.ssa.gov/agency/contact | Email: OPI.Policy.Coordination@ssa.gov

        For further information, contact the Office of Public Inquiries, Social Security Administration, 6401
        Security Boulevard, 1106 West High Rise Building, Baltimore, MD 21235. Phone, 410-965-0709. Fax, 410-
        965-0695.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy
Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Surface Transportation Board




The United States Government Manual




     SURFACE TRANSPORTATION BOARD
    395 E Street SW., Washington, DC 20423


    202-245-0245

    http://www.stb.gov | Email: rcpa@stb.gov




    BOARD
  CHAIR                                                                                 Patrick J. Fuchs


  Vice Chair                                                                            Michelle A. Schultz




  Members                                                                               Karen J. Hedlund


  Members                                                                               Ann D. Begeman


                                                                                        Robert E. Primus


                                                                                        (vacancy)

https://www.stb.gov/about-stb/board-members



OFFICE DIRECTORS


  Economics                                                                             Kristen Monaco


  Environmental Analysis                                                                Danielle Gosselin


  General Counsel                                                                       Anika Cooper


  Management                                                                            Rachel D. Campbell


  Passenger Rail                                                                        Neil Moyer


  Proceedings                                                                           Scott Zimmerman, Acting


  Public Assistance, Governmental Affairs, and Compliance                               Janie Sheng


  Equal Employment Opportunity                                                          Camella Woodham




  (%blankline%)

https://www.stb.gov/about-stb/offices



  The above list of key personnel was updated 11–2021.



The Surface Transportation Board adjudicates and resolves railroad rate and service disputes and reviews proposals for

railroad mergers.


The Surface Transportation Board (STB) is the successor agency to the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC), which

was created in 1887. The ICC Termination Act of 1995 established the STB as an independent adjudicatory body within
the Department of Transportation. It remained administratively aligned with the Department for nearly two decades.

On December 18, 2015, the Surface Transportation Board Reauthorization Act of 2015 established the STB as a wholly

independent Federal agency (49 USC 1301 et seq.).

https://www.stb.gov/about-stb
The STB comprises five members, whom the President appoints and the Senate confirms for 5-year terms. The

President also designates one of the members to serve as the Board's chair.

https://www.stb.gov/about-stb/board-members
The STB posts its organizational chart at the bottom of the "Offices" web page.

https://www.stb.gov/about-stb/offices



ACTIVITIES
The STB adjudicates disputes and regulates interstate surface transportation through various laws governing the

different modes of surface transportation. Its general responsibilities include the oversight of firms engaged in

interstate and foreign commercial transportation—to the extent that it takes place within the United States, or between

or among points in the contiguous United States and points in Alaska, Hawaii, or U.S. Territories or possessions. The

STB’s jurisdiction generally extends over railroad rate and service issues, rail restructuring transactions, including

mergers and line abandonments, construction, and sales, and labor matters related thereto; some moving van,

trucking, and noncontiguous ocean shipping company rate matters; some intercity passenger bus company financial,

operational, and structural matters; and pipeline matters that the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission does not

regulate.


The STB promotes substantive and procedural regulatory reform, provides a forum for the resolution of disputes, and

facilitates appropriate market-based business transactions. Through rulemakings and case disposition, it develops

improved and efficient ways of analyzing problems, reducing costs associated with regulatory oversight, and

encouraging private sector negotiations and resolutions.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Administrative Issuances
The STB posts administrative issuances that may apply to or affect the public.

https://www.stb.gov/about-stb/administrative-issuances

Agricultural Contracts
Rail carriers must file a summary of each contract entered into for the transportation of agricultural products.

Beginning with the first quarter of 2008, filed contract summaries are available on the STB's website in Portable

Document Format (PDF) and grouped by railroad.

https://www.stb.gov/reports-data/agricultural-contract-summaries | Email: rcpa@stb.gov

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that Interstate Commerce

Commission (ICC) records have been assigned to record group 134. The ICC's successor agency is the STB.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/134.html

Career Opportunities
The STB maintains an employment web page.

https://www.stb.gov/about-stb/jobs
STB job opportunities are also available on USAJobs by searching “Surface Transportation Board.


Contact Information
The STB's address is 395 E Street SW., Washington, DC 20423. Phone, 202-245-0245. TTY, 800-877-8339.

Email: rcpa@stb.gov

Environmental Comments
Correspondence and documents that the Office of Environmental Analysis has issued and comments that are part of

environmental reviews are accessible online.

https://www.stb.gov/proceedings-actions/environmental-comments

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the STB recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/surface-transportation-board

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
FOIA gives the public the right to access records of the STB, except where the release of the information in those

records would harm an interest protected by one or more of the nine FOIA exemptions (such as commercially

sensitive information, personal privacy information, investigative documents, ADR materials, etc.) or where release of

information is prohibited by law.

https://www.stb.gov/foia | Email: foia.privacy@stb.gov
The Board’s FOIA officer may be contacted by phone (202) 254-0271 or email: foia.privacy@stb.gov.

Email: foia.privacy@stb.gov
You do not have to file a FOIA request to obtain records that the Board makes routinely available at www.stb.gov,

where you may search for filings, decisions, environmental comments, recordations and many other records. You also

may seek information about STB matters without submitting a FOIA request or incurring FOIA fees by contacting the

Board’s Rail Customer and Public Assistance (RCPA) service (see below).

https://www.stb.gov/foia

Legal Resources
The Board’s website provides information about statutes, legislation, and regulations relevant to the STB, as well as

selected other documents.

https://www.stb.gov/resources/legal-resources/
Litigation Alternatives
The Board has alternative dispute resolution services available to the public, including mediation and arbitration.


Confidential mediation of formal proceedings before the Board is conducted by trained Board staff. Mediation is not

available in Board proceedings in which the agency is required to grant or deny a license or other regulatory approval

or exemption, and those that involve labor protection.


The Board’s arbitration program is available to shippers and railroads that opt-in to the arbitration program by

submitting a notice to the Board. Five types of matters are eligible for Board arbitration: rates; demurrage; accessorial

charges; misrouting or mishandling of rail cars; and disputes over a carrier’s published rules and practices as applied to

particular rail transportation. When a party opts into the program, they can limit the types of matters that they are

willing to arbitrate and can opt-out at any time with 90-day notice.


The Board also has a Rail Customer and Public Assistance service, which handles a variety of public inquiries and

provides confidential informal dispute resolution services.

https://www.stb.gov/resources/litigation-alternatives/

Maps
The "Railroad Map Depot" web page has links to railroad maps. The railroad map information is based on publicly

available maps and data that government agencies, railroads, and other stakeholders produce.

https://www.stb.gov/resources/railroad-map-depot

Moving Companies
A moving company is responsible if it loses or damages a customer’s household possessions during the move. The

customer may file a claim with the mover to request financial compensation for the loss or damage. For additional

information, individuals should see the Board’s website or may contact the Rail Customer and Public Assistance

service, described below, at rcpa@stb.gov.

https://www.stb.gov/resources/need-assistance/hhg-moving/hhg-lost-or-damaged-items

News
The STB posts press releases online.

https://www.stb.gov/news-communications/latest-news

Open Government
The STB supports the three principles of Open Government: transparency, participation, and collaboration.

https://www.stb.gov/about-stb/open-government

Performance / Accountability
Starting with the year 2016, the STB posts these annual reports on its "Strategic Plan and Performance & Accountability

Reports" web page.

https://www.stb.gov/about-stb/agency-materials/strategic-plan-and-pars

Rail Customer and Public Assistance
     Rail Customer and Public Assistance solves problems in ways ranging from a simple answer to a telephone inquiry to

     lengthy confidential informal mediation efforts. Topics handled by RCPA include questions on rates and other charges,

     railroad car supply and service issues, claims for damage, interchange issues, employee complaints, and community

     concerns. The staff also explains the Board’s jurisdiction and procedures and informally answers questions based on

     the staff’s knowledge and experience. Phone: (866) 254-1792 (toll free) or (202) 245-0238

     https://www.stb.gov/resources/need-assistance/rcpa | Email: rcpa@stb.gov

     Reports / Data
     Information on the economic data, service data, and other materials that the STB collects or prepares is posted online.

     https://www.stb.gov/reports-data

     Social Media
     The STB posts newsworthy items and announcements on its pages on X and LinkedIn. https://x.com/STB_Newsroom

     https://www.linkedin.com/company/us-surface-transportation-board/ The STB also streams hearings and has videos of

     past hearings on YouTube. https://www.youtube.com/@surfacetransportationboard8768

     https://x.com/STB_Newsroom

        The Sources of Information were updated 4-2025.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                 Tennessee Valley Authority




The United States Government Manual




     TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY
    400 West Summit Hill Drive, Knoxville, TN 37902


    865-632-2101

    http://www.tva.com




    Board of Directors
 CHAIR                                                            (vacancy)




 DIRECTORS                                                        Kenneth E. Allen


                                                                  A.D. Frazier, Jr.


                                                                  William B. Kilbride


                                                                  John L. Ryder


                                                                  Jeffrey W. Smith




                                                                  (vacancy)


                                                                  (vacancy)


                                                                  (vacancy)

https://www.tva.com/About-TVA/Our-Leadership/Board-of-Directors



Executive Leadership


 PRESIDENT / CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER                              Jeffrey J. Lyash


 Senior Vice President                                            Susan E. Collins




 EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENTS                                        Jeannette M. Mills


                                                                  Sherry A. Quirk


                                                                  John M. Thomas III




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 External Relations                                               Jeannette M. Mills


 Financial                                                        John M. Thomas III


 Human Resources                                                  Susan E. Collins
  Nuclear                                                                                Timothy Rausch


  Operating                                                                              Michael D. Skaggs




  General Counsel                                                                        Sherry A. Quirk

https://www.tva.com/About-TVA/Our-Leadership/Executives

  Inspector General                                                                      Richard W. Moore


http://oig.tva.gov/igmoore.html



The above list of key personnel was updated 8–2020.

The Tennessee Valley Authority conducts a unified program of resource development to advance economic growth in

the Tennessee Valley region.


Establishment and Members of the Board
The Tennessee Valley Authority Act of 1933 created the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA). This act of May 18, 1933 (16

U.S.C. 831-831dd), established the TVA as a wholly owned Government corporation.

https://www.tva.com/file_source/TVA/Site%20Content/About%20TVA/TVA_Act.pdf
All functions of this public corporation are vested in its nine-member Board of Directors, whose members the

President appoints by the advice and with the consent of the Senate. At least seven of the nine members must be

legal residents of the TVA's service area. The Board designates one of its members to serve as the Chair.

https://www.tva.com/About-TVA/Our-History



ACTIVITIES
TVA activities range from economic development and environmental stewardship to electric power production and

transmission; to flood control, navigation, and recreation improvement; and to water supply and water quality

management.


The TVA's electric power program is financially self-supporting and operates as part of an independent system with

the Authority's system of dams on the Tennessee River and its larger tributaries. These dams provide flood regulation

on the Tennessee River and contribute to regulation of the lower Ohio and Mississippi Rivers. The system maintains a

continuous 9-foot-draft navigation channel for the length of the 650-mile Tennessee River main stream, from

Paducah, KY, to Knoxville, TN. The dams harness the power of the rivers to produce electricity. They also provide other

benefits, notably outdoor recreation and water supply.


The Authority operates the river management system and provides assistance to State and local governments in

reducing local flood problems. It also works with other agencies to encourage full and effective use of the navigable
waterway by industry and commerce.


The TVA is the wholesale power supplier for 154 local municipal and cooperative electric systems serving customers in

parts of 7 States. It supplies power to 60 industries and Federal installations whose power requirements are large or

unusual. Power to meet these demands is supplied from dams, coal-fired powerplants, nuclear powerplants, natural

gas combined-cycle powerplants, combustion turbine and diesel installations, solar energy sites, wind turbines, a

methane gas facility, and a pumped-storage hydroelectric plant; U.S. Corps of Engineers dams in the Cumberland

Valley; and Brookfield Renewable Energy Partners dams, whose operations are coordinated with the TVA's system.


Economic development is at the heart of the TVA's mission of making the Tennessee Valley a better place to live. A

healthy economy means quality jobs, more investment in the region, sustainable growth, and opportunities for

residents in the southeastern region to build more prosperous lives. TVA economic development takes a regional

approach to economic growth by partnering with power distributors and both public and private organizations to

attract new investments and quality jobs, supporting retention and growth of existing businesses and industries,

preparing communities for leadership and economic growth, and providing financial and technical services.

https://www.tva.com/About-TVA



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that TVA records have been

assigned to record group 142.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/142.html

Birdwatching
With birds living in and migrating through the area year-round, TVA lands offer plenty of opportunities for

birdwatchers.

https://www.tva.com/environment/recreation/birdwatching | Email: plic@tva.gov

Business Opportunities
The TVA partners with power distributors, suppliers, and other individuals and organizations. It seeks business

relationships with firms offering reliable products and services at competitive prices. The TVA encourages businessmen

and women of diverse backgrounds—minorities, service-disabled-veterans, veterans, as well as small business owners

and entrepreneurs in historically underutilized business zones—to learn about available opportunities. For more

information, contact Supply Chain, BR 4A–C, 1101 Market Street, Chattanooga, TN 37402. Phone , 423-751-7903.

https://www.tva.com/Information/Doing-Business-with-TVA

Career Opportunities
The TVA is a service-oriented agency whose mission covers 86,000 square miles and depends on professionals with

expertise in diverse fields. Some of those fields include archaeology, aviation, economics, engineering, environmental

law, hydrology, law enforcement, library science, marketing, program management, water quality, and zoology.
https://www.tva.com/Careers | Email: careers@tva.gov
In 2019, the Office of Inspector General ranked first among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public

Service's Best Places To Work Agency Rankings!

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/TV01

Climate Change
The "TVA Climate Change Adaptation and Resiliency Plan—2020 Update" is available in Portable Document Format

(PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://tva-azr-eastus-cdn-ep-tvawcm-prd.azureedge.net/cdn-tvawcma/docs/default-source/about-tva/guidelines-
reports/climate-change-adaptation-plan.pdf?sfvrsn=ea883571_2

Contact Information
The TVA benefits from engaged citizens. It encourages comments, feedback, and input. Contact TVA

Communications, 400 W. Summit Hill Drive, Knoxville, TN 37902-1499. Phone, 865-632-2101.

https://www.tva.gov/About-TVA/Contact-Us | Email: tvainfo@tva.gov

Economic Development
TVA Economic Development serves the seven States of the TVA service area—AL, GA, KY, MS, NC, TN, and VA.

Through partnerships with other economic development organizations, the TVA fosters capital investment and job

growth in its service area. Information is available online, or contact TVA Economic Development, 26 Century

Boulevard, Suite 100, Nashville, TN 37214. Phone, 615-232-6051.

https://www.tva.com/Economic-Development

Environmental Reviews
The TVA conducts environmental reviews to consider the effects of its proposed projects on the human and natural

environment before making final decisions. The TVA's environmental projects are open for public review.

https://www.tva.com/Environment/Environmental-Stewardship/Environmental-Reviews

Federal Register
Documents that the TVA has published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/tennessee-valley-authority

Fishing Tips
The TVA helps ambitious fishermen and women meet their numbers. The "Where the Sport Fish Are" page lists the

largest populations of Tennessee Valley sport fish and the reservoirs that they inhabit.

https://www.tva.com/Environment/Recreation/Where-the-Sport-Fish-Are | Email: plic@tva.gov
Anglers developed the "Angler's Aquatic Plant ID" as a guide for anglers. The online guide contains seasonal tips for

fishing near aquatic plants, starting with American Lotus and ending with Southern Naiad.

https://www.tva.com/Environment/Environmental-Stewardship/Anglers-Aquatic-Plant-ID

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Like all Federal agencies, the TVA is required to disclose records that any person requests in writing. The statute
contains, however, nine exemptions and three exclusions that may shield some records or parts of them from

disclosure. The TVA operates a FOIA requester service center. Phone, 865-632-6945.

https://www.tva.com/Information/Freedom-of-Information | Email: foia@tva.gov

Green Power
The Green Power Providers program offers Tennessee Valley homeowners and businessmen and women an

opportunity to help the TVA generate clean, renewable energy. Participants in the program agree to install a small-

scale renewable energy system on their property, and the TVA pays them for every kilowatt hour generated by that

system.

https://www.tva.com/Energy/Valley-Renewable-Energy/Green-Power-Providers

Historic Photographs
From the earliest days of the TVA, photographers captured images of the agency's work and the cultural changes that

followed. The TVA collection contains over 20,000 black-and-white negatives and over 5,000 original file prints. Its

images span half a century, from 1933 to 1983.

https://www.tva.com/about-tva/our-history

Lake Levels
Current information on ecological health ratings, fish population surveys, planned generation releases at the dams,

recreation facilities, reservoir operations, today’s levels, and predicted elevations for each TVA reservoir is available

online.

https://www.tva.com/Environment/Lake-Levels

Library Services
Visitors may use the TVA Research Library by appointment. Contact the TVA Research Library, 400 W. Summit Hill

Drive, Knoxville, TN 37902-1499. Phone, 865-632-3464.

https://tva.com/Our-TVA-Story/Nancy-Proctor | Email: corplibknox@tva.gov

Native American Tribes
Native Americans have a cultural and historical interest in the Tennessee Valley. The TVA consults with 21 federally

recognized Tribes when it undertakes projects that could affect their cultural sites.

https://www.tva.com/environment/environmental-stewardship/land-management/cultural-resource-
management/tribal-relations

Newsroom
The TVA posts news stories and press releases online.

https://www.tva.com/Newsroom

Oversight
The Office of the Inspector General from the TVA posts reports and data on Oversight.gov, a text-searchable

repository of reports that Federal Inspectors General publish. The Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and

Efficiency operates and maintains the website to increase public access to independent and authoritative information
    on the Federal Government.

    https://oversight.gov

    Public Relations
    The TVA Public Relations team is available to help representatives of the media.

    https://www.tva.com/newsroom/public-relations

    Site Map
    The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

    https://www.tva.com/Index

    Social Media
    The TVA has a Facebook account.

    https://www.facebook.com/TVA
    The TVA posts photos and short videos on Instagram.

    https://www.instagram.com/TVA/
    The TVA publishes business-oriented information on LinkedIn.

    https://www.linkedin.com/company/tva
    The TVA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/tvanews
    The TVA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/user/TVANewsVideo

    TVA Kids
    The TVA maintains the website tvakids.com, which is a colorful online resource for students and teachers. The site

    covers topics like green power, making electricity, and saving energy. It also has a section of "Cool Stuff" that includes

    games, videos, and warnings about energy vampires.

    https://www.tvakids.com

        The Sources of Information were updated 8–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy
Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                              Trade and Development Agency




The United States Government Manual




     TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT AGENCY
    1000 Wilson Boulevard, Suite 1600, Arlington, VA 22209-3901


    703-875-4357

    703-875-4009

    http://www.ustda.gov


      DIRECTOR                                                                              Enoh T. Ebong, Acting


      Deputy Director                                                                       Enoh T. Ebong
 Administrative Officer                                                            Carolyn Hum


 Chief of Staff                                                                    Vacant


 Chief, Office of Acquisition Management                                           Garth Hibbert


 Director, Congressional Affairs and Public Relations                              Thomas R. Hardy


 Director, Finance                                                                 Kathleen Neumann


 General Counsel                                                                   Kendra Link, Acting


 Chief Information Officer                                                         Benjamin Bergersen


 Special Advisor to the Director                                                   Clark Jennings




REGIONAL DIRECTORS


 East Asia                                                                         Carl B. Kress


 Latin America and Caribbean                                                       Nathan Younge


 Middle East, North Africa, Europe and Eurasia                                     Carl B. Kress


 South and Southeast Asia                                                          Henry D. Steingass


 Sub-Saharan Africa                                                                Lida Fitts


 Director, Global Programs                                                         Andrea Lupo


 Director, Office of Program Monitoring and Evaluation                             Diana Harbison

The Trade and Development Agency advances economic development and U.S. commercial interest in developing and

middle-income countries.

Organizational Chart
The Trade and Development Program was established on July 1, 1980, as a component organization of the

International Development Cooperation Agency. Section 2204 of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988

(22 U.S.C. 2421) made it a separate component agency. The organization was renamed the Trade and Development

Agency (USTDA) and made an independent agency within the executive branch of the Federal Government on

October 28, 1992, by the Jobs Through Exports Act of 1992 (22 U.S.C. 2421).


The USTDA is a foreign assistance agency that delivers its program commitments through overseas grants and
contracts with U.S. firms. The Agency helps companies create U.S. jobs through the export of U.S. goods and services

for priority development projects in emerging economies. The Agency links U.S. businesses to export opportunities by

funding project planning activities, pilot projects, and reverse trade missions while creating sustainable infrastructure

and economic growth in partner countries.


The USTDA provides grant funding to overseas project sponsors for the planning of projects that support the

development of modern infrastructure and an open trading system. The hallmark of USTDA development assistance is

building partnerships between U.S. companies and overseas project sponsors. These partnerships facilitate the

application of proven private sector solutions to developmental challenges.


The Agency works with other U.S. Government agencies to bring their particular expertise and resources to a

development objective. These agencies include the Departments of Commerce, Energy, State, Transportation, and the

Treasury; Office of the U.S. Trade Representative; Export-Import Bank of the United States; and Overseas Private

Investment Corporation.

https://www.ustda.gov/about/mission

Activities
The USTDA funds various forms of technical assistance, training, early investment analysis, reverse trade missions, and

business workshops that support the development of a modern infrastructure and a fair and open trading

environment. The Agency works closely with foreign project sponsors and makes its funds available to them for

contracting with U.S. businesses. This arrangement gives American firms market entry, exposure, and access to

information. It helps them establish positions in markets that are otherwise difficult to penetrate. The USTDA is

involved in many sectors, including energy, transportation, and information and communications technologies.


USTDA-funded studies evaluate the technical, economic, and financial aspects of a development project. They provide

the host nation with information on the availability of U.S. goods and services. Financial institutions also use these

studies for assessing the creditworthiness of an undertaking. Grants are based on an official request for assistance:

Either the sponsoring government or a private sector organization in a developing or middle-income nation can make

the request.

https://www.ustda.gov/program



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
Overseas project sponsors can select U.S. firms to carry out USTDA-funded work through a competitive proposal

process that relies on the Federal Business Opportunities Web site (FedBizOpps.gov) or through "sole-source" grants,

which allow an overseas project sponsor to identify a U.S. firm as a partner or preferred supplier. More information is

available on the "Project Proposals" Web page.

https://www.ustda.gov/program/project-proposals

Employment
Job openings and information on internships are posted online.
     https://www.ustda.gov/about/career-opportunities
     https://www.ustda.gov/about/career-opportunities/internships

     Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
     A FOIA request must be submitted in writing by email, fax, or mail, and clearly identified as a "FOIA REQUEST." Staff is

     available to answer questions and help formulate a request over the phone; however, the USTDA does not accept

     phone requests. Mail a request to the FOIA Requester Service Center, U.S. Trade and Development Agency, 1000

     Wilson Boulevard, Suite 1600, Arlington, VA 22209-3901. Phone, 703-875-4357. Fax, 703-875-4009.

     https://www.ustda.gov/about/resources/foia | Email: foia@ustda.gov

     Library
     The USTDA maintains a collection of reports on infrastructure development projects from emerging economies

     worldwide. Contact the library by email to obtain a report: Most reports can be sent electronically. These reports are

     accessible also online. Phone, 703-875-4357.

     https://www.ustda.gov/ustda-library | Email: library@ustda.gov

     Newsletter
     To provide timely information on Agency supported activities, the USTDA distributes an electronic newsletter

     containing business opportunities, events, and updates. A subscription form is available online.

     https://www.ustda.gov/connect/subscribe-ustda-news-and-alerts

     Regional Programs
     The USTDA is organized into five international regions. Information on each region is available on the Agency's Web

     site. Questions should be addressed to the appropriate regional director or country manager. Phone, 703-875-4357.

     http://www.ustda.gov/program/regions/index.asp
     https://www.ustda.gov/about/contact | Email: info@ustda.gov

        For further information, contact the U.S. Trade and Development Agency, 1000 Wilson Boulevard, Suite
        1600, Arlington, VA 22209-3901. Phone, 703-875-4357. Fax, 703-875-4009.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act
No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                    United States African Development Foundation




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FOUNDATION
    1400 I Street NW., Suite 1000, Washington, DC 20005


    202-233-8800

    202-673-3810

    http://www.usadf.gov




    BOARD OF DIRECTORS
 CHAIR                                                                                  John W. Leslie, Jr.


 Vice Chair                                                                             John O. Agwunobi




 Members                                                                                Ward Brehm


                                                                                        Morgan M. Davis


                                                                                        Iqbal Paroo


                                                                                        (vacancy)


                                                                                        (vacancy)

http://www.usadf.gov/board-of-directors



STAFF


 PRESIDENT / CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER                                                    Travis Adkins


 Chief of Staff / Director of External Affairs                                          Brandi James




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Program                                                                                Elisabeth Feleke


 Strategy                                                                               Kwasi Donkor




 General Counsel                                                                        Mateo Dunne


 Managing Director of Finance and Administration                                        Mathieu Zahui

https://www.usadf.gov/leaderships



The above list of key personnel was updated 02–2022.

The United States African Development Foundation provides seed capital and technical assistance to support African-led

development that grows community enterprises.
ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On December 16, 1980, President James E. Carter approved Public Law 96–533, which contains the "African

Development Foundation Act" (94 Stat. 3151). The Act established the United States African Development Foundation

(USADF) as a Government corporation with its principal office in the United States and with branch offices, as necessity

requires for carrying out its functions, in Africa (94 Stat. 3152, 3153).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-94/pdf/STATUTE-94-Pg3131.pdf
"To enable the people of African countries to develop their potential, fulfill their aspirations, and enjoy better, more

productive lives," the Act described the purposes of the USADF as fourfold: strengthening friendly bonds between

Africans and Americans, supporting local self-help activities that enlarge community development opportunities,

promoting effective and expansive African participation in their development process, and promoting development

institutions that are indigenous to particular African countries and responsive to the requirements of those countries'

poor people (94 Stat. 3152).


The management responsibilities of the USADF are vested in seven members who constitute its Board of Directors.

The President appoints each of the members by the advice and with the consent of the Senate. The President

designates one board member to serve as its Chairperson and another one of the seven to serve as its Vice

Chairperson. The President makes his or her appointment based on the appointee's "understanding of and sensitivity

to community level development processes." Five of the board members are "appointed from private life"; the two

other members are "appointed from among officers and employees of agencies of the United States concerned with

African affairs." A member is appointed for a term of 6 years (94 Stat. 3154).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-94/pdf/STATUTE-94-Pg3131.pdf
The USADF's statement of organization has been assigned to part 1501 of 22 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=b295cbf93a8249fce4299d34cd24d414&mc=true&node=pt22.2.1501&rgn=div5

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Codified statutory material affecting the USADF has been assigned to the seventh chapter of 22 U.S.C. See

"Subchapter XXIII—United States African Development Foundation."

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title22/chapter7/subchapter23&edition=prelim
Codified rules and regulations associated with the USADF have been assigned to the 15th chapter of 22 CFR. See

"Chapter XV—African Development Foundation" (parts 1500–1599).

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=db2ff5965204ffe475554b1b1daa53a6&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title22/22chapterXV.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The USADF invests in African grassroots organizations, entrepreneurs, and small and medium-sized enterprises. The

agency's investments promote local economic development by creating jobs, raising incomes, and increasing

revenues. These investments also help to empower marginalized populations and underserved communities to leave

behind economic insecurity and to reach for stability and prosperity.

https://www.usadf.gov/mission
SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Agriculture / Food Security
Agriculture and food security constitute one of the USADF's key programmatic areas for its transformative programs.

https://www.usadf.gov/sectors/2

Archived Records
The records of the "African Development Foundation" are referenced in the "Guide to Federal Records in the National

Archives of the United States." The guide is accessible online, and USADF records have been assigned to Record

Group 487. This record group currently does not have a description because no transfer of archival records had been

made before the time of the guide's last update.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/401-to-500.html?
_ga=2.185314729.1809565798.1643669212-1043139313.1643669212

Career Opportunities
The USADF posts career opportunities on its website.

https://www.usadf.gov/career-opportunities

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has an electronic form for sending a message. Postal correspondence may be sent to the

USADF, 1400 I Street NW., Washington, DC 20005. Phone, 202-233-8800.

https://www.usadf.gov/contact-us | Email: info@usadf.gov

Country Portfolios
The Foundation has 21 country programs and special initiatives that have extended its reach to a total of 40 African

countries.

https://www.usadf.gov/countries

Development Model
The USADF uses a community-led development approach and a pan-African network of local implementing partners

to support African-designed and African-delivered solutions.

https://www.usadf.gov/development-model

Entrepreneurship / Job Creation
Employment through job training and placement and entrepreneurship grants for women and youth constitute one of

the USADF's key programmatic areas for its transformative programs.

https://www.usadf.gov/sectors/4

Events
The USADF posts information on its events.

http://www.usadf.gov/events
Federal Register
Recent documents that the USADF published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/african-development-foundation

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Information on USADF FOIA policies can be obtained from the agency by using the "Contact Us" web page or by

sending an email.

https://www.usadf.gov/contact-us | Email: info@usadf.gov
Annual and quarterly FOIA reports are posted on the "Legal Notices and Reports" web page.

https://www.usadf.gov/oversight

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The USADF posts answers to FAQs on its website.

http://www.usadf.gov/faq

Grants
Information on grants is available online. An applicant may download an application in English or French. Once

completed, the application may be submitted by email or postal mail.

http://www.usadf.gov/apply

History
The "Celebrating 40 Years" web page has an annotated timeline that highlights the notable achievements of the past

40 years.

https://www.usadf.gov/celebrating-40-years

In the News
For news items, see the "USADF in the News" web page.

https://www.usadf.gov/usadf-in-the-news

Open Government
The USADF supports the Open Government initiative by promoting collaboration, participation, and transparency.

https://www.usadf.gov/oversight

Partners
The USADF partners with African governments, corporations, foundations, and nongovernmental organizations, as

well as with other agencies of the U.S. Government and their initiatives.

https://www.usadf.gov/partnerships

Renewable Energy / Energy Access Off the Grid
Off-grid renewable energy access is one of the USADF's key programmatic areas for its transformative programs.

https://www.usadf.gov/sectors/3
     Reports
     The USADF posted its "Impact Report 2015–2019." The report describes USADF's work and the effects of that work.

     https://www.usadf.gov/reports

     Resources
     The USADF posts its congressional budget justifications and operating plans. The "Resources" web page also has bar

     and pie graphs: annual revenues, annual expenditures, and a 5-year revenue source profile.

     https://www.usadf.gov/resources

     Social Media
     The USADF has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/USADF
     The Foundation tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/USADF
     The USADF posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCvhwYYAN6WGK4rImiWAfEAA

     Videos
     The USADF maintains a large collection of videos on its website. The topics of those videos range from onion farming

     to transforming the lives of former child soldiers.

     https://www.usadf.gov/videos

        The Sources of Information were updated 02–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                          United States Agency for Global Media




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES AGENCY FOR GLOBAL MEDIA
    330 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20237


    202-203-4545

    http://www.usagm.gov




    Office of the Chief Executive Officer
 CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER                           Kelu Chao, Acting


 Deputy Director                                   Brian Conniff




 Deputy Director for Operations                    Matthew Walsh


 Executive Director                                H. Oanh Tran




Heads of Offices


 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Financial                                         Grant K. Turner


 Information                                       James Reeves


 Risk                                              Nnake Nweke


 Strategy                                          Shawn Powers




 DIRECTORS


 Congressional Affairs                             (vacancy)


 Management Services                               (vacancy)


 Public Affairs                                    (vacancy)


 Technology, Services, and Innovation              P. Terry Balazs




 General Counsel                                   David Kligerman

https://www.usagm.gov/who-we-are/management-team



Federal Networks


 DIRECTORS


 Office of Cuba Broadcasting                       Sylvia Rosabal
 Voice of America                                                                     Yolanda Lopez, Acting




Grantee Networks


 PRESIDENTS


 Middle East Broadcasting Networks                                                    Kelley Sullivan, Acting


 Radio Free Asia                                                                      Bay Fang


 Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty                                                    Jamie M. Fly

https://www.usagm.gov/networks



Open Technology Fund


 President                                                                            Laura Cunningham

https://www.opentech.fund/about/people/laura-cunningham



Office of Inspector General


 Inspector General for the U.S. Department of State                                   Diana Shaw, Acting

https://www.stateoig.gov/about/IG



 The above list of key personnel was updated 4–2021.



The U.S. Agency for Global Media informs, engages, and connects people around the world in support of freedom and

democracy.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On April 30, 1994, President William J. Clinton approved Public Law 103–236, which includes the United States

International Broadcasting Act of 1994. The Act "established within the United States Information Agency a

Broadcasting Board of Governors." The first Broadcasting Board of Governors (BBG) was sworn in on August 11, 1995.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-108/pdf/STATUTE-108-Pg382.pdf
Four years later, on October 21, 1998, President Clinton approved Public Law 105–277, which includes the Foreign

Affairs Reform and Restructuring Act of 1998 (112 Stat. 2681–761). On October 1, 1999, the BBG became an
independent and autonomous entity as a result of the legislation.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-112/pdf/STATUTE-112-Pg2681.pdf
On December 23, 2016, President Barack H. Obama approved Public Law 114–328, which also is cited as the National

Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2017. Title XII, which is dedicated to matters relating to foreign nations,

contains a section that modifies the United States International Broadcasting Act of 1994. The modifications included

terminating the position of the Director of the International Broadcasting Bureau and transferring the responsibilities,

offices, authorities, and immunities of that position to the Chief Executive Officer of the Broadcasting Board of

Governors (130 Stat. 2549). Another modification authorized the agency to rename itself after giving notification to the

U.S. Congress of the intended change (130 Stat. 2551).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW-114publ328/pdf/PLAW-114publ328.pdf
On August 22, 2018, as part of a modernization effort, the agency changed its name from the BBG to the United

States Agency for Global Media (USAGM). The USAGM continued to use the name BBG when referring to its nine-

member board until its dissolution in 2020.

https://www.usagm.gov/who-we-are/history
The USAGM posts an organizational chart on its website.

https://www.usagm.gov/who-we-are/organizational-chart



STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
"Chapter 71—United States International Broadcasting" is assigned to 22 U.S.C. The chapter comprises sections 6201–

6216 and contains codified statutory material affecting Radio Free Afghanistan, Radio Free Asia, Radio Free Europe,

Radio Free Liberty, and the Chief Executive Officer of the Broadcasting Board of Governors.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title22/chapter71&edition=prelim
"Chapter V—Broadcasting Board of Governors" is assigned to 22 CFR. The chapter comprises parts 500–599 and

contains codified regulatory material associated with the agency.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=44d20bb4bea6e9db09b28364c465d15c&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title22/22chapterV.tpl



ACTIVITIES
USAGM broadcast services adhere to the broadcasting standards and principles of the United States International

Broadcasting Act of 1994 (108 Stat. 433).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-108/pdf/STATUTE-108-Pg382.pdf
The statute's principles and standards support reliable, accurate, and comprehensive news; balanced and

comprehensive presentations of U.S. thought, institutions, and policies, as well as discussions on those policies;

information on developments throughout the world; and a variety of opinions from nations around the world.

https://www.usagm.gov/who-we-are

Middle East Broadcasting Networks
The Middle East Broadcasting Networks, Inc. (MBN) is a nonprofit news organization that operates Alhurra and

Alhurra-Iraq Television, Radio Sawa, and MBN Digital under a grant from the USAGM. Alhurra Television, Radio Sawa,

and MBN Digital offer an open line of communication between the people of the Middle East and the United States.

These networks deliver accurate information on the United States, its policies, and its people, from a range of

perspectives and with an exchange of ideas on relevant issues. They reach an audience of nearly 25 million Arabic-

speakers in 22 countries across the Middle East and North Africa.

https://www.usagm.gov/networks/mbn
Alhurra TV

http://www.alhurra.com
Radio Sawa

https://www.radiosawa.com

Office of Cuba Broadcasting
The Office of Cuba Broadcasting operates the Martís from its headquarters in Miami, FL. The Martís are a multimedia

hub of news, information, and analysis that provides the people of Cuba with interactive programs each day of the

week. To broadcast their message, the Martís rely on a combination of high- and low-tech approaches: DVDs, emails,

flash drives, Internet, satellite television, shortwave and AM radio, and SMS text. Combined with martinoticias.com,

they constitute a unique service that brings accurate information to the Cuban people.

https://www.usagm.gov/networks/ocb
Martinoticias

http://www.martinoticias.com

Radio Free Asia
Radio Free Asia (RFA) is a private nonprofit news organization that operates under a grant from the USAGM.

Broadcasting daily in nine languages to Asian audiences whose governments restrict media, RFA delivers award-

winning, reliable news and information. It also allows a range of voices and opinions from within Asia to be heard as a

demonstration of freedom of expression over the airwaves, on television, and online. Through shortwave, medium

wave, satellite and transmission television, social media, and the Internet, RFA broadcasts in Cantonese, Khmer,

Korean, Lao, Mandarin, Myanmar, Uyghur, Vietnamese, and in three Tibetan dialects. Headquartered in Washington,

DC, it has eight overseas bureaus and a network of correspondents around the world.

https://www.usagm.gov/networks/rfa
Radio Free Asia—English

https://www.rfa.org/english

Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty
Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty (RFE/RL) is a private nonprofit multimedia broadcasting corporation whose funding

comes from a USAGM grant. It reaches nearly 34 million people in 23 countries—including Afghanistan, Iran, Pakistan,

Russia, and Ukraine—in 26 languages. Its journalists provide what many people cannot get locally: uncensored news,

responsible discussion, and open debate. RFE/RL uses digital technologies—the Internet, SMS text messaging, online

video, satellite radio, and popular social media networks—and conventional broadcast radio to reach people in some
of the most closed societies on Earth. With nearly 70 years of surrogate broadcasting experience, it continues to bring

diverse, immediate, and interactive content to audiences.

https://www.usagm.gov/networks/rferl
Radio Free Europe / Radio Liberty—English

https://www.rferl.org

Voice of America
The Voice of America (VOA) is a multimedia international broadcasting service funded by the U.S. Government

through the USAGM. It began broadcasting in 1942 and now reaches more than 275 million people worldwide. The

VOA provides accurate, comprehensive, and trustworthy news and information, as well as informed discussion on the

United States and the world. It engages audiences in regions deemed critical to the United States through whatever

medium—radio, television, Internet, or digital media—the people of those regions prefer. It broadcasts approximately

1,800 hours of news, information, educational, and cultural programming every week to a global audience. Programs

are produced in 46 languages.

https://www.usagm.gov/networks/voa
Voice of America—English

https://www.voanews.com



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that BBG records have been

assigned to record group 517. The BBG is the predecessor agency to the USAGM. See the above "Establishment and

Organization" section. Record group 517 does not have a description currently associated with it.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/501-to-600.html

At a Glance
The "Who We Are" web page features a 60-second video that captures the essence of USAGM core activities:

informing people, engaging them in support of democracy, and connecting with them on a global scale.

https://www.usagm.gov/who-we-are

Awards
The USAGM has won awards for its productions in a variety of categories: documentary, education, investigative

journalism, promotional programming, special reporting, video, and more.

https://www.usagm.gov/awards

Business Opportunities
Information on contract opportunities and instructions on how to do business with the USAGM are available online.

https://www.usagm.gov/who-we-are/partnerwithus/contract-opportunities

Career Opportunities
The USAGM work environment is diverse, multicultural, and professional. In addition to American citizens, the agency

also hires non-U.S. citizens for positions that require foreign language skills. Internships are available in the fields of

engineering, public affairs, public diplomacy, and research.

https://www.usagm.gov/work-with-us
The USAGM provides training opportunities for reporters and students of media on five continents.

https://www.usagm.gov/our-work/media-development
In 2019, the USAGM ranked 23d among 25 midsize agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To

Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/IB00

Climate Change
The USAGM is committed to developing a better understanding of the effects of climate change and to addressing

climate change adaptation.

https://www.usagm.gov/our-work/strategy-and-results/strategic-priorities/research-reports/strategic-sustainability-
performance-plan
The USAGM has provided media training aimed at equipping journalists in the Latin America and the Caribbean

region with skills and practices needed to report accurately and effectively on changes in the climate.

https://www.usagm.gov/2016/09/29/covering-climate-change

Federal Register
Documents that the USAGM recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/united-states-agency-for-global-media
Documents that the BBG published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/broadcasting-board-of-governors

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA provides a statutory basis for public access to official agency information previously restricted from public

view. Through the FOIA, Congress affirmed that citizens have the right to know what their Government does. Under

the act, official information is available to "any person" without regard to need for or interest in the material. The

USAGM and its FOIA staff are committed to ensuring the fullest possible disclosure that is consistent with the letter and

spirit of the law.

https://www.usagm.gov/foia | Email: foia@usagm.gov
The FOIA requires agencies to disclose, proactively and electronically, certain categories of records to the public.

Records that the USAGM has previously released to the public under the FOIA and that are the subject of subsequent

requests or likely to be the subject of subsequent requests are proactively disclosed in the USAGM's electronic reading

room for public access. Records that the USAGM determines are of sufficient public interest to warrant automatic

disclosure are also proactively disclosed in the electronic reading room.

https://www.usagm.gov/foia/electronic-reading-room

History
"The news may be good for us. The news may be bad. But we shall tell you the truth." These words, American

journalist and writer William Harlan Hale spoke during the Voice of America's first radio show. For 75 years, U.S.

international media have been broadcasting to audiences abroad. Visit the "History" web page to learn more about a

story that continues to be heard around the world today.

https://www.usagm.gov/who-we-are/history

Learn English
The Voice of America's website features resources for learning American English.

https://learningenglish.voanews.com

Legislation / Congressional Committees
The USAGM receives its mandate to supervise all broadcasting activities and to provide strategic management for the

agency from various public laws. The U.S. Congress oversees the USAGM, which is an independent executive branch

agency, by monitoring, reviewing, and supervising its activities, programs, and policy implementation.

https://www.usagm.gov/who-we-are/oversight

Networks
The USAGM's website provides convenient access to the home pages of all of its networks.

https://www.usagm.gov/networks

News
USAGM-related news and information are available online.

https://www.usagm.gov/news-and-information
The latest press releases from the USAGM and its networks are available online.

https://www.usagm.gov/news-and-information/press-releases

Open Government
The USAGM supports the Open Government initiative by promoting collaboration, participation, and transparency.

https://www.usagm.gov/our-work/strategy-and-results/strategic-priorities/research-reports/open-government | Email:
opengov@bbg.gov

Pronunciation Guide
The VOA "Pro • nounce" website is a pronunciation guide with an audio feature. The guide helps people from around

the globe pronounce challenging words that have been or are currently trending in media sources.

https://pronounce.voanews.com

Services and Technology To Evade Censorship
The Open Technology Fund advances global Internet freedom by supporting research and development and the

implementation and sustainability of technologies that facilitate the free flow of information, increase digital security,

and enable freedom of expression online.

https://www.opentech.fund/about

Site Map
     The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

     https://www.usagm.gov/sitemap

     Social Media
     The USAGM has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/USAGMgov
     The USAGM tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/USAGMgov
     The USAGM posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCvYge67D7cpRJ6aYn2E9pPw

     Students and Youth Worldwide
     Voice of America's "Student Union" section offers students and youth international news that relates to them.

     https://www.voanews.com/student-union

        The above Sources of Information were updated 4–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                 United States Agency for International Development




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES AGENCY FOR INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
    1300 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20523


    202-712-0000

    http://www.usaid.gov


      ADMINISTRATOR                                                                         Samantha Power


      Deputy Administrator                                                                  (vacancy)


      Chief of Staff                                                                        Gideon Maltz
 Counselor                                                         T. Christopher Milligan




 CHIEFS


 Financial Officer                                                 Reginald W. Mitchell


 Information Officer                                               Jay Mahanand




 DIRECTORS


 Acquisition and Assistance                                        Mark A. Walther


 Executive Secretary                                               Jeremy Bernton


 General Counsel                                                   Margaret L. Taylor


https://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/organization/leadership-listing



Central Bureaus


 ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATORS


 Foreign Assistance                                                (vacancy)


 Legislative and Public Affairs                                    (vacancy)


 Management                                                        Colleen R. Allen, Acting




 ASSISTANT TO THE ADMINISTRATOR


 Policy, Planning and Learning                                     Michele Sumilas




Functional Bureaus


 ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATOR


 Development, Democracy, and Innovation                            Karl Fickenscher, Acting
 Global Health                                          Kerry Pelzman, Acting




 ASSISTANT TO THE ADMINISTRATOR


 Conflict Prevention and Stabilization                  Robert Jenkins, Acting


 Humanitarian Assistance                                Sarah Charles


 Resilience and Food Security                           Jim Barnhart




Geographic Bureaus


 ASSISTANT ADMINISTRATORS


 Africa                                                 Peter Malnak, Acting


 Asia                                                   Karen L. Freeman, Acting


 Europe and Eurasia                                     Margot Ellis, Acting


 Latin America and the Caribbean                        Peter Natiello, Acting


 Middle East                                            Andrew Plitt, Acting

https://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/organization/bureaus



Independent Offices


 DIRECTORS


 Budget and Resource Management                         Tricia Schmitt


 Civil Rights and Diversity                             Ismael Martinez, Acting


 Security                                               John Voorhees


 Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization           John M. Watson, Acting




 CHIEF OFFICER


 Human Capital                                          Robert Leavitt
https://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/organization/independent-offices



Office of Inspector General


  Inspector General                                                                          Thomas J. Ullom, Acting

https://oig.usaid.gov/leadership



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2021.



The United States Agency for International Development seeks to eradicate extreme global poverty and enables resilient

and democratic societies to realize their potential.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) is an independent Federal agency established by 22

U.S.C. 6563.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title22/chapter74/subchapter4&edition=prelim
Its principal statutory authority is the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, as amended (22 U.S.C. 2151 et seq.).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title22/chapter32&edition=prelim
Its statement of organization was published as a notice in the Federal Register on August 26, 1987, (52 FR 32174).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1987-08-26/pdf/FR-1987-08-26.pdf
USAID serves as the focal point within the Government for economic matters affecting U.S. relations with developing

countries. It administers international economic and humanitarian assistance programs. The Administrator is under the

direct authority and foreign policy guidance of the Secretary of State.

https://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/mission-vision-values
The Agency posts its organizational chart online. The chart includes independent offices and central, functional, and

geographic bureaus.

https://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/organization

ACTIVITIES
The Agency works in over 100 countries to promote broadly shared economic prosperity, strengthen democracy and

good governance, protect human rights, improve global health, advance food security and agriculture, increase

environmental sustainability, further education, help societies prevent and recover from conflicts, and provide

humanitarian assistance in the wake of natural and manmade disasters.

https://www.usaid.gov/what-we-do

Democracy
The Agency promotes the transition to and consolidation of democratic regimes throughout the world. Programs

focus on such problems as human rights abuses; misperceptions of democracy and free-market capitalism; lack of
experience with democratic institutions; the absence or weakness of intermediary organizations; nonexistent,

ineffectual, or undemocratic political parties; disenfranchisement of women, indigenous peoples, and minorities; failure

to implement national charter documents; powerless or poorly defined democratic institutions; tainted elections; and

inability to resolve conflicts peacefully.

https://www.usaid.gov/democracy

Economic Growth
The Agency promotes broad-based economic growth by addressing factors that enhance the capacity for growth and

by working to remove obstacles that obstruct individual opportunity. Programs concentrate on strengthening market

economies, expanding economic opportunities for the disadvantaged in developing countries, and building human

skills and capacities to facilitate broad participation.

https://www.usaid.gov/economic-growth-and-trade

Environment
Environmental programs support two strategic goals: 1) reducing long-term threats to the biosphere, particularly loss

of biodiversity and change in climate; 2) promoting sustainable economic growth locally, nationally, and regionally by

addressing shortsighted economic, environmental, and developmental practices. Globally, USAID programs focus on

reducing sources of greenhouse gas emissions and enhancing greenhouse gas sinks and on promoting innovative

approaches to the conservation and sustainable use of Earth's biological diversity. The approach adopted to address

national environmental problems differs from county to country, depending on its environmental priorities. Strategies

may include improving agricultural, industrial, and natural resource management practices; strengthening public

policies and institutions; being in dialogue with governments and international agencies; and environmental research

and education.

https://www.usaid.gov/what-we-do/environment-and-global-climate-change

Global Health and Population
The Agency improves access and quality of services for maternal and child health, nutrition, voluntary family planning,

and reproductive health. It prevents and treats HIV/AIDS, malaria, and tuberculosis. It assists countries in the design

and implementation of state-of-the-art public health approaches to end preventable child-maternal deaths and

achieve an AIDS-free generation. The Agency takes advantage of economies of scale in procurement, technical

services, and commodities. To promote sustainability, the Agency helps expand health systems and the health

workforce by adopting and scaling-up proven health interventions across programs and countries. It also contributes

to a cooperative global effort to stabilize world population growth and support women's reproductive rights. The

types of population and health programs supported vary with the particular needs of individual countries and the

kinds of approaches that local communities initiate and support.

https://www.usaid.gov/global-health

Humanitarian Assistance / Post-Crisis Transitions
The Agency gives humanitarian assistance to save lives, reduce suffering, help victims return to self-sufficiency, and

reinforce democracy. Programs focus on disaster prevention, preparedness, and mitigation; timely delivery of disaster

relief and short-term rehabilitation supplies and services; preservation of basic institutions of civil governance during a
disaster crisis; support for democratic institutions during periods of national transition; and building and reinforcement

of local capacity to anticipate disasters and better cope with their aftermath.

http://www.usaid.gov/what-we-do/working-crises-and-conflict

Overseas Organizations
USAID country organizations are located in countries where a bilateral program is being implemented. The in-country

organizations are subject to the direction and guidance of the chief U.S. diplomatic representative in the country,

usually the Ambassador. The organizations report to the appropriate assistant administrators according to geographic

bureaus: Africa, Asia and the Near East, Europe and Eurasia, and Latin America and the Caribbean.


Overseas program activities that involve more than one country are administered by regional offices. These offices

may also have country organizational responsibilities for assigned countries. Generally, the offices are headed by a

regional development officer.


Coordination and representative offices for development assistance provide liaison with various international

organizations and represent U.S. interests in development assistance matters. These offices may be only partially

staffed by USAID personnel and may be headed by employees of other U.S. Government agencies.

http://www.usaid.gov/where-we-work



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that USAID records have been

assigned to record group 286.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/286.html

Blog
"Impact" is the name of the official USAID blog.

https://blog.usaid.gov/

Bureaus
Geographic bureaus are responsible for the overall activities in countries; functional bureaus conduct Agency

programs that are worldwide in nature or that cross geographic boundaries.

https://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/organization/bureaus

Business Opportunities
Through worldwide partnerships, USAID seeks to find innovative and cost-effective ways of addressing global

challenges. The Agency partners with educational institutions, faith-based and community organizations, non-

governmental organizations, and individuals and organizations in the private sector.

https://www.usaid.gov/work-usaid/how-to-work-with-usaid

Career Opportunities
USAID employs professionals with a variety of managerial, operational, and technical skills to achieve its international

development goals. Its workforce includes direct-hire and contract employees based in the United States and at field

missions worldwide.

http://www.usaid.gov/careers
The Partnership for Public Service ranked USAID 14th among 25 midsize agencies in its Best Places To Work in the

Federal Government 2019 rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/AM00

Climate Change
Deforestation and reliance on fossil fuels accelerate climate disruption. As the climate changes, it undermines the

efforts of poor communities to be self-supporting. USAID shares data, knowledge, and tools with developing countries

to help people predict, prepare for, and adapt to more frequent and more destructive weather-related events. The

Agency also helps countries grow in sustainable ways by promoting clean and reliable energy and healthy landscapes.

Watch the 3-minute video to learn more about USAID global climate action.

https://www.usaid.gov/climate/usaid-global-climate-action

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has an electronic form for submitting comments and questions, phone numbers, and links

to relevant USAID web pages.

https://www.usaid.gov/contact-us | Email: open@usaid.gov

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that USAID recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/agency-for-international-development

Foreign Aid Explorer
The Foreign Aid Explorer website offers a multidimensional picture of U.S. foreign assistance to help users find and

retrieve the data that they seek. Interactive maps and graphics displaying the historical details of U.S. foreign assistance

allow users to explore foreign aid data across countries, sectors, and over time. Advanced users can quickly download

data by using data query tools or by selecting a prepared file.

https://foreignassistance.gov/consolidation

Forms
An electronic forms page features a selection of up-to-date USAID forms that are arranged according to form

number.

https://www.usaid.gov/forms

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
FOIA requests must be submitted in writing: email, fax, mail, or via the Public Access Link web portal. The Agency does

not accept verbal FOIA requests. USAID Government information specialists are available to answer questions. Phone,

202-712-0960. Fax, 202-216-3070.
https://www.usaid.gov/foia-requests | Email: foia@usaid.gov
USAID adds records that information seekers request repeatedly to its electronic FOIA library. If the desired record or

document is not part of the FOIA library, consider submitting a written FOIA request to obtain the desired information.

Please search the electronic reading room before submitting an official request for information.

https://foiarequest.usaid.gov/app/ReadingRoom.aspx

History
President John F. Kennedy approved the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and created USAID by Executive order. Two

years later, in a commencement address, he proclaimed: "Our problems are man-made; therefore, they can be solved

by man. For in the final analysis, our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet; we all breathe the

same air; we all cherish our children’s futures—and we are all mortal." President Kennedy's actions and words helped

characterize the years of his administration and the one that followed, years that became known as the "decade of

development." To learn more about the role that USAID played in expanding international development assistance

opportunities, visit the "USAID History" web page.

https://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/usaid-history

Mission Directory
The online mission directory allows users to filter their searches by region: Afghanistan and Pakistan, Africa, Asia,

Europe and Eurasia, Latin America and the Caribbean, and the Middle East.

https://www.usaid.gov/mission-directory

News
USAID posts news and information: congressional testimonies, events, factsheets, photographs and videos, podcasts,

press releases, speeches, and success stories, as well as its "Frontlines" magazine, "Impact" newsletter, and "Impact"

blog.

https://www.usaid.gov/news-info

Offices
USAID has several independent offices that carry out discrete functions.

https://www.usaid.gov/who-we-are/organization/independent-offices

Open Government
USAID supports the Open Government initiative by posting data, records, and reports online.

https://www.usaid.gov/open

Plain Language
USAID adheres to the principles of transparency and openness that the Plain Writing Act of 2010 promotes. Plain

writing plays a key role in achieving Open Government initiative goals and in improving collaboration, public

participation, and transparency.

https://www.usaid.gov/plain-writing

SERVIR Global
     A joint initiative of USAID and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, SERVIR partners with leading

     regional organizations worldwide to help developing countries use information from Earth observing satellites and

     geospatial technologies for managing climate risks and land use. SERVIR products, services, and tools empower

     decisionmakers to act locally on agriculture, ecosystems, land use, natural disasters, water, and other climate-sensitive

     issues.

     https://servirglobal.net/

     Social Media
     USAID maintains a YouTube channel and has a presence on Facebook, Twitter, and other social media.

     https://www.usaid.gov/stayconnected

     Water / Sanitation
     Nearly 2.1 billion people cannot access safe drinking water in their homes, and about 4.4 billion people live exposed to

     sewage, trash, or both. Inadequate water and sanitation and poor hygiene combine to spread disease and elevate

     death rates worldwide.

     https://www.usaid.gov/what-we-do/water-and-sanitation

        The Sources of Information were updated 6–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                         United States Commission on Civil Rights




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES COMMISSION ON CIVIL RIGHTS
    1331 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Suite 1150, Washington, DC 20425


    202-376-8128

    800-977-8339 (FedRelay)

    http://www.usccr.gov


      CHAIR                                                                                 Catherine E. Lhamon


      Vice Chair                                                                            Patricia Timmons-Goodson
  Commissioner                                                                             Debo P. Adegbile


  Commissioner                                                                             Gail Heriot


  Commissioner                                                                             Peter N. Kirsanow


  Commissioner                                                                             David Kladney


  Commissioner                                                                             Karen K. Narasaki


  Commissioner                                                                             Michael Yaki




  Staff Director                                                                           Mauro A. Morales




  [For the Commission on Civil Rights statement of organization, see the Code of Federal Regulations, Title
  45, Part 701]



The Commission on Civil Rights informs the development of national civil rights policy and enhances enforcement of

Federal civil rights laws.

Organizational Chart
The Commission on Civil Rights was first created by the Civil Rights Act of 1957, as amended, and reestablished by the

United States Commission on Civil Rights Act of 1994, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1975).

http://www.usccr.gov/about/index.php



ACTIVITIES
The Commission conducts hearings on important civil rights issues, including issuing subpoenas for the production of

documents and the attendance of witnesses; publishes studies and reports on a wide range of civil rights issues to

inform and advise policymakers; holds public briefings, issues press releases, makes information publicly available

online, and provides a complaint referral service to promote greater public awareness of civil rights issues, protections,

and enforcement; and sustains advisory committee involvement in the national program planning to strengthen

factfinding.

http://www.usccr.gov/about/powers.php

Regional Programs
The Commission maintains 51 State Advisory Committees (SACs), one for each State and the District of Columbia. Each

SAC is composed of citizen volunteers who are familiar with local and State civil rights issues. SAC members assist the

Commission with factfinding, investigating, and disseminating information. The Commission ensures that advisory

committees are diverse and represent a variety of backgrounds, skills, experiences, and perspectives. This diversity
promotes debate and broadens exploration of the issues. All appointments are made in a nondiscriminatory manner.

http://www.usccr.gov/about/sac.php



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Complaints
The complaint referral service helps place individuals in contact with the appropriate office for obtaining information

on the complaint process. Phone, 202-376-8513 or 800-552-6843.

http://www.usccr.gov/filing/complaint.php | Email: referrals@usccr.gov

Employment
Career opportunities—vacancy announcements and available internships—are posted online. Contact the Human

Resources Division for more information. Phone, 202-376-8364.

http://www.usccr.gov/about/careers.php | Email: careers@usccr.gov

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Information on how to file a FOIA request is available online. A request may be sent by email or fax, or by mail to the

FOIA Officer, U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, 1331 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Suite 1150, Washington, DC 20425.

Phone, 202-376-8351. Fax, 202-376-1163.

http://www.usccr.gov/foia/index.php | Email: foia@usccr.gov

Library
The Robert S. Rankin Memorial Library welcomes visitors. It is open on weekdays, 10 a.m.–4 p.m. (except on Federal

holidays). For more information, contact the Robert S. Rankin Memorial Library, 1331 Pennsylvania Avenue NW.,

Washington, DC 20425. Phone, 202-376-8110. Fax, 202-376-7597.

http://www.usccr.gov/about/library.php | Email: publications@usccr.gov

Publications
For a complete list of Commission publications, consult the online catalog. It includes briefings; clearinghouse

publications; hearings, consultations, and conferences; periodicals; publications in Spanish; staff reports; State advisory

committee reports; and statutory and interim reports. To order a publication, contact the U.S. Commission on Civil

Rights, 1331 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW., Suite 1150, Washington, DC 20425. Phone: 202-376-8128.

http://www.usccr.gov/pubs/index.php | Email: publications@usccr.gov

Regional Offices
A list of the six regional offices—including addresses, telephone numbers, and areas served—is available online.

http://www.usccr.gov/contact/regional.php
http://www.usccr.gov/contact/index.php

  For further information, contact the Office of the Staff Director, U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, 1331
  Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Suite 1150, Washington, DC 20425. Phone, 202-376-7700. Phone, 800-977-
  8339 (FedRelay).
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                     United States International Trade Commission




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL TRADE COMMISSION
    500 E Street SW., Washington, DC 20436


    202-205-2000

    http://www.usitc.gov




    Commissioners
 CHAIR                                      David S. Johanson


 VICE CHAIR                                 (vacancy)




                                            Meredith M. Broadbent


                                            Jason E. Kearns


                                            Rhonda K. Schmidtlein


                                            Irving A. Williamson




https://www.usitc.gov/press_room/bios.htm

 CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE             Charles E. Bullock




 CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER                  Keith B. Vaughn




 GENERAL COUNSEL                            Dominic L. Bianchi




Administrative Services Offices


 CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER               Stephen McLaughlin




 DIRECTORS


 Human Resources                            Eric Mozie


 Security and Support Services              Robert N. Riess




 Secretary to the Commission                Lisa R. Barton




Financial Offices
 CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER               John M. Ascienzo




 DIRECTORS


 Budget                                Chris Swetz


 Finance                               Derek Henderson


 Procurement                           Debra Bridge




Independent Offices


 DIRECTORS


 Equal Employment Opportunity          Altivia R. Jackson


 External Relations                    Jennifer Andberg




Operating Offices


 DIRECTOR OF OPERATIONS                Catherine B. DeFilippo




 Chief Data Officer                    Jeremy Wise




 DIRECTORS


 Analysis and Research Services        Jeremy Wise


 Economics                             William M. Powers


 Industries                            Jonathan R. Coleman


 Investigations                        Nannette M. Christ


 Tariff Affairs and Trade Agreements   James R. Holbein


 Unfair Import Investigations          Margaret D. Macdonald
Office of Inspector General


  Inspector General                                                                        Philip M. Heneghan

https://www.usitc.gov/oig.htm



The above list of key personnel was updated 7–2019.

The United States International Trade Commission provides the President, the U.S. Trade Representative, and the

Congress with independent analysis of and information on tariffs, international trade, and the Nation's competitiveness;

makes determinations in proceedings involving imports that may harm a domestic industry or violate U.S. intellectual

property rights; and maintains the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The United States International Trade Commission (USITC) is an independent agency created by the Revenue Act (39

Stat. 795) and originally named the United States Tariff Commission. The name was changed to the United States

International Trade Commission by section 171 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 U.S.C. 2231).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2017-title19/pdf/USCODE-2017-title19-chap12.pdf
With the advice and consent of the Senate, the President appoints six commissioners for 9-year terms, unless the

appointment is made to fill an unexpired term. The Chair and Vice Chair are designated by the President for 2-year

terms, and succeeding Chairs may not be of the same political party. The Chair generally is responsible for the

administration of the Commission. Not more than three Commissioners may be members of the same political party

(19 U.S.C. 1330).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2017-title19/pdf/USCODE-2017-title19-chap4-subtitleII.pdf
The USITC posts its organizational chart (2017) online.

https://www.usitc.gov/documents/usitc_org_2017_revised.pdf



ACTIVITIES
The USITC engages in various activities pursuant to the previously mentioned statutes. Under the Tariff Act of 1930, it

has broad powers of investigation to scrutinize the following competitive factors: U.S. customs laws and those of

foreign countries; the proportional relationship between the volume of imported articles and domestic production and

domestic consumption; the conditions, causes, and effects of foreign industries competing with U.S. industries; and any

other factor affecting competition between imported articles and U.S. articles. Upon request, the USITC is required to

convey its available information to the President, the House Committee on Ways and Means, and the Senate

Committee on Finance. The President, the Congress, or the two committees mentioned can direct the USITC to
undertake investigations and studies. To carry out its research and conduct its specialized studies, the USITC maintains

expertise in all matters relating to the commercial and international trade policies of the United States.

https://www.usitc.gov/press_room/about_usitc.htm

Foreign Subsidization / Selling at Less Than Fair Value
The USITC conducts preliminary-phase investigations to determine whether imports of foreign merchandise that are

alleged to be subsidized or sold at less than fair value injure or threaten to injure an industry in the United States. If its

determination is affirmative and the Secretary of Commerce concludes that unfair practices are occurring or suspects

that they may be occurring, then the USITC conducts final-phase investigations to determine the injury or threat of

injury to an industry.

https://www.usitc.gov/press_room/usad.htm
Under the Uruguay Round Agreements Act, the USITC also conducts sunset reviews. In these reviews, the it evaluates

whether material injury to a U.S. industry would continue or recur if the antidumping duty or countervailing duty order

under review were revoked. Injury reviews must be conducted on all antidumping duty and countervailing duty orders

every 5 years for as long as the orders remain in effect.

https://www.usitc.gov/press_room/us_sunset.htm

Generalized System of Preferences
With respect to articles that may be considered for preferential removal of the duty on imports from designated

developing countries, the USITC advises the President of the economic consequences that removal may have on the

domestic industry and on consumers.

https://www.usitc.gov/glossary/term/generalized-system-preferences-gsp

Harmonized Tariff Schedule
The U.S. Congress enacted the "Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States" (HTS). The HTS became effective on

January 1, 1989, replacing the Nation's former tariff schedules. The USITC publishes the HTS, which contains the U.S.

tariff schedules and related matters. The agency also considers questions affecting the arrangement of tariff schedules

and the classification of articles.

https://www.usitc.gov/tariff_affairs/about_hts.htm

Import Relief for Domestic Industries
The USITC conducts global safeguard investigations upon petition, on behalf of an industry, a firm, a group of workers,

or other entity representative of an industry, to determine whether an article is being imported in increased quantities

that injure, or threaten to injure, the domestic industry producing a similar article or an article that competes with the

imported one. If its determination is affirmative, the USITC recommends to the President action that would address the

threat and be most effective in facilitating positive adjustment by the industry to import competition. The President

determines if import relief is an appropriate response. The USITC also reports on developments within an industry that

has been granted import relief. It advises the President of the probable economic effect of reducing or eliminating the

tariff increase that was previously granted. The President may continue, modify, or terminate the import relief.

https://www.usitc.gov/press_room/us_safeguard.htm

Imports From NAFTA Countries
Pursuant to section 302 of the NAFTA Implementation Act, the USITC conducts bilateral safeguard investigations.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/BILLS-103hr3450enr/pdf/BILLS-103hr3450enr.pdf
These investigations seek to determine whether, as a result of the reduction or elimination of a duty that the North

American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) facilitates, a Canadian or Mexican export to the United States in increased

quantities and under certain conditions may damage, or threaten to damage, a U.S. industry that produces a similar

article competing with the Canadian or Mexican export. If the USITC makes an affirmative determination, it advises the

President on the relief needed to prevent or to remedy serious harm. USITC investigations of this kind resemble

procedurally investigations that are conducted under the global safeguard-action provisions of the Trade Act of 1974.

https://www.usitc.gov/press_room/us_safeguard.htm

Interference With Agricultural Programs
The USITC conducts investigations, at the direction of the President, to determine whether products are being

imported into the United States under conditions and in quantities that render, or tend to render, ineffective or that

materially interfere with a Department of Agriculture program. The USITC communicates its findings to the President

and makes recommendations. The President then may impose a fee or quota on the imports in question; however, no

fee or quota may be imposed on any article that a member of the World Trade Organization produces.

https://www.usitc.gov/press_room/statutory_resp.htm

Market Disruption From Communist Countries
The USITC conducts investigations to determine whether increased imports of an article produced in a Communist

country are causing market disruption in the United States. If the USITC'S determination is in the affirmative, the

President may take the same action as in the case of serious injury to an industry, except that the action would apply

only to imports of the article from the Communist country. Commission investigations conducted under this provision

are similar procedurally to those conducted under the global safeguard action provisions.

https://www.usitc.gov/press_room/statutory_resp.htm

Trade Negotiations
When duties and other trade barriers are being considered for modification as part of a proposed trade agreement

with a foreign county, the USITC advises the President of the potential economic consequences on U.S. industries and

on consumers.

https://www.usitc.gov/press_room/statutory_resp.htm

Unfair Import Trade Practices
The USITC applies U.S. statutory and common law of unfair competition to the importation of products into the United

States and their sale. If it determines that there is a violation of law, it will direct that the articles involved be excluded

from entry into the United States, or it may issue cease-and-desist orders directing the person engaged in such

violation to stop.

https://www.usitc.gov/intellectual_property/about_section_337.htm

Uniform Statistical Data
The USITC cooperates with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of Commerce to establish an enumeration
of articles imported into and exported from the United States for statistical purposes. It also seeks to establish

comparability of these statistics with statistical programs for domestic production.

https://www.usitc.gov/press_room/statutory_resp.htm



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
Most USITC contract opportunities are reserved for small businesses. They are typically for experienced contractors in

the areas of administrative services, facilities management, information technology, and management consulting. The

Office of Procurement oversees all procurements. Phone, 202-205-2252.

https://usitc.gov/procurement/doing_business_with_usitc.htm

Career Opportunities
The USITC relies on accountants, analysts and specialists, attorneys, economists, and other professionals to carry out its

mission. For more information, contact the Director, Office of Human Resources. Phone, 202-205-2651.

https://www.usitc.gov/employment/positions.htm | Email: hr@usitc.gov
The USITC ranked 2d among 29 small agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's 2018 Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/TC00

Contact Information
The USITC website has an electronic form for submitting a comment or question.

https://www.usitc.gov/contact_us.htm

External Links
The "Related External Links" web page has a collection of external links to make locating additional information more

convenient.

https://www.usitc.gov/related_sites.htm

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
Enacted in 1966, the FOIA took effect on July 4, 1967. The statute makes all existing Federal Government records

available to the public; however, a record may be shielded from disclosure by one or more of nine exemptions or by

specific harm that its disclosure may cause. Any person, except a fugitive from the law, has a right to request access to

Federal agency records. The FOIA strengthens democratic governance by giving access to Government records to

anyone who submits a proper FOIA request.

https://www.usitc.gov/secretary/foia/index.htm
The USITC posts answers to frequently asked FOIA-related questions.

https://www.usitc.gov/secretary/foia/foia_faq.htm

Glossary
The USITC maintains an online glossary.

https://usitc.gov/glossary.htm
The "USITC Acronyms" web page enables the nonspecialist to navigate in an acronym-rich environment.

https://www.usitc.gov/acronyms.htm

Harmonized Tariff Schedule
The "Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States," which includes general notes and rules of interpretation, is

available online in Portable Document Format (PDF). The HTS is used to classify imported merchandise for rate of duty

and statistical purposes.

https://hts.usitc.gov/current

History
The USITC has developed a timeline of U.S. tariffs and trade and posted it online.

https://www.usitc.gov/flash/dynamic_timeline.htm
The USITC celebrated its 100th birthday in September of 2016. To mark that milestone, it published a 453-page history

of the agency called "A Centennial History of the United States International Trade Commission" (2017). The entire

history is available online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.usitc.gov/documents/final_centennial_history_508_compliant_v2.pdf

How To Find It
Try the "How Do I Find" web page, which has a collection of links to help online visitors use the USITC website.

https://www.usitc.gov/press_room/how_to_find.htm

Investigations
A list of active antidumping and countervailing duty investigations is available online.

https://www.usitc.gov/trade_remedy/731_ad_701_cvd/investigations.htm
337Info is an information retrieval system containing data on USITC Section 337 investigations.

https://pubapps2.usitc.gov/337external | Email: 337InfoHelp@usitc.gov
The Electronic Document Information System (EDIS) contains all documents that have been filed in relation to USITC

investigations. EDIS provides the capabilities to file documents for an investigation and to search for documents that

have been submitted to the USITC.

https://edis.usitc.gov | Email: EDIS3Help@usitc.gov

Low-Carbon Energy / Sustainable Products
European Union climate regulations, which treat wood pellets as a low-carbon energy source, play a principal role in

supporting the wood pellet industry's growth. To learn more, see Robert Ireland's 2018 executive briefing, in which he

expresses his views on international trade in this energy source.

https://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/executive_briefings/wood_pellets_ebot_final.pdf
In their 2018 working paper "Exporting Ecolabels: Is Demand for Certified Sustainable Products Affecting International

Trade?" coauthors Renee Berry and Marin Weaver explore the influence of sustainability certifications on trade patterns
    in food and agricultural products. USITC working papers express the views of their authors and may not represent the

    views of the U.S. International Trade Commission or its individual Commissioners.

    https://www.usitc.gov/publications/332/working_papers/exporting_ecolabels_final_with_cover_mjs_071718.pdf

    News
    The USITC posts news releases on its website.

    https://www.usitc.gov/press_room/news_release/news_release_index.htm

    Open Data
    The USITC helps increase the Federal Government's efficiency and transparency by making its operational information

    more accessible and useful.

    https://www.usitc.gov/data/index.htm

    Reading Rooms
    Reading rooms are open to the public in the Office of the Secretary and the USITC Main Library. The USITC Law

    Library is publicly accessible by prior arrangement. Call 202-205-3287 to schedule a visit.


    Popular Topics
    The "Popular Topics" web page has links to frequently visited USITC pages. Popular topics include calendar events,

    commissioner biographies, "Federal Register" notices, hearing protocols, jobs, and news releases.

    https://usitc.gov/popular_topics.htm

    Publications
    The Commission publishes results of investigations on various commodities and subjects. Other publications include an

    annual report to the Congress on the operation of the trade agreements program and an annual review of

    Commission activities. Specific information on these publications may be obtained from the Office of the Secretary.

    https://usitc.gov/research_and_analysis/commission_publications.htm

    Site Map
    The USITC site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

    https://www.usitc.gov/sitemap

    Trade Seminars
    The research division of the Office of Economics posts the International Trade Seminar Series on the USITC website.

    https://www.usitc.gov/research_and_analysis/seminars_economics.htm

       The Sources of Information were updated 7–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States
About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                          United States Office of Special Counsel




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES OFFICE OF SPECIAL COUNSEL
    1730 M Street NW., Suite 218, Washington, DC 20036-4505


    202-804-7000

    800-872-9855

    202-653-5151

    http://www.osc.gov




    LEADERSHIP TABLES
 SPECIAL COUNSEL                        Henry J. Kerner


 Principal Deputy Special Counsel       Ellen C. Epstein




 DEPUTY SPECIAL COUNSELS


 Legal Affairs                          Patrick Hartobey


 Public Policy                          Travis Millsaps




 General Counsel                        Susan K. Ullman

https://osc.gov/Pages/Leadership.aspx



Administrative Services Division


 CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER                Bruce Gipe




 CHIEF OFFICERS


 Administrative Services                Derrick McDuffie


 Data                                   Smita Patel


 Financial                              Karl P. Kammann


 Human Capital                          Kathy McDuffie


 Information                            Smita Patel




 Clerk                                  Mahala Dar




General Law Division


 ASSOCIATE SPECIAL COUNSEL              Anne Wagner
 UNIT CHIEFS


 Alternative Dispute Resolution                       Jane Juliano


 Complaints Examining                                 Barbara J. Wheeler


 Disclosure                                           Catherine A. McMullen


 Diversity, Outreach, and Training                    Shirine Moazed




Investigation and Prosecution Division—Field


 ASSOCIATE SPECIAL COUNSEL                            Bruce D. Fong




 FIELD OFFICE CHIEFS


 Dallas                                               Anne Gullick


 Detroit                                              Christopher T. Tall


 San Francisco Bay Area                               Joseph Siegelman




Investigation and Prosecution Division—Headquarters


 ASSOCIATE SPECIAL COUNSEL                            Louis Lopez




 DIVISION CHIEFS                                      Kimberley Baxter


                                                      Emilee Collier


                                                      Darshan Sheth


                                                      Rachel Venier




 UNIT CHIEFS
  Hatch Act                                                                                 Ana Galindo-Marrone


  Retaliation and Disclosure                                                                Elizabeth McMurray


  Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act                                 Patrick H. Boulay




The above list of key personnel was updated 11–2019.

The United States Office of Special Counsel investigates allegations of certain activities prohibited by civil service laws,

rules, or regulations and litigates before the Merit Systems Protection Board.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The U.S. Office of Special Counsel (OSC) was established on January 1, 1979, by Reorganization Plan No. 2 of 1978 (5

U.S.C. app.).

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title5a-node84-leaf186&num=0&edition=prelim
Public Law 95–454, which is also cited as the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978, was approved on October 13, 1978, and

became effective on January 11, 1979. This statute enlarged the agency's functions and powers (92 Stat. 1112).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-92/pdf/STATUTE-92-Pg1111.pdf
Pursuant to provisions of Public Law 101–12, which is also cited as the Whistleblower Protection Act of 1989, the OSC

functions as an independent investigative and prosecutorial executive branch agency that litigates before the Merit

Systems Protection Board (103 Stat. 16).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-103/pdf/STATUTE-103-Pg16.pdf
Statutory material associated with the OSC is codified in sections 1211—1219 of 5 U.S. C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title5/part2/chapter12/subchapter2&edition=prelim
Additional statutory material that affects the OSC and that derives from the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 is codified

in section 1101, note, of 5 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title5/part2/chapter11&edition=prelim
The OSC included an organizational chart in its "Performance and Accountability Report for Fiscal Year 2018" on page

107.

https://osc.gov/Documents/Resources/Statutory%20Reports%20and%20Notices/Performance%20and%20Accountabili
ty%20Reports%20(PAR)/Performance%20Reports/FY%202018%20Performance%20and%20Accountability%20Report.p
df



ACTIVITIES
The OSC safeguards the merit system in Federal employment by protecting employees and applicants from prohibited

personnel practices, especially from reprisal for whistleblowing. The Office operates a secure channel for Federal

whistleblower disclosures of gross waste of funds or mismanagement, substantial and specific danger to public health
and safety, and violations of laws, regulations, or rules. The OSC also issues advice on the Hatch Act and enforces its

restrictions on political activity by Government employees. It protects the civilian employment and reemployment

rights of military servicemembers under the Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Act. The OSC

enhances Government accountability and performance by the realization of a diverse, inclusive Federal workplace

where employees embrace excellence in service, uphold merit system principles, are encouraged to disclose

wrongdoing, and are protected against reprisals and other unlawful employment practices.

https://osc.gov/Services



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that OSC records have been

assigned to record group 481. The Guide is accessible online, but no description is associated with this record group.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/groups/000.html

Business Opportunities
The OSC relies on the Department of Interior for performing assisted procurements. The OSC posts contract

opportunities online by using Government acquisition vehicles like GSA Ebuy. It posts open market opportunities on

the Federal Business Opportunities Web site.

https://osc.gov/Careers

Career Opportunities
The agency employs approximately 110 employees who work in Washington, DC, or in the Dallas, Detroit, and Oakland

field offices. To carry out its mission, the OSC relies heavily on attorneys, investigators, and personnel management

specialists.


The OSC seeks law students year-round for internships in Dallas, TX; Detroit, MI; Oakland, CA; and Washington, DC.

https://osc.gov/Careers
In 2018, the OSC ranked 14th among 29 small agencies in the Partnership for Public Service's Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/FW00

Contact Information
The "Contact OSC" web page has postal and email addresses and phone numbers.

https://osc.gov/Pages/contact.aspx | Email: info@osc.gov

Electronic Filing
The E–Filing System makes filing a complaint with the OSC easier and faster.

https://osc.gov/pages/file-complaint.aspx

En Español
The OSC posts information in Spanish on its "Para Información En Español" web page.

https://osc.gov/Espanol

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
FOIA requests must be submitted in writing by email, fax, or U.S. postal mail or other delivery service. The OSC

provides a Public Access Link portal that allows information seekers to submit a request online and to receive

confirmation of and updates on a pending request.

https://osc.gov/Pages/FOIA-Resources.aspx

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The OSC posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://osc.gov/FAQ

Hatch Act Advisory Opinions
Advice that the OSC has given to individuals on the Hatch Act is publicly accessible online.

https://osc.gov/Services/Pages/HatchAct-AdvisoryOpinion.aspx

News
The OSC posts press releases online.

https://osc.gov/PressReleases

Open Government
The OSC supports the Open Government initiative by promoting the principles of collaboration, participation, and

transparency.

https://osc.gov/OpenGov

Prohibited Personnel Practices
The OSC provides information on personnel practices that are prohibited within the Federal workplace.

https://osc.gov/Services/Pages/PPP.aspx

Reports
The OSC posts reports on its website.

https://osc.gov/Reports

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

https://osc.gov/Pages/SiteMap.aspx

Social Media
The OSC tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/US_OSC

Speakers
     To request a speaker, contact the OSC by phone or fax. Phone, 202-804-7000. Fax, 202-254-3711.


     Whistleblower Files
     The OSC posts documents from closed investigations on its website. These documents are based on whistleblower

     disclosures.

     https://osc.gov/PublicFiles

     2302(c) Program Certification
     The White House has required all Federal agencies to certify that they are educating their employees about the rights

     of whistleblowers. Phone, 703-466-0259.

     https://osc.gov/Services/Pages/Outreach-2302Cert.aspx | Email: 2302c@osc.gov

        The Sources of Information were updated 11–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                United States Postal Service




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES POSTAL SERVICE
    475 L'Enfant Plaza SW., Washington, DC 20260


    202-268-2000

    http://about.usps.com




    BOARD OF GOVERNORS
 CHAIR                                                            Robert M. Duncan


 Vice Chair                                                       (vacancy)




 Governor                                                         John M. Barger


 Governor                                                         Ronald A. Bloom


 Governor                                                         Roman Martinez IV


 Governor                                                         Donald L. Moak


 Governor                                                         William D. Zollars


 Governor                                                         (vacancy)


 Governor                                                         (vacancy)




 Postmaster General / Chief Executive Officer                     Louis DeJoy


 Deputy Postmaster General / Chief Government Relations Officer   (vacancy)




 Secretary                                                        Michael J. Elston

http://about.usps.com/who-we-are/leadership/board-governors.htm



OFFICERS


 POSTMASTER GENERAL / CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER                     Louis DeJoy


 Deputy Postmaster General                                        (vacancy)




 EXECUTIVE VICE PRESIDENTS                                        Scott Bombaugh, Acting


                                                                  Joseph Corbett


                                                                  Isaac Cronkhite
                                                                    Thomas J. Marshall


                                                                    Pritha Mehra, Acting


                                                                    Steve Monteith, Acting


                                                                    Kristin Seaver


                                                                    Jacqueline Krage Strako


                                                                    David E. Williams




 Chief Postal Inspector                                             Gary Barksdale


 General Counsel                                                    Thomas J. Marshall




 VICE PRESIDENT


 Corporate Communications                                           Jeffery A. Adams

http://about.usps.com/who-we-are/leadership/pmg-exec-comm.htm#p=1



Commerce and Business Solutions


 CHIEF COMMERCE AND BUSINESS SOLUTIONS OFFICER                      Jacqueline Krage Strako




 VICE PRESIDENTS


 Facilities                                                         Thomas Samra


 Business Development                                               (vacancy)


 Business Solutions                                                 (vacancy)


 Transportation Strategy                                            Kelly Abney, Acting




Customer Affairs and Marketing


 CHIEF CUSTOMER AND MARKETING OFFICER                               Steve Monteith, Acting
 VICE PRESIDENTS


 Customer Experience                  Kelly M. Sigmon


 Marketing                            (vacancy)


 Product Innovation                   Gary Reblin


 Sales                                Timothy R. Costello, Acting




Financial Affairs


 CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER              Joseph Corbett




 SENIOR VICE PRESIDENT


 Finance and Strategy                 Luke Grossman




 VICE PRESIDENTS


 Controller                           Cara Greene


 Pricing and Costing                  Sharon Owens


 Supply Management                    Mark Guilfoil




Government Relations


 CHIEF GOVERNMENT RELATIONS OFFICER   (vacancy)




 Judicial Officer                     Alan R. Caramella, Acting

https://about.usps.com/who/judicial



Human Resources
 CHIEF HUMAN RESOURCES OFFICER                       Isaac Cronkhite




 Labor Relations                                     Douglas Tulino


 Employee Resource Management                        Simon Storey




Information


 CHIEF INFORMATION OFFICER                           Pritha Mehra, Acting




 VICE PRESIDENTS


 Mail Entry and Payment Technology                   Randy Workman, Acting


 Information Security                                Gregory S. Crabb


 Information Technology                              Marc McCrery, Acting




 Chief Information Security Officer                  Gregory S. Crabb




Logistics and Processing Operations


 CHIEF LOGISTICS AND PROCESSING OPERATIONS OFFICER   David E. Williams




 VICE PRESIDENTS


 Logistics                                           Robert Cintron


 Processing and Maintenance Operations               Mike Barber




 VICE PRESIDENTS—REGIONAL OPERATIONS


 Eastern                                             Dane Coleman
 Western                                                   Larry Muñoz




Retail and Delivery


 CHIEF RETAIL AND DELIVERY OFFICER                         Kristin Seaver




 VICE PRESIDENTS


 Delivery Operations                                       Joshua D. Colin


 Retail and Post Office Operations                         Angela Curtis




 VICE PRESIDENTS—AREA OPERATIONS


 Atlantic                                                  Salvatore Vacca


 Central                                                   Krista Finazzo, Acting


 Southern                                                  Shaun E. Mossman


 Western Pacific                                           Gregory Graves




Technology


 CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER                                  Scott Bombaugh, Acting




 VICE PRESIDENTS


 Engineering Systems                                       Linda M. Malone, Acting


 Enterprise Analytics                                      Jeffrey C. Johnson

http://about.usps.com/who-we-are/leadership/officers.htm

 Inspector General                                         Tammy L. Whitcomb


https://www.uspsoig.gov/about-us/tammy-whitcomb
  The above list of key personnel was updated 9–2020.



The United States Postal Service binds the Nation together through the people's personal, educational, literary, and

business correspondence by providing prompt, reliable, and efficient services to patrons in all areas and by rendering
postal services to all communities.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
Three weeks after the battles of Lexington and Concord, the Second Continental Congress met in Philadelphia and

planned for the defense of the colonies against Great Britain. The conveyance of letters and intelligence was essential

for winning the war for independence. A committee, which Benjamin Franklin chaired, was named to consider the

creation of a postal system. The committee reported back to the Continental Congress in July of 1775. The Continental

Congress agreed to the committee's recommendations, quickly created the position of Postmaster General, and

named the committee's chair to fill the new position. Under Franklin and his immediate successors, the postal system

mainly carried communications between Congress and the Continental Army. To ensure reliable service, postmasters

and post riders were exempt from military duties. Franklin served as Postmaster General until November of 1776. He

held the office when the Declaration of Independence created the United States in July of that year, which means that

Franklin had the distinction of serving as the first Postmaster General of the United States. America's present Postal

Service descends from the system Franklin placed in operation.

https://about.usps.com/publications/pub100.pdf
The Articles of Confederation were ratified in 1781. Article IX addressed the establishment and regulation of "post

offices from one State to another, throughout all the United States" and the exaction of "postage on the papers

passing" from State to State, throughout the United States, "as may be requisite to defray the expenses of the said

office."

https://www.ourdocuments.gov/doc.php?flash=false&doc=3&page=transcript
The Constitution of the United States gives the U.S. Congress the power "to establish Post Offices and post Roads"

(ART. I, Sec. 8).

https://www.ourdocuments.gov/doc.php?flash=false&doc=9&page=transcript
On September 22, 1789, President George Washington approved an "Act for the temporary establishment of the Post-

Office" (1 Stat. 70). This temporary piece of legislation provided that "the regulations of the post-office shall be the

same as they last were under the resolutions and ordinances of the late Congress." It also provided for the

appointment of a Postmaster General, who would "be subject to the direction of the President . . . in performing the

duties of his office, and in forming contracts for the transportation of the mail." The Act remained in force "until the

end of the next session of Congress," and its provisions were continued by subsequent acts.

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/1st-congress/session-1/c1s1ch16.pdf
On June 8, 1872, President Ulysses S. Grant approved an "Act to revise, consolidate, and amend the Statutes relating to

the Post-office Department" (17 Stat. 283). Even before the passage of this law, the Post Office, or General Post Office,

as it sometimes was called, had acquired the additional epithet of Post-office Department, which inaccurately implied

its prior establishment as an executive branch department. This law "established, at the seat of government of the

United States of America, a department to be known as the Post-office Department." The Post Office was now officially
named the Post-office Department, and it had acquired departmental status within the executive branch of

Government.

https://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/42nd-congress/session-2/c42s2ch335.pdf
Pursuant to the provisions of the Reorganization Act of 1949 (PL 81–109), President Harry S. Truman prepared

Reorganization Plan No. 3 of 1949 and transmitted it to the Senate and the House of Representatives on June 20,

1949. The provisions of the Reorganization Act of 1949 became effective on August 20, 1949.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title5a-node84-leaf99&num=0&edition=prelim
On August 23, 1949, the National Archives published President Truman's reorganization plan in the Federal Register

(14 FR 5225). The plan "established an Advisory Board for the Post Office Department." In addition to the Chair and

Vice Chair, the Board comprised seven other members who were representative of the public. It also provided that

these seven members "shall be appointed by the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate"; that

this same process shall be applied to the appointment of the Deputy Postmaster General; and that the Post Office

Department's Postmaster General and Deputy Postmaster General shall serve as the Board's Chair and Vice Chair.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR-1949-08-23/pdf/FR-1949-08-23.pdf
On August 12, 1970, President Richard M. Nixon approved Public Law 91–375, which is commonly cited as the Postal

Reorganization Act. Senators and Representatives passed this piece of legislation "to improve and modernize the

postal service" and "to reorganize the Post Office Department." Regarding postal policy, the Act stated: "The United

States Postal Service shall be operated as a basic and fundamental service provided to the people by the Government

of the United States, authorized by the Constitution, created by Act of Congress, and supported by the people . . . .

shall have as its basic function the obligation to provide postal services to bind the Nation together through the

personal, educational, literary, and business correspondence of the people . . . . shall provide prompt, reliable, and

efficient services to patrons in all areas and shall render postal services to all communities. The costs of establishing

and maintaining the Postal Service shall not be apportioned to impair the overall value of such service to the people"

(84 Stat. 719). The present United States Postal Service (USPS) commenced operations on July 1, 1971.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-84/pdf/STATUTE-84-Pg719.pdf
The most comprehensive postal legislation since the Nation's founding, the Postal Reorganization Act transformed the

Post Office Department into the USPS, an independent establishment of the executive branch of the Federal

Government. The Act did not change, however, the mission of the Postal Service, as stated in section 101 of 39 U.S.C.

The new USPS began operations on July 1, 1971, the same day that the President's Cabinet no longer included the

Postmaster General among its membership. The Act affected postal rates and mail classifications, terms and conditions

of employment, labor and management relations, laws that govern mail transportation, and compensation and

benefits for USPS officers and employees.


Regarding labor and management relations, the Postal Reorganization Act authorized collective bargaining on wages

and working conditions under laws that apply to private industry and provided for binding arbitration if an impasse

persists 180 days after the start of bargaining. The strike ban, which is applicable to all Federal employees, remained in

effect. The Act authorized the National Labor Relations Board to determine proper bargaining units, supervise

representative elections, and enforce the unfair labor practices provisions. It also protected the rights of all employees

to form, join, or assist a labor organization or to refrain from such activity. Today, the USPS is the only Federal agency

whose employment policies are governed by a process of collective bargaining that the National Labor Relations Act
prescribes.

https://about.usps.com/publications/pub100.pdf
On December 20, 2006, President George W. Bush signed Public Law 109–435, which is cited usually as the Postal

Accountability and Enhancement Act (120 Stat. 3198).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-120/pdf/STATUTE-120-Pg3198.pdf
This piece of legislation made more than 150 changes to Federal law, affecting the Postal Service.

https://about.usps.com/transforming-business/postal-act-2006.htm
Changes included the categorization of postal products, the replacement of the Postal Rate Commission by the Postal

Regulatory Commission, transferring the obligation to pay military pension costs, and the establishment of the Postal

Service Retiree Health Benefits Fund, into which the Postal Service was required to prepay benefits for 10 years into the

future.

https://about.usps.com/publications/pub100.pdf
Spanning two full centuries and parts of two others, congressional action and Presidential approval have shaped the

general organization of the Postal Service into what it is today. The Board of Governors directs the exercise of USPS

powers, reviews its practices and policies, and directs and controls USPS expenditures. The Board comprises 11

members, 9 of whom the President appoints by the advice and with the consent of the Senate. Not more than five

governors may belong to the same political party. The governors are chosen to represent the public interest, and they

may not be representatives of specific interests that use the Postal Service. The Postmaster General and Deputy

Postmaster General are also voting members of the Board.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=ac56841027cf753f6ab20c24468d6fa3&mc=true&node=pt39.1.221&rgn=div5#se39.1.221_12
The chief executive officer of the Postal Service is the Postmaster General, who is responsible responsible for the

overall operation of the Postal Service. The Board of Governors appoints the Postmaster General. The Postmaster

General and the governors appoint the Deputy Postmaster General.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=ac56841027cf753f6ab20c24468d6fa3&mc=true&node=pt39.1.221&rgn=div5#se39.1.221_14
The USPS posts its organizational chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://about.usps.com/who/leadership/hq-org.pdf
The USPS statement of organization has been assigned to part 221 in 39 CFR.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=ac56841027cf753f6ab20c24468d6fa3&mc=true&node=pt39.1.221&rgn=div5

STATUTORY AND REGULATORY AUTHORITIES
Statutory material affecting the Postal Service has been codified and assigned to 39 U.S.C. The title comprises four

parts: General, Personnel, Modernization and Fiscal Administration, Mail Matter, and Transportation of Mail.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title39&edition=prelim
Regulatory material that is associated with the USPS is codified and assigned to 39 CFR. The title comprises parts 1–

3099.

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?
SID=ac56841027cf753f6ab20c24468d6fa3&mc=true&tpl=/ecfrbrowse/Title39/39tab_02.tpl

ACTIVITIES
The USPS provides business, Government, mailing, shipping, and sustainability services, as well as law enforcement. As

a Federal agency, the USPS has been a sustainability leader through policies and programs like its renewable energy

and recycling initiatives.

https://about.usps.com/what/welcome.htm
The USPS is the only delivery service that reaches every mailbox—including APO, FPO, DPO, and post office box

addresses—nationwide. This comprehensive reach allows the USPS to support Government activities through its

services like the distribution of tax forms and the delivery of ballots overseas.

https://about.usps.com/what/government-services
USPS programs support communities through disseminating information, educating, and participating in worthwhile

causes. Examples of these types of programs include National Dog Bite Awareness Week, the Stamp Out Hunger

National Food Drive, and a partnership with the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.

https://about.usps.com/what/corporate-social-responsibility/activities
The U.S. Postal Inspection Service has jurisdiction in criminal matters affecting the integrity and security of the mail.

Postal inspectors protect all postal employees and enforce Federal statutes involving mail fraud, mail bombs, child

pornography, illegal drugs, mail theft, and other postal crimes.

https://www.uspis.gov
To expand and improve its services, the USPS engages in customer cooperation activities, including the development

of programs for both the general public and major customers. To provide services that are responsive to public needs,

the Postal Service operates its own planning, research, engineering, real estate, and procurement programs, and it

maintains close ties with international postal organizations.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Annual Food Drive
On the second Saturday of May, in more than 10,000 cities and towns nationwide, letter carriers collect food that

postal customers donate, as part of the National Association of Letter Carriers' (NALC) one-day Stamp Out Hunger

National Food Drive, which is the largest in the Nation. Led by letter carriers who are represented by the NALC (AFL–

CIO), with help from rural letter carriers, other postal employees, and volunteers, the drive has delivered more than

one billion pounds of food over the past 25 years. Carriers collect nonperishable food donations in post offices and at

mailboxes and deliver them to local community food banks, pantries, and shelters. Nearly 1,500 NALC branches in all

50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Virgin Islands participate.

https://about.usps.com/what/corporate-social-responsibility/activities/nalc-food-drive.htm

Annual Reports / Strategic Plans
Documents that are required by law and regularly published by the Office of Strategic Planning are available in

Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing online and downloading.
https://about.usps.com/strategic-planning/future-postal-service/publications.htm

Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that USPS records have been

assigned to record group 488. The guide is accessible online, but it does not contain a description that is associated

with record group 488.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/401-to-500.html

Blog
"Postal Posts" is the USPS's official blog.

https://uspsblog.com

Business Customers
The Business Customer Gateway website supports USPS online services for mailers, shippers, and business.

https://gateway.usps.com/eAdmin/view/signin

Business Opportunities
Suppliers can learn about doing business with the Postal Service online. Information on rights and permissions (the use

of trademarked material) and licensing products is also available online.

http://about.usps.com/doing-business/welcome.htm

Career Opportunities
Information on careers—including information for veterans and reservists, for students and recent graduates—is

available on the USPS website or at the nearest post office.

https://about.usps.com/careers
In 2019, the Office of Inspector General ranked 57th among 420 agency subcomponents in the Partnership for Public

Service's Best Places To Work Agency Rankings.

https://bestplacestowork.org/rankings/detail/PS01

Change of Address
A family member, individual, or business owner may change his or her address online, using the "Official USPS

Change-of-Address" web page.

https://moversguide.usps.com/mgo/disclaimer?referral=MG14

Contact Information
The USPS posts contact information online. It also operates a customer care center. Phone, 800-275-8777.

https://www.usps.com/help/contact-us.htm
USPS media relations specialists can answer questions that journalists and reporters may have.

https://about.usps.com/newsroom/national-releases/welcome.htm#national-media-contacts

Election Mail
Americans rely on the USPS to fulfill its role in the electoral process. The Postal Service provides an effective, efficient,
and secure way for citizens to participate in democracy when policymakers decide to use mail as part of elections.

https://about.usps.com/what/government-services/election-mail
The USPS Office of Inspector General website has a section that is devoted to "Election and Political Mail."

https://www.uspsoig.gov/election-and-political-mail

Federal Register
Significant documents and documents that the USPS recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/postal-service

Forms / Publications
The "Resources" web page provides convenient access to USPS forms and publications, including the "Postal Bulletin,"

which was started in 1880.

http://about.usps.com/periodicals-publications/welcome.htm

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA is a Federal law that provides the public a right of access to Government documents and records, the

premise being that the public has a right to know what the Federal Government is doing. The FOIA applies to

executive branch agencies, which includes the USPS. Any person may request a copy of USPS records. The USPS must

provide copies of such records, unless a FOIA exemption exists that shields the information from disclosure.

https://about.usps.com/who/legal/foia
The Postal Service maintains an electronic FOIA library. Frequently requested records—previously released records

that have been or are likely to become the subject of repeated requests—are part of the FOIA library. Before

submitting a formal FOIA request, check the online library to see if the desired information is already accessible

without charge and without delay.

https://about.usps.com/who-we-are/foia/readroom/welcome.htm

History
Benjamin Franklin and the Postal Service, what was the nature of their association? It was closer than many Americans

may know. To learn more about the role Franklin played in the early years of the Postal Service, see the 149-page and

poignantly illustrated publication "The United States Postal Service: An American History." The publication is available

in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing online and downloading.

https://about.usps.com/publications/pub100.pdf | Email: phistory@usps.gov
The National Postal Museum houses one of the largest and most significant philatelic and postal history collections in

the world and one of the most comprehensive library resources on philately and postal history. The museum’s

exhibition galleries present America’s postal history from Colonial times to the present. Its collections contain

prestigious international and U.S. postal issues and specialized collections, archival postal documents, and three-

dimensional objects.

https://postalmuseum.si.edu

Mail Hold
Before submitting a "USPS Hold Mail" request, the requester must create a USPS account. Once an account is created,
an account holder may print shipping labels, purchase stamps, print custom forms online, and manage a post office

box.

https://reg.usps.com/login?app=HOLDMAIL&appURL=https%3A%2F%2Fholdmail.usps.com%2Fholdmail%2F

News
The USPS posts national news items on its "Newsroom" web page.

https://about.usps.com/newsroom

Passports
Thousands of post offices accept passport applications on behalf of the Department of State. These post offices offer

the products and services needed to acquire a first-time passport or renewal. At some locations, a passport

photograph can be taken for an additional fee.

https://www.usps.com/international/passports.htm

Philatelic Sales
For information on available stamps, philatelic items, and collectibles, visit the "Stamps" web page.

https://store.usps.com/store/results/stamps/_/N-9y93lv#content

Photo Galleries
Photo galleries are found in the "Our History" section of the USPS website. The galleries are six in number: airmail,

buildings, equipment, people, railroads, and vehicles. Students of history can find some arresting images in the

galleries.

https://about.usps.com/who-we-are/postal-history/pho-gallery.htm

Postal Certainty
The 30-second video highlights the long-standing culture of service associated with USPS mail carriers.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uuNLLZcSTKE

Postal Explorer
The Postal Explorer website is a virtual library of postal information and tools for USPS customers, business mailers,

and employees. It brings a wealth of postal requirements for mailing and shipping together, in one place, in an easy-

to-use format.

https://pe.usps.com

Postal Facts
The history of the USPS reaches back to the founding of the Nation. The "Postal Facts" web page has information on

postal operations and revenue, as well as other information of a more trivial character.

https://facts.usps.com

Postal Money Orders
Using a money order for sending money by mail is a safe alternative to cash and personal checks. A USPS money

orders is affordable, widely accepted, and never expires. The money order receipt helps with tracking the payment and
shows proof of value in case the money order is damaged or stolen or goes missing.

https://www.usps.com/international/money-transfers.htm

Postmaster and Post Officer Finder
Most postmasters who were appointed after 1986 and some postmasters who were appointed before that year, going

back to the 18th century, are included in the database. Currently, complete information on more than 15,000 post

offices is available, and the number increases weekly.

https://about.usps.com/who-we-are/postmasterfinder/welcome.htm

Public Opinion
On page 10 of its "FY2019 Annual Report to Congress," the USPS reported: "Public interest and opinion of our

organization remain strong. In a poll released in September 2019, the Pew Research Center found that 90 percent of

Americans held a favorable opinion of the Postal Service, a higher rating than any other Federal Government agency.

Additionally, an April 2019 Gallup Poll found that three in four Americans (74 percent) rated the job performance of

the organization as 'excellent' or 'good,' placing [it] as the highest rated Governmental agency. The Postal Service has

achieved this top ranking every year Gallup has measured it (2014, 2017, and 2019)."

https://about.usps.com/what/financials/annual-reports/fy2019.pdf

Reading Areas
Reading areas are maintained in the library at USPS Headquarters on the 11th Floor. The library's holdings include

historic, legal, regulatory, and other documents. Visitors must schedule an appointment before accessing the library.

Phone, 202-268-2906.


Semipostal Stamps
Semipostal stamps are postage stamps with a postage value equal to the First-Class Mail single-piece, 1-ounce, stamp

rate, plus an amount to fund a designated cause. Revenue from sales of semipostal stamps, less the postage paid and

the costs incurred by the Postal Service, is distributed to designated agencies for support of the particular cause.

https://about.usps.com/what/corporate-social-responsibility/activities/semipostals.htm

Site Indices and Maps
The USPS site index allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse for content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.usps.com/globals/site-index.htm
The PostalPro site index allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse for content that aligns with their

interests.

https://postalpro.usps.com/site-index
The U.S. Postal Inspection Service site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse for content that aligns

with their interests.

https://www.uspis.gov/sitemap
The Smithsonian’s National Postal Museum site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse for content

that aligns with their interests.
     https://postalmuseum.si.edu/site-map

     Social Media
     The USPS has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/USPS
     The Postal Service tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/usps
     The Postal Service posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/uspstv/custom

     Stamp Collecting
     Stamps are miniature gateways to the world. Collectors learn about art, biography, culture, geography, and history as

     they pursue their interests and build their collections. Stamp collecting has very few rules, and expensive equipment is

     not required to participate.

     https://postalmuseum.si.edu/introduction-to-stamp-collecting

     Sustainability
     The USPS is committed to environmental stewardship and leading by example to ensure that we leave behind a

     healthy biosphere and habitable planet for future generations.

     https://facts.usps.com/sustainability
     The USPS 40-page "Annual Sustainability Report—2020" is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing

     online and downloading.

     https://about.usps.com/what/corporate-social-responsibility/sustainability

     Zip Codes
     Looking for a Zip Code? Visit the "Look Up a Zip Code" web page.

     https://tools.usps.com/go/ZipLookupAction!input.action

        The Sources of Information were updated 9–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act
No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                 Legal Services Corporation




The United States Government Manual




     LEGAL SERVICES CORPORATION
    3333 K Street NW., Washington, DC 20007


    202-295-1500

    202-337-6797

    http://www.lsc.gov




    BOARD OF DIRECTORS
 CHAIR                                        John G. Levi


 Vice-Chair                                   Fr. Pius Pietrzyk, O.P.




                                              Robert J. Grey, Jr.


                                              Matthew Keenan


                                              Abigail Lawlis Kuzma


                                              Victor B. Maddox


                                              John G. Malcolm


                                              Laurie Mikva


                                              Frank X. Neuner, Jr.


                                              Julie A. Reiskin


                                              Gloria Valencia-Weber

https://www.lsc.gov/about-lsc/board-members



LEADERSHIP


 PRESIDENT                                    Ronald S. Flagg


 Chief of Staff                               Rebecca Fertig Cohen




 VICE PRESIDENTS


 Government Relations and Public Affairs      Carol A. Bergman


 Grants Management                            Lynn A. Jennings


 Legal Affairs                                William A. Gunn




 Corporate Secretary                          Rebecca Fertig Cohen


 General Counsel                              William A. Gunn
  Treasurer                                                                              Deborah Moore




Chief Officers


  Data                                                                                   (vacancy)


  Financial                                                                              Deborah Moore


  Information                                                                            Jada Breegle




Office Directors


  Compliance and Enforcement                                                             Lora Rath


  Data Governance and Analysis                                                           (vacancy)


  Human Resources                                                                        Traci Higgins


  Institutional Advancement                                                              Nadia Elguindy


  Program Performance                                                                    Joyce McGee

https://www.lsc.gov/about-lsc/lsc-leadership

  Inspector General                                                                      Jeffrey E. Schanz


https://www.oig.lsc.gov/about-oig/meet-the-ig



  The above list of key personnel was updated 6–2021.



The Legal Services Corporation promotes equal access to justice and provides civil legal assistance to low-income

persons.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On July 25, 1974, President Richard M. Nixon approved Public Law 93–355 "to amend the Economic Opportunity Act

of 1964 to provide for the transfer of the legal services program from the Office of Economic Opportunity to a Legal

Services Corporation." The Legal Services Corporation Act of 1974, as amended (42 U.S.C. 2996 et seq.), established a

private, nonprofit corporation to promote equal access to justice under the law for all Americans.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-88/pdf/STATUTE-88-Pg378.pdf
The President appoints, by the advice and with the consent of the Senate, the 11 members who constitute the Board of
Directors, which heads the LSC. By law, it is bipartisan and no more than six members may be of the same political

party. A member is appointed to a term of 3 years. A majority of the Board members must be members of the bar of

the highest court of any State. The Board meets four or more times per year.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2017-title42/pdf/USCODE-2017-title42-chap34.pdf
An organizational chart is available on the "LSC Leadership" web page.

https://www.lsc.gov/about-lsc/lsc-leadership

ACTIVITIES
Congressional appropriations fund the LSC to provide legal services through grants to independent, local legal

services provider programs. These programs are selected through a system of competition. In 2017, the LSC funded

133 programs. Together, they serve every county and congressional district in the Nation, as well as the U.S. Territories.

Some of these programs address the particular needs of Native Americans and migrant farmworkers.

http://www.lsc.gov/what-legal-aid/how-we-work
The legal services delivery system is based on several principles: local priorities, national accountability, competition for

grants, and a strong public-private partnership. Local programs are governed by their own boards of directors, which

set priorities and determine the types of cases that will be handled subject to restrictions set by Congress. A majority

of each local board is appointed by local bar associations, and one-third of each local board is composed of client

representatives appointed by client groups. Each board hires its own executive director. Programs may supplement

their LSC grants with additional funds from State and local governments and other sources. They further leverage

Federal funds by involving private attorneys in the delivery of legal services for the poor, mostly through volunteer pro

bono work.


LSC-funded programs neither handle criminal cases nor accept fee-generating cases that private attorneys are willing

to accept on a contingency basis. In addition, in 1996, a series of new limitations were placed upon activities in which

LSC-funded programs may engage on behalf of their clients, even with non-LSC funds. All programs must comply with

laws enacted by Congress and the implementing regulations promulgated by the LSC.

http://www.lsc.gov/about-lsc/what-we-do



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Blog
The LSC maintains a blog.

http://www.lsc.gov/media-center/blog

Board Meetings
Board meeting documents and information are available online.

http://www.lsc.gov/about-lsc/board/board-meetings

Business Opportunities
The LSC regularly seeks the assistance of vendors to purchase products and contractors to carry out special projects.
The LSC is eligible for General Services Administration schedule pricing and posts requests for proposals on eBuy and

FedBizOpps.gov.

http://www.lsc.gov/about-lsc/doing-business-lsc-rfps

Career Opportunities
The LSC is an organization of socially aware professionals who serve the unrepresented and promote equal justice.

Information on career opportunities and working at the LSC is available online.

http://www.lsc.gov/about-lsc/careers

Civil Legal Outcomes
The LSC developed its civil legal outcomes toolkit to help legal aid programs with defining, collecting, and reporting

on metrics that describe their effectiveness. The toolkit includes detailed instructions, electronic learning modules,

examples, and additional resources for implementing an outcomes management system.

https://www.lsc.gov/grants-grantee-resources/civil-legal-outcomes

Client Success Stories
An interactive map allows website visitors to browse client success stories by State.

http://www.lsc.gov/what-legal-aid/client-success-stories

Contact Us
To make a media inquiry, submit a Freedom of Information Act request, ask a grant submission question, or need to

contact the LSC for another reason, use the electronic form on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.lsc.gov/about-lsc/contact-us

Data
The LSC seeks to increase the accessibility of data that can help grantees, the media, and the public better understand

the nature of civil legal needs and the services that are available for addressing the legal needs of individuals and

families.

https://www.lsc.gov/what-legal-aid/data

Donations
Tax-deductible donations to the LSC support the use of technology innovations in legal services, provide law fellows

for civil legal aid programs in need, raise public awareness of the legal aid system crisis, and support research into the

effectiveness and need of civil legal aid.

http://www.lsc.gov/support-lsc/donate-now

Events
A list of upcoming events is available online.

http://www.lsc.gov/meetings-and-events/calendar

Facts
What percentage of the population is eligible for LSC-funded assistance? What is the average annual salary of LSC
grantee staff attorneys? To learn the answers to these questions and others, visit the "Quick Facts" web page.

http://www.lsc.gov/quick-facts

Federal Register
Documents that the Legal Services Corporation recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/legal-services-corporation

Find Legal Aid
An online search tool is available to find the nearest LSC-funded legal aid organization by address, city, or ZIP Code.

http://www.lsc.gov/what-legal-aid/find-legal-aid

Freedom of Information Act (FOIA)
The FOIA grants any person the right to request access to Federal agency records or information. U.S. Government

agencies are required to disclose records after they receive a written request for them; however, the statute shields

certain records from disclosure. The LSC complies with the FOIA and releases records to information seekers, as long

as the desired records are not shielded. A FOIA request must be made in writing and may be submitted by electronic

submission form, email, fax, or postal service. The request should be clearly marked: "Freedom of Information Act

Request." Fax, 202-337-6519.

http://www.lsc.gov/about-lsc/foia | Email: FOIA@lsc.gov
The LSC maintains a FOIA reading room online. Before submitting a FOIA request, information seekers should search

the reading room for records that are immediately accessible.

http://www.lsc.gov/about-lsc/foia/foia-electronic-public-reading-room

Grant Programs
Descriptions of the LSC's seven grant programs—basic field, disaster relief emergency, technology initiative, and

veterans appeals pro bono grants; leadership development and loan repayment assistance programs; and pro bono

innovation fund—are available online.

http://www.lsc.gov/grants-grantee-resources/our-grant-programs

Justice Gap
The justice gap represents the difference between the level of civil legal assistance that is available and the level that is

necessary to meet the legal needs of low-income individuals and families. To learn more about the justice gap, visit the

"The Unmet Need for Legal Aid" web page.

http://www.lsc.gov/what-legal-aid/unmet-need-legal-aid

Maps
The LSC posts maps that provide a visual representation of nationwide statistics on poverty, disaster risks, flood zones,

social vulnerability, and on other topics.

https://www.lsc.gov/what-legal-aid/maps

News
The LSC posts press releases on its website.
     http://www.lsc.gov/media-center/press-releases

     Oversight
     The Office of the Inspector General from the LSC posts reports and data on Oversight.gov, a text-searchable

     repository of reports that Federal Inspectors General publish. The Council of the Inspectors General on Integrity and

     Efficiency operates and maintains the website to increase public access to independent and authoritative information

     on the Federal Government.

     https://oversight.gov

     Publications
     Annual reports, budget requests, factbooks, and reports are accessible online.

     http://www.lsc.gov/media-center/publications

     Public Commentary
     The LSC seeks public comments on a variety of proposals affecting grants and operations.

     https://www.lsc.gov/about-lsc/matters-comment

     Sharing Best Practices
     The "Model Practices and Innovations" web page has a collection of resources: ideas, innovations, projects, and best

     practices. The legal aid community has contributed these resources as examples, models, or guidance in the quest to

     provide the highest quality and most effective legal services to low-income communities.

     https://www.lsc.gov/grants-grantee-resources/model-practices-innovations

     Social Media
     The LSC has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/LegalServicesCorporation
     The LSC tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/lsctweets

        The Sources of Information were updated 6–2021.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility
Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               Smithsonian Institution
                                   John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts
                                               National Gallery of Art
                                  Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars




The United States Government Manual




     SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION
    1000 Jefferson Drive SW., Washington, DC 20560


    202-633-1000

    http://www.si.edu
Board of Regents


 CITIZEN REGENTS




 Chair                   David M. Rubenstein


 Vice Chair              Steve M. Case


                         Barbara M. Barrett


                         John Fahey


                         Roger W. Ferguson


                         Michael Govan


                         Risa J. Lavizzo-Mourey


                         Michael M. Lynton


                         John W. McCarter, Jr.




 CONGRESSIONAL REGENTS




 Representatives         Thomas J. Cole


                         Samuel Johnson


                         Doris Matsui


 Senators                John Boozman


                         Patrick J. Leahy


                         David Perdue




 EX OFFICIO REGENTS
 Chief Justice of the United States                         John G. Roberts, Jr.


 Vice President of the United States                        Michael R. Pence




 Chief of Staff to the Regents                              Porter Wilkinson

https://www.si.edu/regents/members



SENIOR EXECUTIVES


 SECRETARY                                                  David J. Skorton

https://www.si.edu/about/secretary-david-skorton

 Chief Financial Officer                                    Albert G. Horvath


 Provost                                                    John H. Davis, Acting




 Assistant Secretary, Advancement                           Zully Dorr, Acting


 Assistant Secretary, Communications and External Affairs   Carolyn Martin, Acting


 Assistant Secretary, Education and Access                  Patty Bartlett, Acting


 Director, Equal Employment and Minority Affairs            Era L. Marshall


 General Counsel                                            Judith E. Leonard




Administration / Program Directors


 UNDER SECRETARY FOR FINANCE AND ADMINISTRATION             Albert G. Horvath




 Chief Information Officer                                  Deron Burba


 Chief Investment Officer                                   Amy Chen


 Director, Contracting and Personal Property Management     Thomas Dempsey
 Director, Finance and Accounting                          Jean Garvin


 Director, Human Resources                                 Waltrunette Gardner, Acting


 Director, Planning, Management and Budget                 David Voyles


 Director, Policy and Analysis                             H. Whitney Watriss, Acting


 Director, Smithsonian Exhibits                            Susan Ades


 Director, Smithsonian Facilities                          Nancy Bechtol


 Director, Sponsored Projects                              Tracey Fraser


 President, Smithsonian Enterprises                        Chris Liedel




Museums / Research Centers


 UNDER SECRETARY FOR MUSEUMS AND RESEARCH                  John H. Davis, Acting




 DIRECTORS


 Anacostia Community Museum                                Lori D. Yarrish, Acting


 Archives of American Art                                  Kate Haw


 Center for Astrophysics                                   Charles R. Alcock


 Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage                 Michael A. Mason


 Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum                  Caroline Baumann


 Freer Gallery of Art and Arthur M. Sackler Gallery        Julian Raby


 Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden                     Melissa Chiu


 National Air and Space Museum                             John R. Dailey


 National Museum of African American History and Culture   Lonnie G. Bunch III


 National Museum of African Art                            Christine Kreamer, Acting


 National Museum of American History                       John Gray


 National Museum of Natural History                        Kirk Johnson
  National Museum of the American Indian                                                 Kevin Gover


  National Portrait Gallery                                                              Kim Sajet


  National Postal Museum                                                                 Elliot Gruber


  National Zoological Park                                                               Dennis Kelly


  Smithsonian American Art Museum and Renwick Gallery                                    Stephanie Stebich


  Smithsonian Asian Pacific American Center                                              Lisa Sasaki


  Smithsonian Environmental Research Center                                              Anson H. Hines


  Smithsonian Institution Archives                                                       Anne Van Camp


  Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service                                   Myriam Springuel


  Smithsonian Latino Center                                                              Eduardo Díaz


  Smithsonian Libraries                                                                  Nancy E. Gwinn


  Smithsonian Marine Station                                                             Valerie J. Paul


  Smithsonian Museum Conservation Institute                                              Robert J. Koestler


  Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute                                                Matthew Larsen

https://www.si.edu/about/people

  Inspector General                                                                      Cathy L. Helm


https://www.si.edu/oig



The above list of key personnel was updated 09–2017.

The Smithsonian Institution increases the fund of human knowledge and diffuses that knowledge among people.


The Smithsonian Institution was created by an act of Congress on August 10, 1846 (20 U.S.C. 41 et seq.), to carry out

the terms of the will of British scientist James Smithson (1765–1829), who in 1826 had bequeathed his entire estate to

the United States "to found at Washington, under the name of the Smithsonian Institution, an establishment for the

increase and diffusion of knowledge among men." On July 1, 1836, Congress accepted the legacy and pledged the

faith of the United States to the charitable trust.

http://www.loc.gov/law/help/statutes-at-large/29th-congress/session-1/c29s1ch178.pdf
In September 1838, Smithson's legacy, which amounted to more than 100,000 gold sovereigns, was delivered to the

mint at Philadelphia. Congress vested responsibility for administering the trust in the Secretary of the Smithsonian and
the Smithsonian Board of Regents, composed of the Chief Justice, the Vice President, three Members of the Senate,

three Members of the House of Representatives, and nine citizen members appointed by joint resolution of Congress.

To carry out Smithson's mandate, the Institution executes the following functions: conducts scientific and scholarly

research; publishes the results of studies, explorations, and investigations; preserves for study and reference more than

137 million artifacts, works of art, and scientific specimens; organizes exhibits representative of the arts, the sciences,

American history, and world culture; shares Smithsonian resources and collections with communities throughout the

Nation; and engages in educational programming and national and international cooperative research.


The Smithsonian Institution is an independent trust instrumentality of the United States that comprises the world's

largest museum and research complex. It includes 19 museums and galleries, the National Zoo, and nine research

facilities in several States and the Republic of Panama. The Institution is dedicated to public education, national service,

and scholarship in the arts, sciences, history, and culture. Smithsonian activities are supported by its trust endowments

and revenues; gifts, grants, and contracts; and funds appropriated to it by Congress. Admission to the museums in

Washington, DC, is free.

http://www.si.edu/About/History



ACTIVITIES

Anacostia Community Museum
The Museum, located in the historic Fort Stanton neighborhood of Southeast Washington, serves as a national

resource for exhibitions, historical documentation, and interpretive and educational programs relating to the impact of

history and contemporary social issues on urban communities.

http://anacostia.si.edu | Email: ACMinfo@si.edu

  For further information, contact the Anacostia Community Museum, 1901 Fort Place SE., Washington, DC
  20020. Phone, 202-633-4820.



Archives of American Art
The Archives contains the Nation's largest collection of documentary materials reflecting the history of visual arts in the

United States. On the subject of art in America, it is the largest archives in the world, holding more than 16 million

documents. The Archives gathers, preserves, and microfilms the papers of artists, craftsmen, collectors, dealers, critics,

and art societies. These papers include manuscripts, letters, diaries, notebooks, sketchbooks, business records,

clippings, exhibition catalogs, transcripts of tape-recorded interviews, and photographs of artists and their work.

http://www.aaa.si.edu

  For further information, contact the Archives of American Art, Suite 2200, 750 Ninth Street NW.,
  Washington, DC 20001. Phone, 202-633-7940.



Arthur M. Sackler Gallery
This Asian art museum opened in 1987 on the National Mall. Changing exhibitions drawn from major collections in the
United States and abroad, as well as from the permanent holdings of the Sackler Gallery, are displayed in the

distinctive below-ground museum. The Gallery's growing permanent collection is founded on a group of art objects

from China, South and Southeast Asia, and the ancient Near East that were given to the Smithsonian by Arthur M.

Sackler (1913–1987). The Museum's current collection features Persian manuscripts; Japanese paintings; ceramics,

prints, and textiles; sculptures from India; and paintings and metalware from China, Korea, Japan, and Southeast Asia.

The Sackler Gallery is connected by an underground exhibition space to the neighboring Freer Gallery.

http://www.asia.si.edu | Email: publicaffairsAsia@si.edu

  For further information, contact the Arthur M. Sackler Gallery, 1050 Independence Avenue SW.,
  Washington, DC 20560. Phone, 202-633-4880.



Center for Astrophysics
The Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory and the Harvard College Observatory have coordinated research activities

under a single director in a cooperative venture, Harvard-Smithsonian Center for Astrophysics. The Center's research

activities are organized in the following areas of study: atomic and molecular physics, radio and geoastronomy, high-

energy astrophysics, optical and infrared astronomy, planetary sciences, solar and stellar physics, and theoretical

astrophysics. Research results are published in the Center Preprint Series and other technical and nontechnical

bulletins and distributed to scientific and educational institutions around the world.

http://www.cfa.harvard.edu/sao

  For more information, contact the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge,
  MA 02138. Phone, 617-495-7463.



Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage
The Center is responsible for research, documentation, and presentation of grassroots cultural traditions. It maintains a

documentary collection and produces Smithsonian Folkways Recordings, educational materials, documentary films,

publications, and traveling exhibits, as well as the annual Smithsonian Folklife Festival on the National Mall. Recent

Folklife festivals have featured a range of American music styles, a number of State tributes, and performers from

around the world. Admission to the festival is free. The 2-week program includes Fourth of July activities on the

National Mall.

http://www.folklife.si.edu

  For further information, contact the Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage, Capital Gallery, Suite 2001,
  600 Maryland Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20024. Phone, 202-633-1000.



Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum
The Museum is the only museum in the country devoted exclusively to historical and contemporary design. Collections

include objects in such areas as applied arts and industrial design, drawings and prints, glass, metalwork, wallcoverings,

and textiles. Changing exhibits and public programs seek to educate by exploring the role of design in daily life.

http://cooperhewitt.org
  For further information, contact the Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum, 2 East Ninety-First
  Street, New York, NY 10128. Phone, 212-849-8400.



Freer Gallery of Art
The building, the original collection, and an endowment were the gift of Charles Lang Freer (1854–1919). The Gallery

houses one of the world's most renowned collections of Asian art, an important group of ancient Egyptian glass, early

Christian manuscripts, and works by 19th- and early 20th-century American artists. The objects in the Asian collection

represent the arts of East Asia, the Near East, and South and Southeast Asia, including paintings, manuscripts, scrolls,

screens, ceramics, metalwork, glass, jade, lacquer, and sculpture. Members of the staff conduct research on objects in

the collection and publish results in scholarly journals and books for general and scholarly audiences.

http://www.asia.si.edu | Email: publicaffairsAsia@si.edu

  For further information, contact the Freer Gallery of Art, Jefferson Drive at Twelfth Street SW.,
  Washington, DC 20560. Phone, 202-633-4880.



Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden
From cubism to minimalism, the Museum houses major collections of modern and contemporary art. The nucleus of

the collection is the gift and bequest of Joseph H. Hirshhorn (1899–1981). Supplementing the permanent collection are

loan exhibitions. The Museum houses a collection research facility, a specialized art library, and a photographic

archive, available for consultation by prior appointment. The outdoor sculpture garden is located nearby on the

National Mall. There is an active program of public service and education, including docent tours, lectures on

contemporary art and artists, and films of historic and artistic interest.

http://www.hirshhorn.si.edu | Email: hmsginquiries@si.edu

  For further information, contact the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Seventh Street and
  Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20560. Phone, 202-633-4674.



Museum Conservation Institute
The Institute researches preservation, conservation, and technical study and analysis of collection materials. Its

researchers investigate the chemical and physical processes that are involved in the care of art, artifacts, and

specimens and attempt to formulate conditions and procedures for storage, exhibit, and stabilization that optimize the

preservation of these objects. In interdisciplinary collaborations with archeologists, anthropologists, and art historians,

natural and physical scientists study and analyze objects from the collections and related materials to expand

knowledge and understanding of their historical and scientific context.

http://www.si.edu/mci

  For further information, contact the Museum Conservation Institute, Museum Support Center, Suitland,
  MD 20746. Phone, 301-238-1240.



National Air and Space Museum
Created to memorialize the development and achievements of aviation and spaceflight, the Museum collects, displays,
and preserves aeronautical and space flight artifacts of historical significance, as well as documentary and artistic

materials related to air and space. Among its artifacts are full-size planes, models, and instruments. Highlights of the

collection include the Wright brothers' "Flyer," Charles Lindbergh's "Spirit of St. Louis," a Moon rock, and Apollo

spacecraft. The exhibitions and study collections record the human leap into the air, the sky, and space beyond. They

offer a concentrated presentation of flight craft of all types, spaceflight vehicles, and propulsion systems. The

Museum's IMAX Theater and domed Einstein Planetarium are popular attractions. The Museum's Steven F. Udvar-

Hazy Center, at Washington Dulles International Airport, features artifacts that include a space shuttle and the "Enola

Gay" World War II bomber.

http://airandspace.si.edu | Email: NASMVisitorServices@si.edu

  For further information, contact the National Air and Space Museum, Sixth Street and Independence
  Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20560. Phone, 202-633-2214.



National Museum of African American History and Culture
Established in 2003, the Museum is the first national museum that documents exclusively African American art, culture,

history, and life.

http://www.nmaahc.si.edu | Email: NMAAHCinfo@si.edu

  For further information, contact the National Museum of African American History and Culture, Capital
  Gallery, Suite 7001, 600 Maryland Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20024. Phone, 202-633-1000.



National Museum of African Art
This is the only art museum in the United States that portrays exclusively Africa's creative, visual traditions. Its research

components, collection, exhibitions, and public programs make the Museum a primary source for the examination and

discovery of African arts and culture. The collection includes works in wood, metal, fired clay, ivory, and fiber. The Eliot

Elisofon Photographic Archives includes slides, photos, and film segments on Africa. There is also a specialized library.

http://africa.si.edu

  For further information, contact the National Museum of African Art, 950 Independence Avenue SW.,
  Washington, DC 20560. Phone, 202-633-4600.



National Museum of American History
In pursuit of its fundamental mission to inspire a broader understanding of the United States and its people, the

Museum provides learning opportunities, stimulates the imagination of visitors, and presents challenging ideas about

the Nation's past. The Museum's exhibits provide a unique view of the American experience. Emphasis is placed upon

innovative individuals representing a wide range of cultures, who have shaped our heritage, and upon science and the

remaking of our world through technology. Exhibits draw upon strong collections in the sciences and engineering,

agriculture, manufacturing, transportation, political memorabilia, costumes, musical instruments, coins, Armed Forces

history, photography, computers, ceramics, and glass. Classic cars, icons of the American Presidency, First Ladies'

gowns, the Star-Spangled Banner flag, Whitney's cotton gin, Morse's telegraph, the John Bull locomotive, Dorothy's
ruby slippers from "The Wizard of Oz," and other American icons are highlights of the collection.

http://www.americanhistory.si.edu | Email: info@si.edu

  For further information, contact the National Museum of American History, Fourteenth Street and
  Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20560. Phone, 202-633-1000.



National Museum of Natural History
Dedicated to understanding the natural world and the place of humans in it, the Museum's permanent exhibitions

focus on human cultures, Earth sciences, biology, and anthropology, with the most popular displays featuring gem

stones such as the Hope Diamond, dinosaurs, insects, marine ecosystems, birds, and mammals. In 2010, the Museum

celebrated its 100th anniversary with the opening of a new permanent exhibition, the David H. Koch Hall of Human

Origins. An IMAX theater offers large-format films. The Museum's encyclopedic collections comprise more than 126

million specimens, making the Museum one of the world's foremost facilities for natural history research. The

Museum's seven departments are anthropology, botany, entomology, invertebrate zoology, mineral sciences,

paleobiology, and vertebrate zoology. Doctorate-level staff researchers ensure the continued growth and value of the

collection by conducting studies in the field and laboratory.

http://www.mnh.si.edu | Email: naturalexperience@si.edu

  For further information, contact the National Museum of Natural History, Tenth Street and Constitution
  Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20560. Phone, 202-633-1000.



National Museum of the American Indian
The Museum was established in 1989, and the building on the National Mall opened September 2004. Much of the

collection of the Museum is comprised of the collection of the former Heye Foundation in New York City. It is an

institution of living cultures dedicated to the collection, preservation, study, and exhibition of the life, languages,

literature, history, and arts of the Native peoples of the Americas. Highlights include Northwest Coast carvings; dance

masks; pottery and weaving from the Southwest; painted hides and garments from the North American Plains;

goldwork of the Aztecs, Incas, and Maya; and Amazonian featherwork. The National Museum of the American Indian

also operates the George Gustav Heye Center at the Alexander Hamilton U.S. Custom House in New York City.

http://americanindian.si.edu | Email: NMAI-info@si.edu

  For further information, contact the National Museum of the American Indian, Fourth Street and
  Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20560. Phone, 202-633-1000.



National Portrait Gallery
The Gallery was established in 1962 for the exhibition and study of portraiture depicting men and women who have

made significant contributions to the history, development, and culture of the United States. The Gallery contains more

than 19,000 works, including photographs and glass negatives. The first floor of the Gallery is devoted to changing

exhibitions from the Gallery's collection of paintings, sculpture, prints, photographs, and drawings as well as to special

portrait collections. Featured on the second floor are the permanent collection of portraits of eminent Americans and

the Hall of Presidents, including the famous Gilbert Stuart portrait-from-life of George Washington. The two-story
American Victorian Renaissance Great Hall on the third floor of the Gallery houses an exhibit of 20th-century

Americans and is used for special events and public programs. The Gallery shares a large library with the Smithsonian

American Art Museum and the Archives of American Art. The education department offers public programs; outreach

programs for adult groups; and walk-in and group tours.

http://www.npg.si.edu | Email: npgnews@si.edu

  For further information, contact the National Portrait Gallery, Eighth and F Streets NW., Washington, DC
  20001. Phone, 202-633-8300.



National Postal Museum
The Museum houses the Nation's postal history and philatelic collection, the largest of its kind in the world, with more

than 13 million objects. The Museum is devoted to the history of America's mail service, and major galleries include

exhibits on mail service in colonial times and during the Civil War, the Pony Express, modern mail service, automation,

mail transportation, and the art of letters, as well as displays of the Museum's priceless stamp collection. Highlights

include three mail planes, a replica of a railway mail car, displays of historic letters, handcrafted mail boxes, and rare

U.S. and foreign-issue stamps and covers.

http://postalmuseum.si.edu

  For further information, contact the National Postal Museum, 2 Massachusetts Avenue NE., Washington,
  DC 20001. Phone, 202-633-1000.



National Zoological Park
The National Zoo is an international leader in wildlife conservation, education, and research. Home to more than 2,000

animals, the Zoo encompasses 163 acres along Rock Creek Park in Northwest Washington. Exhibits include the David

M. Rubenstein Family Giant Panda Habitat, where the giant pandas Mei Xiang and Tian Tian reside with their cub Bao

Bao. Built to mimic the animals' natural habitat in China, it is part of the Zoo's Asia Trail, which also takes visitors

through the habitats of red pandas, Asian small-clawed otters, fishing cats, sloth bears, and clouded leopards. Other

highlights include the Elephant Trails, home to the Asian elephant Kandula, who was born at the Zoo in 2001;

Amazonia, a 15,000-square-foot rain forest habitat; the Reptile Discovery Center, featuring African pancake tortoises

and the world's largest lizards, Komodo dragons; and the Great Ape House, home to gorillas, orangutans, and other

primates.

http://nationalzoo.si.edu

  For further information, contact the National Zoo, 3001 Connecticut Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20008.
  Phone, 202- 633-4888.



Renwick Gallery
The Gallery, a branch of the Smithsonian American Art Museum, is dedicated to exhibiting crafts of all periods and to

collecting 20th-century American crafts. It offers changing exhibitions of American crafts and decorative arts, both

historical and contemporary, and a rotating selection from its permanent collection. The Gallery's grand salon is
elegantly furnished in the Victorian style of the 1860s and 1870s.

http://www.americanart.si.edu/renwick | Email: AmericanArtRenwick@si.edu

  For further information, contact the Renwick Gallery, Seventeenth Street and Pennsylvania Avenue NW.,
  Washington, DC 20006. Phone, 202-633-7970.



Smithsonian American Art Museum
The Museum's art collection spans centuries of American painting, sculpture, folk art, photography, and graphic art. A

major center for research in American art, the Museum has contributed to such resources as the Inventory of

American Paintings Executed Before 1914, the Smithsonian Art Index, and the Inventory of American Sculpture. The

library, shared with the National Portrait Gallery, contains volumes on art, history, and biography, with special

emphasis on the United States. The Donald W. Reynolds Center for American Art and Portraiture is home to the

Smithsonian American Art Museum, the National Portrait Gallery, and the Archives of American Art. Hundreds of

images from the collection and extensive information on its collections, publications, and activities are available on the

Museum's Web site.

http://www.americanart.si.edu | Email: AmericanArtInfo@si.edu

  For further information, contact the Smithsonian American Art Museum, Eighth and F Streets NW.,
  Washington, DC 20006. Phone, 202-633-7970.



Smithsonian Asian Pacific American Center
The Center seeks to enrich the appreciation of America's Asian Pacific heritage and empower Asian Pacific American

communities in their sense of inclusion within the national culture.

http://smithsonianapa.org | Email: apac@si.edu

  For further information, contact the Asian Pacific American Center's administrative office, Capital Gallery,
  Suite 7065, MRC 516, P.O. Box 37012, Washington, DC 20013-7012. Phone, 202-633-2691.



Smithsonian Environmental Research Center (SERC)
The Center is the leading national research center for understanding environmental issues in the coastal zone. SERC is

dedicated to increasing knowledge of the biological and physical processes that sustain life on Earth. The Center,

located near the Chesapeake Bay, trains future generations of scientists to address ecological questions of the Nation

and the globe.

http://www.serc.si.edu

  For further information, contact the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center, 647 Contees Wharf
  Road, Edgewater, MD 21037. Phone, 443-482-2200.



Smithsonian Institution Archives
The Smithsonian Institution Archives acquires, preserves, and makes available for research the official records of the

Smithsonian Institution and the papers of individuals and organizations associated with the Institution or with its work.
These holdings document the growth of the Smithsonian and the development of American science, history, and art.

http://siarchives.si.edu

  For further information, contact the Smithsonian Institution Archives, Capital Gallery, Suite 3000, 600
  Maryland Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20024. Phone, 202-633-5870.



Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service (SITES)
Since 1952, SITES has been committed to making Smithsonian exhibitions available to millions of people who cannot

view them firsthand at the Smithsonian museums. Exhibitions on art, history, and science travel to more than 250

locations each year.

http://www.sites.si.edu

  For further information, contact the Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service, Suite 7103, 470
  L'Enfant Plaza SW., Washington, DC 20024. Phone, 202-633-3120.



Smithsonian Latino Center
The Center promotes Latino presence within the Smithsonian Institution. It is not represented in one physical location;

rather, it works collaboratively with the Institution's museums and research centers to ensure that the contributions of

the Latino community in the arts, history, national culture, and scientific achievement are celebrated, explored,

presented, and preserved. The Center supports collections and archives, exhibitions, public and educational programs,

research, and Web-based content and virtual platforms. It also manages leadership and professional development

programs for emerging scholars, museum professionals, and Latino youth.

http://latino.si.edu/Home

  For further information, contact the Smithsonian Latino Center at Capital Gallery, 600 Maryland Avenue
  SW., MRC 512, Washington, DC 20013-7012. Phone, 202-633-1240.



Smithsonian Libraries
The Smithsonian Institution Libraries include more than 1 million volumes (among them, 40,000 rare books) with

strengths in natural history, art, science, humanities, and museology. Many volumes are available through interlibrary

loan.

http://library.si.edu

  For further information, contact the Smithsonian Institution Libraries, Tenth Street and Constitution
  Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20560. Phone, 202-633-2240.



Smithsonian Marine Station at Fort Pierce
The research institute features a state-of-the-art laboratory where Station scientists catalog species and study marine

plants and animals. Among the most important projects being pursued at the site is the search for possible causes of

fishkills, including Pfiesteria and other organisms.
http://www.sms.si.edu

  For further information, contact the Smithsonian Marine Station–Fort Pierce, 701 Seaway Drive, Fort
  Pierce, FL 34949. Phone, 772-462-6220.



Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (STRI)
The Institute is a research organization for advanced studies of tropical ecosystems. Headquartered in the Republic of

Panama, STRI maintains extensive facilities in the Western Hemisphere tropics. It is the base of a corps of tropical

researchers who study the evolution, behavior, ecology, and history of tropical species of systems ranging from coral

reefs to rain forests.

http://www.stri.org

  For further information, contact the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, 1100 Jefferson Drive SW.,
  Suite 3123, Washington, DC 20560. Phone, 202-633-4700. Phone, 011-507-212-8000 (Panama).




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
Information on procurement of supplies, property management and utilization services for Smithsonian Institution

organizations, and construction contracts may be obtained from the Director, Office of Contracting, Smithsonian

Institution, 2011 Crystal Drive, Suite 350, Arlington, VA 22202. Phone, 202-633-7290.

http://www.si.edu/se/seproductsubmissions.aspx

Career Opportunities
Employment information is available from the Office of Human Resources, Smithsonian Institution, Capital Gallery,

Suite 5060, 600 Maryland Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20560. Phone, 202-633-6370.

http://www.sihr.si.edu
In 2016, the Smithsonian Institution ranked 7th among 27 midsize Government agencies in the Best Places To Work

Agency Rankings.

http://bestplacestowork.org/BPTW/rankings/detail/SM00

Education / Research
Write to the Directors of the following offices at the Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC 20560: Office of

Fellowships and Internships, Smithsonian Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage, Smithsonian Science Education

Center, and Smithsonian Center for Learning and Digital Access.

http://www.smithsonianofi.com
http://www.folklife.si.edu
https://ssec.si.edu
http://smithsonianeducation.org

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Smithsonian Institution posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.si.edu/faqs

Media Affairs
Members of the press may contact the Smithsonian Office of Public Affairs, 1000 Jefferson Drive SW., Washington, DC

20560. Phone, 202-633-2400.

http://newsdesk.si.edu/contacts

Memberships
For information on the Friends of the Smithsonian, write to PO Box 37012, MRC 712 Washington, DC 20013-7012.

Phone, 202-633-6300.

http://smithsonianmembership.com | Email: membership@si.edu
For information on the Resident Associate Program, write to Smithsonian Associates, PO Box 23293, Washington, DC

20026-3293. Phone, 202-633-3030.

http://residentassociates.org
For information on the Smithsonian National Associate Program, call 800-766-2149.

http://www.si.edu/Membership
For information on the National Air and Space Society, call 202-633-2603.

http://www.nasm.si.edu/getinvolved/membership | Email: MembershipNASM@si.edu
For information on the Friends of the National Zoo, call 202-633-3038.

http://nationalzoo.si.edu/Audiences/Members
For information on National Museum of the American Indian membership, call 800-242-6624.

http://americanindian.si.edu | Email: NMAImember@si.edu

Organizational Chart
The Smithsonian Institution's organizational chart is accessible online in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing

and downloading.

https://www.si.edu/Content/Pdf/About/Smithsonian-organizational-chart.pdf

Photographs
Photographs and slides from the Smithsonian photographic archives are available to researchers, publishers,

Government agencies, and the general public. A searchable database of images is available online. Purchase or use of

images may require permission from the Smithsonian curatorial unit that holds copyright. For assistance, contact

Smithsonian Photographic Services. Phone, 202-633-1933.

http://www.si.edu/Collections | Email: photos@si.edu

Publications
The Smithsonian Institution's annual reports, starting with the year 2004, are available online as Portable Document

Format (PDF) files. For information on acquiring hardcopies of reports, call 202-633-1000.

http://www.si.edu/About/Annual-Report | Email: info@si.edu
Smithsonian Books, in collaboration with the Smithsonian Institution, publishes narrative nonfiction books on culture,

history, science and technology, and the arts, as well as signature illustrated books based on Smithsonian museums

and their collections. Random House Publisher Services distribute these titles.

http://www.smithsonianbooks.com
Smithsonian Institution Scholarly Press, in conjunction with Rowman and Littlefield Publishing Group, Inc., publishes the

research and other scholarly contributions of Smithsonian authors.

http://www.scholarlypress.si.edu
Subscribe to the "Smithsonian Magazine" online. Phone, 800-766-2149.

http://www.smithsonianmag.com | Email: smithsonian@customersvc.com
Subscribe to "Air and Space Magazine" online. Phone, 800-513-3081.

http://www.airspacemag.com/?no-ist | Email: airandspace@customersvc.com

Social Media
The Smithsonian Institution has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/Smithsonian
The Smithsonian Institution tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/smithsonian
The Smithsonian Institution posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/SmithsonianVideos

Tours
For information on museum and gallery tours, contact the Smithsonian Information Center, 1000 Jefferson Drive SW.,

Washington, DC 20560. Phone, 202-633-1000. School groups are welcome. The benefits of various memberships and

their levels include special guided tours.

http://www.si.edu/Visit/GroupTours

Visitor Information
The Smithsonian Information Center, located in the original Smithsonian building, commonly known as The Castle,

provides general orientation through films, computer interactive programs, and visitor information specialists to help

members and the public learn about the national collections, museum events, exhibitions, and special programs. Write

to the Smithsonian Information Center, 1000 Jefferson Drive SW., Washington, DC 20560. Phone, 202-633-1000.

http://www.si.edu/Visit/Hours
An accessibility map of Smithsonian museums on and near the National Mall is available online.

https://www.si.edu/content/ovs/accessmapsindd.pdf

Volunteer Opportunities
The Smithsonian Institution welcomes volunteers and offers a variety of service opportunities. For information, write to

the Office of Visitor Services, 1000 Jefferson Drive SW., Washington, DC 20560. Phone, 202-633-1000.

http://www.si.edu/Volunteer
http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/contact-us/department-list
For further information, contact the Smithsonian Information Center, 1000 Jefferson Drive SW., Washington, DC 20560.

Phone, 202-633-1000. TDD, 202-357-1729.



John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing
Arts
John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, DC 20566


202-467-4600

http://www.kennedy-center.org


 CHAIR                                                   Donald J. Trump


 President                                               Ric Grenell


 Treasurer                                               (vacancy)


 General Counsel                                         Aswathi Zachariah


http://www.kennedy-center.org/pages/about/ourpeople



National Symphony Orchestra


 Music Director                                          Gianandrea Noseda

http://www.kennedy-center.org/artist/A58901




Washington National Opera


 Governance Board Officers


 Chair                                                   Eric Jon Larsen


 Chairman Emeritus                                       Jacqueline Badger Mars


 President                                               Andy Pharoah


 Secretary                                               Edward J. Asher


 Treasurer                                               Billy Cox
  Opera Ambassador                                         Anne Kline Pohanka




  Artistic Director                                        Francesca Zambello

http://www.kennedy-center.org/wno/MTO/ArtDir



The above list of key personnel was updated 02–2025.

The Kennedy Center is the only official memorial to President John F. Kennedy in Washington, DC. The Center

presents a year-round program of dance, drama, music, and opera from the United States and abroad.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
Opportunities are posted on the Federal Business Opportunities Web site. For more information, contact The

John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, DC 20566.

https://www.fbo.gov

Career Opportunities
Job descriptions of open positions are available online.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/jobs
The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts offers internships for undergraduate and graduate students

and for recent college graduates.

http://education.kennedy-center.org/education/internships/overview.html
In partnership with American University, the Center offers a merit-based, 9-month fellowship in art management.

http://education.kennedy-center.org/education/internships/fellowships.html

Education / Research
For information on education programs, contact The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts,

Washington, DC 20566. Phone, 202-416-8000.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/education

Free Performances
Free performances are given every day at 6 p.m. on the Millennium Stage in the Grand Foyer.

https://www.kennedy-center.org/video/upcoming

History
In January of 1964, not long after the death of President John F. Kennedy, Congress designated the National

Cultural Center as a "living memorial" to the slain President and authorized 23 million dollars to help build what
is known today as the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. Before the end of that year, enough

artwork, building materials, and additional funds had been donated to start construction. With a gold-plated

spade that had been used to break ground at both the Lincoln and Jefferson Memorials, President Lyndon B.

Johnson symbolically removed the first soil from the new site. The Center opened to the public in 1971, more

than a decade after President Dwight D. Eisenhower and legislators, from both parties, had taken initial steps

toward realizing this vision. To learn more about the people who imagined a cultural center for the Nation,

those who supported its realization, and the emergence of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts

as an iconic institution of the arts, visit the "History" Web page.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/pages/about/history

Live Streaming
The Center live streams artists while they perform.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/video/live

Memberships
For information on national and local activities, including the bimonthly "Kennedy Center News" for members,

visit an information desk inside The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. Or, contact Member

Services, The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, DC 20566. Phone, 202-416-8310.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/membership | Email: membership@kennedy-center.org

Social Media
John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/KennedyCenter
The Center tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/KenCen
The Center posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/TheKennedyCenter

Special Functions
For information on using the facilities for special functions, contact the Office of Special Events, The John F.

Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, DC 20566. Phone, 202-416-8000.

https://www.kennedy-center.org/rental

Theater Operations
For information on using the theaters, contact the booking manager at The John F. Kennedy Center for the

Performing Arts, Washington, DC 20566. Phone, 202-416-8032.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/pages/theaterrental

Tickets
Tickets for admission to performances may be purchased at the box office, by mail, by phone using instant-

charge, or online. Phone, 202-467-4600. TTY, 202-416-8524.
https://www.kennedy-center.org/tickets
The Center posts answers to frequently asked ticket-related questions.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/contact/topic/1

Tours
The Friends of the Kennedy Center volunteers provide visitor services. Tours are available free of charge on

weekdays, 10 a.m.–5 p.m., and on weekends, 10 a.m.–1 p.m.

https://www.kennedy-center.org/pages/visitor/tours

Videos
The Center regularly posts short videos of artists performing. Its Web site has an expanding collection of over

2,000 selections.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/Video/recentVideos

Volunteer Opportunities
For information on volunteer opportunities, contact Friends of the Kennedy Center, 2700 F Street NW,

Washington, DC 20566. Phone, 202-416-8000.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/support/volunteers
http://www.kennedy-center.org/contact
For further information, contact The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. Phone, 202-467-4600.



National Gallery of Art
4th and Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20565


202-737-4215

http://www.nga.gov




EXECUTIVE OFFICERS


  DIRECTOR                                                Kaywin Feldman


  Secretary / General Counsel                             Nancy R. Breuer

https://www.nga.gov/about/directors-welcome.html



GENERAL TRUSTEES


  PRESIDENT                                               Mitchell P. Rales


  Chair                                                   Sharon P. Rockefeller
https://www.nga.gov/about/leadership.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.




ACTIVITIES
The National Gallery of Art administers a world-class collection of painting, sculpture, and the graphic arts. The

West Building includes European (13th–early 20th century) and American (18th–early 20th century) works. An

extensive survey of Italian painting and sculpture, including the only painting by Leonardo da Vinci in the

Americas, is on display in the Gallery. Rich in Dutch masters and French impressionists, the collection offers

superb surveys of American, British, Flemish, Spanish, and 15th- and 16th-century German art, as well as

Renaissance medals and bronzes, Chinese porcelains, and about 117,000 works of graphic art from the 12th

century to the present day. The East Building collections and Sculpture Garden contain important works by

major 20th-century artists. The Gallery relies on public and private resources. Federal appropriations support its

operations and maintenance. Private donations and funds allow it to acquire artwork, as well as to offer a variety

of special programs. For example, a fellowship program promotes graduate and postgraduate research, an

extension service provides free education resources to millions of people each year, and other programs

educate schoolchildren and the public.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
For more information, contact the National Gallery of Art, Office of Procurement and Contracts, 2000B South

Club Drive, Landover, MD 20785. Phone, 202-842-6745. Fax, 202-312-2792.

https://www.fbo.gov/index?s=main&mode=list&tab=list

Calendar
The full calendar of events is available online. To subscribe to the quarterly brochure of seasonal exhibition and

programming highlights, visit the Gallery's Web site or call 202-842-6662.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/calendar.html | Email: calendar@nga.gov

Career Opportunities
The National Gallery of Art relies on approximately 1,000 employees to carry out its mission. Some positions

require a background in art history or design; however, other positions—like salesperson, security guard, and

visitor services aide—support the museum's daily operations and are less specialized. The National Gallery of Art

also employs accountants, administrators, facilities managers, fundraisers, information systems specialists,

librarians, and other professionals with technical expertise. Phone, 202-842-6282.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/opportunities/employment-opportunities.html | Email: staffing@nga.gov
The National Gallery of Art offers internships and opportunities for fellows. Conservation and curatorial

fellowships are available, as well as Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts (CASVA) fellowships.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/opportunities/interns-and-fellows.html
The National Gallery of Art offers a range of volunteer opportunities. Volunteers serve as docents, manage the

information desks at the entrances to the East and West Buildings, work in the library, and help in the

horticulture division. Local high school students can participate in the teen volunteer program.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/opportunities/volunteer-opportunities.html

Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts (CASVA)
The CASVA is a research institute that supports study of the production, use, and cultural meaning of

architecture, art, artifacts, film, photography, and urbanism. It offers fellowships, organizes scholarly meetings,

produces publications, and supports research. These activities are privately funded through endowments and

grants to the National Gallery of Art. Phone, 202-842-6480.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/research/casva.html | Email: casva@nga.gov

Concerts
Concerts by accomplished musicians are open to the public without charge. Seating starts 30 minutes before the

performance on a first-come, first-seated basis. Phone, 202-842-6941.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/calendar/concerts.html

Educational Resources
The Gallery's free loan program allows community groups, educational institutions, individuals, and nonprofit

television stations nationwide to borrow teaching packets and DVDs. Dozens of lessons and activities are also

accessible on the Gallery's Web site. For more information, including the free catalog of education resources,

contact the Department of Education Resources, National Gallery of Art, 2000B South Club Drive, Landover, MD

20785. Phone, 202-842-6273.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/education/learningresources.html | Email: edresources@nga.gov

Family Programs
The Gallery offers free family programs—children's films, music performances, storytelling, and workshops—that

are suitable for children ages 4 and up. Phone, 202-789-3030.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/education/families.html | Email: family@nga.gov

Films
An ongoing program of classic cinema, documentary, avant-garde, and area premieres takes place each

weekend. Seating is on a first-come, first-seated basis, and admission is free. Doors open approximately 30

minutes before each show. Visiting filmmakers and scholars discuss films with the audiences following some

screenings. Phone, 202-842-6799.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/calendar/film-programs.html | Email: film-department@nga.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The National Gallery of Art posts answers to FAQs on its Web site.
http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/contact-us.html

Ice-Skating Rink
Each winter, the National Gallery of Art opens its ice rink in the Sculpture Garden. The seasonal skating schedule

is posted online in November.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/visit/ice-rink.html

Image Collections
The Department of Image Collections serves as the National Gallery of Art's research center for images of

Western art and architecture. The collections now contain over 14 million digital images, microforms, negatives,

photographs, and slides, making this resource one of the largest of its kind. Gallery staff, Center for Advanced

Study in the Visual Arts (CASVA) members, visiting scholars, and serious adult researchers regularly use the

collections. The library is accessible by appointment every Monday, noon–4:30 p.m., and Tuesday–Friday, 10

a.m.–4:30 p.m., except on Federal holidays. Phone, 202-842-6026.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/research/library/imagecollections.html

Lectures
Lecture events are open to the public, and admission is free. Seating is available on a first-come, first-seated

basis.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/calendar/lectures.html

Library
The National Gallery of Art Library maintains a collection of more than 400,000 books and periodicals on the

history, theory, and criticism of art and architecture. The collection's holdings emphasize Western art from the

Middle Ages to the present and American art from the colonial era to the present. The library is accessible by

appointment every Monday, noon–4:30 p.m., and Tuesday–Friday, 10 a.m.–4:30 p.m., except on Federal

holidays. Phone, 202-842-6511.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/research/library/About.html

Memberships
The Gallery offers three membership levels of annual giving: The Circle, The Tower Project, and The Exhibition

Circle. Circle members contribute to conservation programs, special exhibitions, and research. Tower Project

members promote contemporary artists by supporting modern and contemporary exhibitions in the Tower

Gallery of the East Building. Exhibition Circle members provide funding for exhibitions. For more information on

membership levels and their benefits, contact The Circle, National Gallery of Art, 2000B South Club Drive,

Landover, MD 20785. Phone, 202-842-6450. Fax, 202 789-4577.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/support/membership.html | Email: circle@nga.gov

News
The National Gallery of Art posts recent news releases on its Web site.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/press.html | Email: pressinfo@nga.gov
An online subscription form is available to sign up for announcements, newsletters, notifications, and updates on

acquisitions and exhibitions; activities, projects, and programs; and other topics.

http://subscribe.nga.gov/subscription_form_ngart.cfm

NGAkids
NGAkids offers interactive activities and adventures with artwork from the Gallery's collection and an animated

tale set in the Gallery's Sculpture Garden.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/education/kids.html

Photographs
Photographs that are not on display may be viewed by appointment. Phone, 202-842-6144.

Email: photographs@nga.gov

Publications
The Gallery Shops sell publications on the Gallery's collections and quality reproductions of artwork. Purchases

may be made online or by calling 800-697-9350.

https://shop.nga.gov

Public Wi-Fi
Wireless internet service is available throughout the Gallery to visitors who are 18 years old and older or at least

13 years old with permission from a parent or guardian. The network name is "NGA_Public_WiFi," and a

password is not needed. A user must, however, supply his or her own Internet device and agree to the "Terms

and Conditions of Use."

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/visit/public-wifi.html

Tours
The education division offers daily guided talks and tours in the galleries. Phone, 202-842-6247.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/visit/tours-and-guides.html

Visitor Services
The Visitor Services Office assists those with special needs, responds to written and telephone requests, and

helps visitors plan their stay in the Washington, DC, area. For more information, contact the National Gallery of

Art, Office of Visitor Services, 2000B South Club Drive, Landover, MD 20785. Phone, 202-842-6691.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/visit.html

Works on Paper
Works of art on paper that are not on display may be viewed by appointment. Phone, 202-842-6380 (European

works). Phone, 202-842-6605 (American works).

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/research/make-an-appointment.html | Email: printstudyrooms@nga.gov
http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/contact-us.html
For further information, contact the National Gallery of Art. Phone, 202-737-4215.
Woodrow Wilson International Center for
Scholars
Scholar Administration Office, Woodrow Wilson Center, One Woodrow Wilson Plaza, 1300 Pennsylvania Avenue

NW., Washington, DC 20004-3027


202-691-4000

202-691-4001

http://www.wilsoncenter.org


  DIRECTOR / PRESIDENT / CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER          Jane L. Harman


https://www.wilsoncenter.org/person/jane-harman



Board of Trustees


  CHAIR                                                   William E. Haslam

https://www.wilsoncenter.org/leadership



The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.



ACTIVITIES
Created by an Act of Congress in 1968, the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars is a national, living

memorial honoring the legacy of President Woodrow Wilson. The Wilson Center, headquartered in Washington,

DC, and supported by both public and private funds, provides a strictly nonpartisan space for scholars and

policymakers to interact. By conducting relevant, timely research and promoting dialogue from diverse

perspectives, the Center works to address critical current and emerging challenges confronting the United States

and the world.

https://www.wilsoncenter.org/about-the-wilson-center



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
Career opportunities at the Center are posted online. For more information, contact the Office of Human

Resources, One Woodrow Wilson Plaza, 1300 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., 3d Floor, Washington, DC 20004-3027.

http://www.wilsoncenter.org/opportunities/Job | Email: jobs@wilsoncenter.org
Contact Information
In addition to a "Get In Touch" electronic form, the "Contact Us" web page contains the general phone number

and email address for and the hours of operation of and directions to the Woodrow Wilson International Center

for Scholars.

https://www.wilsoncenter.org/contact-us | Email: wwics@wilsoncenter.org

Donations
An online form is available for making tax-deductible contributions to support dialogue and scholarship in public

policy. Gifts may be directed to a specific program by using the "Designation" drop-down menu. "Unrestricted"

gifts allow the Center to build its overall capacity and meet areas of greatest need. Phone, 202-691-4171.

https://engage.wilsoncenter.org/onlineactions/KxzFKo0YTk2W8uYVKK5HKg2                          |               Email:
development@wilsoncenter.org

Experts
The Center convenes scholars to create a dialogue of ideas that the U.S. Congress, the President's

administration, and the international policy community may adopt for implementation.

https://www.wilsoncenter.org/experts

Fellowships
The Center offers residential fellowships that allow academics, public officials, journalists, business professionals,

and others to pursue their research and writing at the Center while interacting with policymakers in Washington.

The Center also invites public policy scholars and senior scholars from a variety of disciplines to conduct

research for varying lengths of time in residence. Phone, 202-691-4000.

http://www.wilsoncenter.org/fellowships-grants

Internships
The Center has a year-round need for interns to assist the program and projects staff and to act as research

assistants for scholars and fellows. Phone, 202-691-4053.

http://www.wilsoncenter.org/opportunities/Internship

Media Affairs
Members of the press may contact the Center at 202-691-4217.

http://www.wilsoncenter.org/media-access-to-the-wilson-center

Multimedia
Wide ranging in scope, "Wilson Center On Demand" serves as a hub for insightful analysis of and commentary

on ideas and issues.

https://www.wilsoncenter.org/wilson-center-demand

President Woodrow Wilson
To learn about President Wilson's life and which of the Center's scholars are researching and writing about him,

visit the "About Woodrow Wilson" web page. The page also contains a bibliography, a list of other institutions
    that are dedicated to the former President, and some of his quotations.

    https://www.wilsoncenter.org/about-woodrow-wilson

    Press Statements
    The Center posts press statements.

    https://www.wilsoncenter.org/press-statements

    Publications
    The Center publishes policy briefs and research reports, as well as books written by staff and visiting scholars and

    fellows, through the Wilson Center Press. Phone, 202-691-4000.

    http://www.wilsoncenter.org/publications
    Every 3 months, "The Wilson Quarterly" magazine releases a cluster of content exploring a single topic from

    diverse perspectives. This free, online magazine examines culture, current events, ideas, and the people affected

    by them.

    http://wilsonquarterly.com/quarterly | Email: wq@wilsoncenter.org

    Social Media
    The Center maintains an account on Facebook.

    https://www.facebook.com/woodrowwilsoncenter
    The Center posts openings for jobs and internships on its LinkedIn page.

    https://www.linkedin.com/company/woodrow-wilson-international-center-for-scholars
    The Center tweets announcements, news, and other noteworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/thewilsoncenter
    The Center posts videos on its YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/user/woodrowwilsoncenter

    Visitor Services
    Events, unless otherwise noted, are free and open to the public. Photo identification is required for entry. A

    listing of events at the Center is available online.

    http://www.wilsoncenter.org/events
    The Sources of Information were updated 10–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy
Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                    John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts




The United States Government Manual




     JOHN F. KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS
    John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, DC 20566


    202-467-4600

    http://www.kennedy-center.org


      CHAIR                                                                                 Donald J. Trump


      President                                                                             Ric Grenell


      Treasurer                                                                             (vacancy)
 General Counsel                                                                    Aswathi Zachariah


http://www.kennedy-center.org/pages/about/ourpeople



National Symphony Orchestra


 Music Director                                                                     Gianandrea Noseda

http://www.kennedy-center.org/artist/A58901




Washington National Opera


 Governance Board Officers


 Chair                                                                              Eric Jon Larsen


 Chairman Emeritus                                                                  Jacqueline Badger Mars


 President                                                                          Andy Pharoah


 Secretary                                                                          Edward J. Asher


 Treasurer                                                                          Billy Cox


 Opera Ambassador                                                                   Anne Kline Pohanka




 Artistic Director                                                                  Francesca Zambello

http://www.kennedy-center.org/wno/MTO/ArtDir



The above list of key personnel was updated 02–2025.

The Kennedy Center is the only official memorial to President John F. Kennedy in Washington, DC. The Center

presents a year-round program of dance, drama, music, and opera from the United States and abroad.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Business Opportunities
Opportunities are posted on the Federal Business Opportunities Web site. For more information, contact The John F.

Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, DC 20566.

https://www.fbo.gov

Career Opportunities
Job descriptions of open positions are available online.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/jobs
The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts offers internships for undergraduate and graduate students and

for recent college graduates.

http://education.kennedy-center.org/education/internships/overview.html
In partnership with American University, the Center offers a merit-based, 9-month fellowship in art management.

http://education.kennedy-center.org/education/internships/fellowships.html

Education / Research
For information on education programs, contact The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, DC

20566. Phone, 202-416-8000.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/education

Free Performances
Free performances are given every day at 6 p.m. on the Millennium Stage in the Grand Foyer.

https://www.kennedy-center.org/video/upcoming

History
In January of 1964, not long after the death of President John F. Kennedy, Congress designated the National Cultural

Center as a "living memorial" to the slain President and authorized 23 million dollars to help build what is known today

as the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. Before the end of that year, enough artwork, building

materials, and additional funds had been donated to start construction. With a gold-plated spade that had been used

to break ground at both the Lincoln and Jefferson Memorials, President Lyndon B. Johnson symbolically removed the

first soil from the new site. The Center opened to the public in 1971, more than a decade after President Dwight D.

Eisenhower and legislators, from both parties, had taken initial steps toward realizing this vision. To learn more about

the people who imagined a cultural center for the Nation, those who supported its realization, and the emergence of

the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts as an iconic institution of the arts, visit the "History" Web page.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/pages/about/history

Live Streaming
The Center live streams artists while they perform.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/video/live

Memberships
For information on national and local activities, including the bimonthly "Kennedy Center News" for members, visit an
information desk inside The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. Or, contact Member Services, The John F.

Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, DC 20566. Phone, 202-416-8310.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/membership | Email: membership@kennedy-center.org

Social Media
John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/KennedyCenter
The Center tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/KenCen
The Center posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/TheKennedyCenter

Special Functions
For information on using the facilities for special functions, contact the Office of Special Events, The John F. Kennedy

Center for the Performing Arts, Washington, DC 20566. Phone, 202-416-8000.

https://www.kennedy-center.org/rental

Theater Operations
For information on using the theaters, contact the booking manager at The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing

Arts, Washington, DC 20566. Phone, 202-416-8032.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/pages/theaterrental

Tickets
Tickets for admission to performances may be purchased at the box office, by mail, by phone using instant-charge, or

online. Phone, 202-467-4600. TTY, 202-416-8524.

https://www.kennedy-center.org/tickets
The Center posts answers to frequently asked ticket-related questions.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/contact/topic/1

Tours
The Friends of the Kennedy Center volunteers provide visitor services. Tours are available free of charge on weekdays,

10 a.m.–5 p.m., and on weekends, 10 a.m.–1 p.m.

https://www.kennedy-center.org/pages/visitor/tours

Videos
The Center regularly posts short videos of artists performing. Its Web site has an expanding collection of over 2,000

selections.

http://www.kennedy-center.org/Video/recentVideos

Volunteer Opportunities
For information on volunteer opportunities, contact Friends of the Kennedy Center, 2700 F Street NW, Washington,
     DC 20566. Phone, 202-416-8000.

     http://www.kennedy-center.org/support/volunteers
     http://www.kennedy-center.org/contact

        For further information, contact The John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts. Phone, 202-467-
        4600.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                   National Gallery of Art




The United States Government Manual




     NATIONAL GALLERY OF ART
    4th and Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20565


    202-737-4215

    http://www.nga.gov




    EXECUTIVE OFFICERS
  DIRECTOR                                                                                Kaywin Feldman


  Secretary / General Counsel                                                             Nancy R. Breuer

https://www.nga.gov/about/directors-welcome.html



GENERAL TRUSTEES


  PRESIDENT                                                                               Mitchell P. Rales


  Chair                                                                                   Sharon P. Rockefeller

https://www.nga.gov/about/leadership.html



  The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.




ACTIVITIES
The National Gallery of Art administers a world-class collection of painting, sculpture, and the graphic arts. The West

Building includes European (13th–early 20th century) and American (18th–early 20th century) works. An extensive

survey of Italian painting and sculpture, including the only painting by Leonardo da Vinci in the Americas, is on display

in the Gallery. Rich in Dutch masters and French impressionists, the collection offers superb surveys of American,

British, Flemish, Spanish, and 15th- and 16th-century German art, as well as Renaissance medals and bronzes, Chinese

porcelains, and about 117,000 works of graphic art from the 12th century to the present day. The East Building

collections and Sculpture Garden contain important works by major 20th-century artists. The Gallery relies on public

and private resources. Federal appropriations support its operations and maintenance. Private donations and funds

allow it to acquire artwork, as well as to offer a variety of special programs. For example, a fellowship program

promotes graduate and postgraduate research, an extension service provides free education resources to millions of

people each year, and other programs educate schoolchildren and the public.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
For more information, contact the National Gallery of Art, Office of Procurement and Contracts, 2000B South Club

Drive, Landover, MD 20785. Phone, 202-842-6745. Fax, 202-312-2792.

https://www.fbo.gov/index?s=main&mode=list&tab=list

Calendar
The full calendar of events is available online. To subscribe to the quarterly brochure of seasonal exhibition and

programming highlights, visit the Gallery's Web site or call 202-842-6662.
http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/calendar.html | Email: calendar@nga.gov

Career Opportunities
The National Gallery of Art relies on approximately 1,000 employees to carry out its mission. Some positions require a

background in art history or design; however, other positions—like salesperson, security guard, and visitor services

aide—support the museum's daily operations and are less specialized. The National Gallery of Art also employs

accountants, administrators, facilities managers, fundraisers, information systems specialists, librarians, and other

professionals with technical expertise. Phone, 202-842-6282.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/opportunities/employment-opportunities.html | Email: staffing@nga.gov
The National Gallery of Art offers internships and opportunities for fellows. Conservation and curatorial fellowships are

available, as well as Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts (CASVA) fellowships.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/opportunities/interns-and-fellows.html
The National Gallery of Art offers a range of volunteer opportunities. Volunteers serve as docents, manage the

information desks at the entrances to the East and West Buildings, work in the library, and help in the horticulture

division. Local high school students can participate in the teen volunteer program.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/opportunities/volunteer-opportunities.html

Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts (CASVA)
The CASVA is a research institute that supports study of the production, use, and cultural meaning of architecture, art,

artifacts, film, photography, and urbanism. It offers fellowships, organizes scholarly meetings, produces publications,

and supports research. These activities are privately funded through endowments and grants to the National Gallery of

Art. Phone, 202-842-6480.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/research/casva.html | Email: casva@nga.gov

Concerts
Concerts by accomplished musicians are open to the public without charge. Seating starts 30 minutes before the

performance on a first-come, first-seated basis. Phone, 202-842-6941.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/calendar/concerts.html

Educational Resources
The Gallery's free loan program allows community groups, educational institutions, individuals, and nonprofit television

stations nationwide to borrow teaching packets and DVDs. Dozens of lessons and activities are also accessible on the

Gallery's Web site. For more information, including the free catalog of education resources, contact the Department of

Education Resources, National Gallery of Art, 2000B South Club Drive, Landover, MD 20785. Phone, 202-842-6273.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/education/learningresources.html | Email: edresources@nga.gov

Family Programs
The Gallery offers free family programs—children's films, music performances, storytelling, and workshops—that are

suitable for children ages 4 and up. Phone, 202-789-3030.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/education/families.html | Email: family@nga.gov
Films
An ongoing program of classic cinema, documentary, avant-garde, and area premieres takes place each weekend.

Seating is on a first-come, first-seated basis, and admission is free. Doors open approximately 30 minutes before each

show. Visiting filmmakers and scholars discuss films with the audiences following some screenings. Phone, 202-842-

6799.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/calendar/film-programs.html | Email: film-department@nga.gov

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The National Gallery of Art posts answers to FAQs on its Web site.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/contact-us.html

Ice-Skating Rink
Each winter, the National Gallery of Art opens its ice rink in the Sculpture Garden. The seasonal skating schedule is

posted online in November.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/visit/ice-rink.html

Image Collections
The Department of Image Collections serves as the National Gallery of Art's research center for images of Western art

and architecture. The collections now contain over 14 million digital images, microforms, negatives, photographs, and

slides, making this resource one of the largest of its kind. Gallery staff, Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts

(CASVA) members, visiting scholars, and serious adult researchers regularly use the collections. The library is accessible

by appointment every Monday, noon–4:30 p.m., and Tuesday–Friday, 10 a.m.–4:30 p.m., except on Federal holidays.

Phone, 202-842-6026.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/research/library/imagecollections.html

Lectures
Lecture events are open to the public, and admission is free. Seating is available on a first-come, first-seated basis.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/calendar/lectures.html

Library
The National Gallery of Art Library maintains a collection of more than 400,000 books and periodicals on the history,

theory, and criticism of art and architecture. The collection's holdings emphasize Western art from the Middle Ages to

the present and American art from the colonial era to the present. The library is accessible by appointment every

Monday, noon–4:30 p.m., and Tuesday–Friday, 10 a.m.–4:30 p.m., except on Federal holidays. Phone, 202-842-6511.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/research/library/About.html

Memberships
The Gallery offers three membership levels of annual giving: The Circle, The Tower Project, and The Exhibition Circle.

Circle members contribute to conservation programs, special exhibitions, and research. Tower Project members

promote contemporary artists by supporting modern and contemporary exhibitions in the Tower Gallery of the East

Building. Exhibition Circle members provide funding for exhibitions. For more information on membership levels and

their benefits, contact The Circle, National Gallery of Art, 2000B South Club Drive, Landover, MD 20785. Phone, 202-
842-6450. Fax, 202 789-4577.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/support/membership.html | Email: circle@nga.gov

News
The National Gallery of Art posts recent news releases on its Web site.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/press.html | Email: pressinfo@nga.gov
An online subscription form is available to sign up for announcements, newsletters, notifications, and updates on

acquisitions and exhibitions; activities, projects, and programs; and other topics.

http://subscribe.nga.gov/subscription_form_ngart.cfm

NGAkids
NGAkids offers interactive activities and adventures with artwork from the Gallery's collection and an animated tale set

in the Gallery's Sculpture Garden.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/education/kids.html

Photographs
Photographs that are not on display may be viewed by appointment. Phone, 202-842-6144.

Email: photographs@nga.gov

Publications
The Gallery Shops sell publications on the Gallery's collections and quality reproductions of artwork. Purchases may be

made online or by calling 800-697-9350.

https://shop.nga.gov

Public Wi-Fi
Wireless internet service is available throughout the Gallery to visitors who are 18 years old and older or at least 13

years old with permission from a parent or guardian. The network name is "NGA_Public_WiFi," and a password is not

needed. A user must, however, supply his or her own Internet device and agree to the "Terms and Conditions of Use."

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/visit/public-wifi.html

Tours
The education division offers daily guided talks and tours in the galleries. Phone, 202-842-6247.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/visit/tours-and-guides.html

Visitor Services
The Visitor Services Office assists those with special needs, responds to written and telephone requests, and helps

visitors plan their stay in the Washington, DC, area. For more information, contact the National Gallery of Art, Office of

Visitor Services, 2000B South Club Drive, Landover, MD 20785. Phone, 202-842-6691.

http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/visit.html

Works on Paper
Works of art on paper that are not on display may be viewed by appointment. Phone, 202-842-6380 (European
     works). Phone, 202-842-6605 (American works).

     http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/research/make-an-appointment.html | Email: printstudyrooms@nga.gov
     http://www.nga.gov/content/ngaweb/contact-us.html

        For further information, contact the National Gallery of Art. Phone, 202-737-4215.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                    Search
                                                                                            Search




                                    Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars




The United States Government Manual




     WOODROW WILSON INTERNATIONAL CENTER FOR SCHOLARS
    Scholar Administration Office, Woodrow Wilson Center, One Woodrow Wilson Plaza, 1300 Pennsylvania Avenue NW.,

    Washington, DC 20004-3027


    202-691-4000

    202-691-4001

    http://www.wilsoncenter.org


      DIRECTOR / PRESIDENT / CHIEF EXECUTIVE OFFICER                                          Jane L. Harman
https://www.wilsoncenter.org/person/jane-harman



Board of Trustees


  CHAIR                                                                                  William E. Haslam

https://www.wilsoncenter.org/leadership



The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.



ACTIVITIES
Created by an Act of Congress in 1968, the Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars is a national, living

memorial honoring the legacy of President Woodrow Wilson. The Wilson Center, headquartered in Washington, DC,

and supported by both public and private funds, provides a strictly nonpartisan space for scholars and policymakers to

interact. By conducting relevant, timely research and promoting dialogue from diverse perspectives, the Center works

to address critical current and emerging challenges confronting the United States and the world.

https://www.wilsoncenter.org/about-the-wilson-center



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
Career opportunities at the Center are posted online. For more information, contact the Office of Human Resources,

One Woodrow Wilson Plaza, 1300 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., 3d Floor, Washington, DC 20004-3027.

http://www.wilsoncenter.org/opportunities/Job | Email: jobs@wilsoncenter.org

Contact Information
In addition to a "Get In Touch" electronic form, the "Contact Us" web page contains the general phone number and

email address for and the hours of operation of and directions to the Woodrow Wilson International Center for

Scholars.

https://www.wilsoncenter.org/contact-us | Email: wwics@wilsoncenter.org

Donations
An online form is available for making tax-deductible contributions to support dialogue and scholarship in public

policy. Gifts may be directed to a specific program by using the "Designation" drop-down menu. "Unrestricted" gifts

allow the Center to build its overall capacity and meet areas of greatest need. Phone, 202-691-4171.

https://engage.wilsoncenter.org/onlineactions/KxzFKo0YTk2W8uYVKK5HKg2 | Email: development@wilsoncenter.org

Experts
The Center convenes scholars to create a dialogue of ideas that the U.S. Congress, the President's administration, and

the international policy community may adopt for implementation.

https://www.wilsoncenter.org/experts

Fellowships
The Center offers residential fellowships that allow academics, public officials, journalists, business professionals, and

others to pursue their research and writing at the Center while interacting with policymakers in Washington. The

Center also invites public policy scholars and senior scholars from a variety of disciplines to conduct research for

varying lengths of time in residence. Phone, 202-691-4000.

http://www.wilsoncenter.org/fellowships-grants

Internships
The Center has a year-round need for interns to assist the program and projects staff and to act as research assistants

for scholars and fellows. Phone, 202-691-4053.

http://www.wilsoncenter.org/opportunities/Internship

Media Affairs
Members of the press may contact the Center at 202-691-4217.

http://www.wilsoncenter.org/media-access-to-the-wilson-center

Multimedia
Wide ranging in scope, "Wilson Center On Demand" serves as a hub for insightful analysis of and commentary on

ideas and issues.

https://www.wilsoncenter.org/wilson-center-demand

President Woodrow Wilson
To learn about President Wilson's life and which of the Center's scholars are researching and writing about him, visit

the "About Woodrow Wilson" web page. The page also contains a bibliography, a list of other institutions that are

dedicated to the former President, and some of his quotations.

https://www.wilsoncenter.org/about-woodrow-wilson

Press Statements
The Center posts press statements.

https://www.wilsoncenter.org/press-statements

Publications
The Center publishes policy briefs and research reports, as well as books written by staff and visiting scholars and

fellows, through the Wilson Center Press. Phone, 202-691-4000.

http://www.wilsoncenter.org/publications
Every 3 months, "The Wilson Quarterly" magazine releases a cluster of content exploring a single topic from diverse

perspectives. This free, online magazine examines culture, current events, ideas, and the people affected by them.
     http://wilsonquarterly.com/quarterly | Email: wq@wilsoncenter.org

     Social Media
     The Center maintains an account on Facebook.

     https://www.facebook.com/woodrowwilsoncenter
     The Center posts openings for jobs and internships on its LinkedIn page.

     https://www.linkedin.com/company/woodrow-wilson-international-center-for-scholars
     The Center tweets announcements, news, and other noteworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/thewilsoncenter
     The Center posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/woodrowwilsoncenter

     Visitor Services
     Events, unless otherwise noted, are free and open to the public. Photo identification is required for entry. A listing of

     events at the Center is available online.

     http://www.wilsoncenter.org/events

        The Sources of Information were updated 10–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                                     State Justice Institute




The United States Government Manual




     STATE JUSTICE INSTITUTE
    11951 Freedom Drive, Suite 1020, Reston, VA 20190


    571-313-8843

    http://www.sji.gov | Email: contact@sji.gov




    BOARD OF DIRECTORS
  JUDGES


  Treasurer                                                                                    David V. Brewer


                                                                                               Jonathan Lippman


                                                                                               Wilfredo Martinez


  Chair                                                                                        John D. Minton, Jr.


  Secretary                                                                                    Gayle A. Nachtigal


                                                                                               Chase T. Rogers




  PUBLIC SECTOR MEMBERS


                                                                                               (vacancy)


                                                                                               Marsha J. Rabiteau


                                                                                               (vacancy)


                                                                                               (vacancy)




  STATE COURT ADMINISTRATOR


  Vice Chair                                                                                   Daniel J. Becker

http://www.sji.gov/about-sji/board-of-directors

  EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR                                                                           Jonathan D. Mattiello


http://www.sji.gov/about-sji/executivedirector



The above list of key personnel was updated 2-2025..

The State Justice Institute supports the Nation's judicial system and the public that it serves.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On November 8, 1984, President Ronald W. Reagan approved Public Law 98–620. Title II of that statute, which is

commonly cited as the State Justice Institute Act of 1984, established the State Justice Institute as a private nonprofit

corporation whose purpose is "to further the development and adoption of improved judicial administration in State
courts in the United States" (98 Stat. 3336).

http://www.sji.gov/wp/wp-content/uploads/SJI_Authorization.pdf
On November 8, 1984, President Ronald W. Reagan approved Public Law 98–620. Title II of that statute, which is

commonly cited as the State Justice Institute Act of 1984, established the State Justice Institute as a private nonprofit

corporation whose purpose is "to further the development and adoption of improved judicial administration in State

courts in the United States" (98 Stat. 3336).

http://www.sji.gov/wp/wp-content/uploads/SJI_Authorization.pdf
Statutory descriptions of the SJI's duties, Board of Directors, officers and employees, grants and contracts, activities,

administrative provisions, Presidential coordination, records and reports, and audits, are codified in chapter 113,

sections 10701–10713, of 42 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title42/chapter113&edition=prelim
A Board of Directors that comprises 11 members—six judges, a State court administrator, and four members from the

public sector— supervises the SJI. The President appoints the members, by the advice and with the consent of the

Senate, to 3-year terms. A member cannot be reappointed to more than two consecutive terms immediately following

his or her initial term. The Chair of the Board is selected from among the members, by the members. No more than

two of the public sector members can affiliate with the same political party.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?req=granuleid:USC-prelim-title42-section10703&num=0&edition=prelim
The SJI does not post an organizational chart on its website.




ACTIVITIES
The SJI develops solutions to common issues faced by State courts; provides practical products to judges and court

staff; ensures that effective approaches in one State are quickly and economically shared with other courts nationwide;

and supports national, regional, and instate educational programs to accelerate the transfer of solutions. To

accomplish these broad objectives, the SJI is authorized to provide funds through grants, cooperative agreements, and

contracts to the State courts and to organizations that support them.

http://www.sji.gov/about-sji
Statutory descriptions of the SJI's duties, Board of Directors, officers and employees, grants and contracts, activities,

administrative provisions, Presidential coordination, records and reports, and audits, are codified in chapter 113,

sections 10701–10713, of 42 U.S.C.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title42/chapter113&edition=prelim



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archived Records
"Records of the State Justice Institute, 1990 - 2013" have been accessioned by the National Archives and Records

Administration. The collection identifier is SJI.
https://catalog.archives.gov/id/7459146

Budget Request
The SJI posted its "Fiscal Year 2025 Budget Request" to Congress in Portable Document Format (PDF) on its website.

http://www.sji.gov/cj/

Forms
Documents to view and print are posted online in Portable Document Format (PDF). These documents include a

number of forms: assurances, consultant rate, disclosure of lobbying activities, grant application, project budget,

reimbursement request, and State approval certificate.

http://www.sji.gov/forms

Grants
Information on various award and grant types—curriculum adaptation and training grants, the education support

program, project grants, and technical assistance grants—is available online.

http://www.sji.gov/grants

History
In 2024, the SJI published its 40th Anniversary Report, which offers a retrospective overview of achievements over the

past three decades.

http://www.sji.gov/wp/wp-content/uploads/SJI-40th-Anniversary-Report.pdf

Priority Investment Areas for Grants
The SJI has posted its priority investment areas for fiscal year 2025.

http://www.sji.gov/priority-investment-areas

News
The SJI posts news items on its website.

http://www.sji.gov/news

Newsletter
Readers may subscribe to the monthly "SJI Newsletter" online.

http://www.sji.gov/newsletter-archives

Social Media
The SJI has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/SJI.gov
The SJI tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/statejustice

Requests for information by email.
Email: contact@sji.gov
The Sources of Information were updated 4-2025.
        The Sources of Information were updated 10–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                         United States Holocaust Memorial Museum




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL MUSEUM
    100 Raoul Wallenberg Place, SW., Washington, DC 20024-2126


    202-488-0400

    TTY, 202-488-0406

    http://www.ushmm.org




    U.S. HOLOCAUST MEMORIAL COUNCIL
Arizona


                       Andrew M. Cohn


                       Susan G. Levine




California


                       Laurence M. Baer


                       Susan E. Lowenberg


                       Deborah A. Oppenheimer


                       Eric P. Ortner


                       Elliot J. Schrage


                       Clemantine Wamariya


                       Jeremy M. Weinstein


                       Daniel G. Weiss




District of Columbia


 VICE CHAIR            Allan M. Holt




                       Joshua B. Bolten


                       Norman L. Eisen


                       Raffi Freedman-Gurspan


                       David M. Marchick


                       Benjamin J. Rhodes
Florida


           Walter R. Allen, Jr.


           Jeffrey P. Feingold


           Murray J. Laulicht


           Andrew J. Weinstein




Illinois


           Jordan T. Goodman


           Samuel N. Gordon


           Priscilla Levine Kersten


           Tamar Newberger


           Michael P. Polsky


           Richard S. Price


           Maureen Schulman




Indiana


           Lee A. Feinstein


           Cindy Simon Skjodt




Maryland


           Edward P. Lazarus


           Bradley D.Wine
New Jersey


                 Ethel C. Brooks


                 Betty Pantirer Schwartz




New York


 CHAIR           Howard M. Lorber




                 Tom A. Bernstein


                 Michael S. Bosworth


                 Jonathan W. Burkan


                 Sara Darehshori


                 Helene Feldman


                 David M. Flaum


                 Michael H. Posner


                 Daniel J. Rosen


                 Menachem Z. Rosensaft


                 Howard D. Unger




Other States


 Massachusetts   Jonathan S. Lavine


 Missouri        Sam M. Devinki


 New Hampshire   Daniel Benjamin


 Ohio            Ronald Ratner


 Texas           Fred S. Zeidman
 Virginia                                                    Melissa Rogers


 Washington                                                  Eric A. LeVine


 West Virginia                                               Irvin N. Shapell




England


                                                             Stuart A. Levey

https://www.ushmm.org/information/about-the-museum/council



Congressional Members


 Florida                                                     Rep. Theodore E. Deutch


 Georgia                                                     Rep. John R. Lewis


 Illinois                                                    Rep. Bradley S. Schneider


 New York                                                    Rep. Lee M. Zeldin


 Tennessee                                                   Rep. David F. Kustoff




 Florida                                                     Sen. Marco A. Rubio


 Maryland                                                    Sen. Benjamin L. Cardin


 South Carolina                                              Timothy E. Scott


 Vermont                                                     Sen. Bernard Sanders


                                                             (vacancy)




Ex Officio Members—Nonvoting


 EXECUTIVE BRANCH DEPARTMENTS


 Education                                                   Philip H. Rosenfelt
 Interior                                                                       (vacancy)


 State                                                                          Thomas K. Yazdgerdi




 General Counsel to the Council                                                 Gerard Leval




Council Staff


 MUSEUM DIRECTOR                                                                Sara J. Bloomfield




 Internal Auditor                                                               Mel Schwartz

https://www.ushmm.org/information/about-the-museum/executive-biographies/bloomfield



MUSEUM ADMINISTRATION


 MUSEUM DIRECTOR                                                                Sara J. Bloomfield


 Deputy Museum Director                                                         Sarah Ogilvie




 General Counsel                                                                Ronald F. Cuffe




Senior Advisors


 Marketing                                                                      Michelle Stein


 Strategy                                                                       Cameron Hudson




Chief Officers


 Development                                                                    Jordan Tannenbaum


 Financial Officer                                                              Polly Povejsil Heath
  Information                                                                          Joseph Kraus


  Museum Operations                                                                    Tanell Coleman


  Program Officer                                                                      Sarah Ogilvie




Directors


  Constituency Engagement                                                              Diane Saltzman


  International Affairs                                                                Paul Shapiro


  Levine Institute for Holocaust Education                                             Yariv Lapid


  Mandel Center for Advanced Holocaust Studies                                         Wendy Lower, Acting


  National Institute for Holocaust Documentation                                       Michael Grunberger


  Planning                                                                             Dara Goldberg


  Simon-Skjodt Center for the Prevention of Genocide                                   Jill Savitt, Acting




The above list of key personnel was updated 7–2019.

The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum promotes documentation, study, and interpretation of the Holocaust

and maintains a permanent living memorial to its victims.




ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On October 7, 1980, President James E. Carter approved Public Law 96–388, which established the U.S. Holocaust

Memorial Council. This Act made the Council responsible for planning, constructing, and overseeing "the operation of,

a permanent living memorial museum to the victims of the holocaust." It established the United States Holocaust

Memorial Museum (USHMM) (36 U.S.C. 1401-1408).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-94/pdf/STATUTE-94-Pg1547.pdf
The United States Holocaust Memorial Council, which serves as a board of trustees, governs the USHMM. The

Council's 55 members are appointed by the President to staggered 5-year terms. Additionally, five members are

appointed from each Chamber of the Congress. There are also three nonvoting ex-officio members from the

Departments of Education, State, and the Interior.


On October 12, 2000, President William J. Clinton approved Public Law 106–292 "to authorize appropriations" for the

USHMM and "for other purposes." The Act gave the Museum permanent authorization as an independent
establishment (36 U.S.C. 2301 et seq.).

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-114/pdf/STATUTE-114-Pg1030.pdf
The USHMM operates as a public-private partnership. Its activities and programs are supported by planned giving,

endowments, and revenues; gifts, grants, and contracts; and Federal funding.

https://www.ushmm.org/information/about-the-museum
The Museum's organizational chart is available in its "Performance and Accountability Report—FY 2018" on page 35.

https://www.ushmm.org/m/pdfs/20181116-ushmm-par-fy18.pdf



ACTIVITIES

Advanced Holocaust Studies
The Jack, Joseph and Morton Mandel Center for Advanced Holocaust Studies works with the United States Holocaust

Memorial Council's Academic Committee to support research projects and publications on the Holocaust, provide

access to Holocaust-related archival materials for study and new research, sponsor fellowship opportunities for pre-

and postdoctoral researchers, and offer seminars, summer research workshops, conferences, lectures, and symposia.

https://www.ushmm.org/research/about-the-mandel-center

  For further information, contact the Jack, Joseph, and Morton Mandel Center for Advanced Holocaust
  Studies. Phone, 202-488-0400. TTY, 202-488-0406.



Holocaust Education
The William Levine Family National Institute for Holocaust Education promotes a variety of resources and programs to

help educators, professionals, and students increase their knowledge of Holocaust history and understand its relevance

today. Educational outreach programs provide teachers with classroom strategies and resources for teaching students

about the Holocaust.

http://www.ushmm.org/educators/teaching-about-the-holocaust

  For further information, contact the National Institute for Holocaust Education.



Prevention of Genocide
The Simon-Skjodt Center for the Prevention of Genocide raises awareness of genocide, influences policymaking on

genocide prevention, and stimulates worldwide action to prevent genocide and related mass atrocities. It seeks to

make genocide prevention a national and international priority by increasing public awareness and mobilizing

worldwide support to avert these crimes against humanity.

http://www.ushmm.org/confront-genocide/about | Email: genocideprevention@ushmm.org

  For further information, contact the Simon-Skjodt Center for the Prevention of Genocide. Phone, 202-
  488-0400. TTY, 202-488-0406.
PROGRAMS

Civic and Defense Initiatives
This program explores the ways in which the military can work to prevent genocide today.

http://www.ushmm.org/professionals-and-student-leaders/military-professionals

Ethics, Religion, and the Holocaust
These programs focus on the response of churches to the Holocaust and the ways in which religious institutions,

leaders, and theologians have addressed this history and its legacy.

https://www.ushmm.org/research/about-the-mandel-center/initiatives/ethics-religion-holocaust

  For further information, contact the Programs on Ethics, Religion, and the Holocaust.



Law Enforcement and Society: Lessons of the Holocaust
This program examines the role that law enforcement professionals played in the Holocaust. It also challenges them to

reflect on their professional and personal responsibilities in a democracy today.

http://www.ushmm.org/professionals-and-student-leaders/law-enforcement

  For further information, contact the Lessons of the Holocaust Program.



Law, Justice, and the Holocaust
This program examines the decisions German jurists made and the pressures they faced under the Nazi regime. This is

a one-day program for judges, prosecutors, and court administrators.

http://www.ushmm.org/professionals-and-student-leaders/judiciary

  For further information, contact the Law, Justice, and the Holocaust Program.



Youth and Community Initiatives
This program introduces students to Holocaust history and helps them develop leadership skills for confronting hatred

and promoting human dignity.

http://www.ushmm.org/professionals-and-student-leaders/student-leaders

  For further information, contact the Student Leaders Program.




SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Café
The Museum Café is open daily, 8:30 a.m.–4:30 p.m., except on Yom Kippur and Christmas Day. Visitors may not bring

food into it or the Museum. The café serves breakfast, salads, sandwiches, and soups, including vegetarian and kosher

options. Kosher food is prepared and sealed offsite under rabbinical supervision.

https://www.ushmm.org/information/visit-the-museum/museum-cafe

Calendar of Events
For information on upcoming events, see the Museum's online calendar.

http://www.ushmm.org/online/calendar

Career Opportunities
The museum employs people with diverse professional experience: collections, education, exhibits, fundraising,

marketing, programming, and other areas. A list of current job openings is available on the "Careers" web page.

https://www.ushmm.org/information/career-volunteer-opportunities/careers
Paid and unpaid internship opportunities are available.

https://www.ushmm.org/information/career-volunteer-opportunities/internships

Collections / Exhibitions
The Museum's holdings include art, books, pamphlets, advertisements, maps, film and video historical footage, audio

and video oral testimonies, music and sound recordings, furnishings, architectural fragments, models, machinery, tools,

microfilm and microfiche of government documents and other official records, personal effects, personal papers,

photographs, photo albums, and textiles. The self-guided permanent exhibition spans three floors and presents a

narrative history of the Holocaust with historical artifacts, photographs, and film footage. Special exhibitions include

Remember the Children: Daniel's Story (for children 8 and up) and Some Were Neighbors: Collaboration and

Complicity in the Holocaust. The Museum's traveling exhibitions have gone to numerous cities, States, and countries.

These exhibitions extend the history of the Holocaust beyond the Museum's walls. More information on the Museum's

collections and exhibitions is available on its website.

http://www.ushmm.org/information/exhibitions

Contact Information
The "Press Room" web page has phone numbers and email addresses for contacting the Museum's communications

staff.

https://www.ushmm.org/information/press

Encyclopedia
An encyclopedia of the Holocaust is available on the Museum's website.

https://www.ushmm.org/learn/holocaust-encyclopedia

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The Museum posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.ushmm.org/research/ask-a-research-question/frequently-asked-questions

Multilingual Resources
At the top of the Museum's home page is a "Language" drop-down menu that allows non-English readers to access

resources in a number of languages: Arabic, Bahasa, Chinese, French, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean,

Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and Turkish.

https://www.ushmm.org

News
The Museum posts press releases on its website.

https://www.ushmm.org/information/press/press-releases
To receive electronic Museum news, invitations to special programs and exhibitions, and updates on genocide

prevention and other initiatives, subscribe using the online form.

https://engage.ushmm.org/subscribe.html

Plan a Visit
The Museum is open every day, except on Yom Kippur and Christmas. Admission is free; however, timed passes are

required to enter the permanent exhibition from March through August. No passes are required for other Museum

exhibitions. The "Plan Your Visit" web pages contain a trove of useful information on accessibility, admission and

tickets, group reservations, hours, location, transportation, and more.

https://www.ushmm.org/information/visit-the-museum/plan-your-visit

Reports
Strategic plans and annual, budget, and FAIR Act reports are available on the "Reports" web page.

https://www.ushmm.org/copyright-and-legal-information/annual-reports
Starting with the year 2004, performance and accountability reports are available online.

https://www.ushmm.org/copyright-and-legal-information/performance-and-accountability

Social Media
The Museum relies on social media to share information on its programs and resources; to memorialize the victims of

Nazism; to launch discussion on the Holocaust and its relevance today; and to raise awareness that antisemitism,

genocide, and hatred are persistent threats and that everybody has a role in combating them.

https://www.ushmm.org/information/connect-with-the-museum#guidelines

Support the Mission
Annual membership gifts help the Museum confront antisemitism and answer Holocaust denial, expand educational

outreach, and preserve historical artifacts.

https://www.ushmm.org/support
The Museum uses its resources to confront hatred and genocide, to educate students and provide classroom

resources for teachers, and to rescue Holocaust evidence and make additional historic documents available in digital

format. An online contribution, one-time or monthly, supports these activities immediately and directly.

https://engage.ushmm.org/support.html

Volunteer Opportunities
     The Museum welcomes volunteers and offers a variety of service opportunities.

     http://www.ushmm.org/information/career-volunteer-opportunities/volunteering

        The Sources of Information were updated 7–2019.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                               United States Institute of Peace




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED STATES INSTITUTE OF PEACE
    2301 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20037


    202-457-1700

    202-429-6063

    http://www.usip.org




    BOARD OF DIRECTORS
 APPOINTEES FROM OUTSIDE FEDERAL SERVICE


 Chair                                                  George E. Moose


 Vice Chair                                             Judy Ansley




 Members                                                Eric S. Edelman


                                                        Joseph Eldridge


                                                        Stephen J. Hadley


                                                        Kerry Kennedy


                                                        Ikram U. Khan


                                                        Stephen D. Krasner


                                                        John A. Lancaster


                                                        Jeremy A. Rabkin


                                                        J. Robinson West


                                                        Nancy Zirkin




 EX–OFFICIO MEMBERS


 Department of State                                    Secretary Antony J. Blinken


                                                        Under Secretary for
 Department of Defense
                                                        Policy Colin H. Kahl




                                                        President and Lt.
 National Defense University
                                                        Gen. Michael T. Plehn, USAF


 U.S. Institute of Peace (nonvoting)                    President Lise Grande

https://www.usip.org/about/leadership/board-directors



SENIOR STAFF
  PRESIDENT                                                                                  Lise Grande




  CHIEF OFFICERS


  Administrative                                                                             Kathleen T. Ross


  Executive                                                                                  Lise Grande


  Financial                                                                                  Joseph Lataille




  Director of Overseas Safety and Security                                                   Paul Hughes


  Special Advisor                                                                            Paul Hughes




  VICE PRESIDENTS


  Africa Center                                                                              Joseph Sany


  Applied Conflict Transformation                                                            David W. Yang


  Asia Programs                                                                              Andrew Wilder


  Finance                                                                                    Joseph Lataille


  Middle East and North Africa Center                                                        Michael Yaffe


  Policy, Learning and Strategy                                                              Joseph Hewitt


  Strategic Stability and Security                                                           William B. Taylor

https://www.usip.org/about/senior-staff



  The above list of key personnel was updated 1–2022.



The United States Institute of Peace prevents, mitigates, and resolves violent conflicts around the world.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
On October 19, 1984, President Ronald W. Reagan approved Public Law 98–525, which also is cited as the

"Department of Defense Authorization Act, 1985" (98 Stat. 2492). One hundred and sixty-nine pages in length, this

new law authorized appropriations for the Department of Defense and the Department of Energy, as well as having

other purposes, which included the establishment of "the United States Institute of Peace" (98 Stat. 2651).
https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/STATUTE-98/pdf/STATUTE-98-Pg2492.pdf
On the same day that President Reagan approved the Department of Defense Authorization Act, 1985, he released a

signing statement. In that statement, he noted the establishment of the United States Institute of Peace (USIP) within

the context of affirming the "President's constitutional power to remove [members of the Board of Directors]."

https://www.reaganlibrary.gov/archives/speech/statement-signing-department-defense-authorization-act-1985
The Department of Defense Authorization Act, 1985, contains within it Title XVII, which also is cited as the "United

States Institute of Peace Act" (98 Stat. 2649–2660). The Act established the USIP as an independent nonprofit

corporation for developing, applying, and fostering cost-effective strategies and tools to prevent, mitigate, and resolve

violent international conflicts, particularly those that threaten or harm America's strategic and security interests.

https://www.usip.org/about-us/history/usip-act
Title 22 of the United States Code (U.S.C.) contains codified statutory material on the topics of foreign relations and

intercourse. Chapter 56 (sections 4601–4611) of 22 U.S.C. is dedicated to codified material that affects the United States

Institute of Peace.

https://uscode.house.gov/view.xhtml?path=/prelim@title22/chapter56&edition=prelim
By the advice and with the consent of the Senate, the President appoints the Institute's bipartisan Board of Directors. It

comprises 12 members from outside Federal service; plus four ex officio members from inside Federal service: one

from the State Department, one from the Department of Defense, one from the National Defense University, and the

USIP President, who serves on the Board as a nonvoting member. The Board governs the Institute and appoints its

President. No more than eight voting members may be from the same political party.

http://www.usip.org/aboutus/board.html

ACTIVITIES
The USIP supports U.S. national security and foreign affairs through conflict management and peacebuilding

operations, training in conflict management and peacebuilding tradecraft and best practices, and conflict research and

analysis. The USIP operates on the ground in conflict zones. It facilitates dialogue among parties in conflict, builds

conflict management skills and capacity, identifies and disseminates best practices in conflict management, promotes

the rule of law, reforms and strengthens education systems, strengthens civil society, and educates the public through

media and other outreach activities.

https://www.usip.org/regions-countries
The USIP works in partnership with the State and Defense Departments, the U.S. Agency for International

Development, nongovernmental organizations, higher and secondary educational institutions, foreign governments,

and international organizations, to promote collaborative problem-solving through conflict management operations,

training and analysis, facilitated dialogue, Track 1.5 diplomacy, and special events. The Institute conducts practitioner

training in conflict management, including mediation and negotiating skills for government and military personnel, civil

society leaders, and staff of nongovernmental and international organizations. The USIP extends its reach through

grants, fellowships, and scholarships, to nonprofit organizations in the United States and overseas.

http://www.usip.org/issue-areas



SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Archived Records
The "Guide to Federal Records in the National Archives of the United States" indicates that USIP records have been

assigned to record group 573. The guide does not contain, however, a description that is associated with USIP records.

https://www.archives.gov/research/guide-fed-records/index-numeric/501-to-600.html

Blog
The USIP's official blog is called "The Olive Branch."

https://www.usip.org/blog

Career Opportunities
The USIP relies on knowledgeable, talented professionals to carry out its mission. A recent graduate typically starts as a

program assistant. The ideal candidate is a high academic achiever; has a background in international relations or a

related field; and possesses administrative, computer, research, and writing skills. Regional specialization and language

skills may be required for some positions.

https://www.usip.org/about/careers-usip

Climate Change
The USIP posted a short piece on the outcomes of the 26th Conference of Parties of the U.N. Framework Convention

on Climate Change, which took place in Glasgow, in 2021. A senior USIP advisor on the environment and conflict

provided the following analysis and commentary: "Glasgow yielded a sobering, honest recognition of the injustices of

climate change . . . . The impacts of climate change are agonizingly unfair, with richer countries responsible for the

historic build-up of greenhouse gases that cause climate change in the atmosphere, while climate change harms most

those who can protect themselves least, including the poorest communities in the world’s fragile states. In addition,

our responses to climate change can exacerbate inequities within and between countries. The agreement reached at

Glasgow takes a big step in recognizing the world’s need to address these injustices. It elevates the global focus on

seeking climate equity, and in particular intergenerational equity."

https://www.usip.org/publications/2021/11/glasgows-summit-will-spur-change-climate-and-conflicts

Contact Information
The "Contact Us" web page has an electronic message box that allows visitors to send a comment or suggestion or to

ask a question. Replies from the USIP are sent via email. The USIP postal address and phone number are also located

at the bottom of the "Contac Us" page.

https://www.usip.org/contact

Education / Training
The USIP runs an academy for peacebuilders seeking to learn more about transforming violent conflict in their

communities to peaceful coexistence. It also has nationwide programs that teach students and teachers about

American approaches to peacebuilding.

https://www.usip.org/education-training

Electoral Violence
The USIP seeks to prevent election violence. Worldwide, 20 percent of elections become marred by violence. No

continent is immune from and no level of development can prevent efforts to intimidate voters, to shut down polling

stations, or to use police force excessively. To counter these threats to democracy, the USIP promotes civic education,

election observation, police training, and preventative diplomacy.

https://www.usip.org/issue-areas/electoral-violence

Events
The USIP maintains an events web page.

https://www.usip.org/events

Experts
Working with governments and civil society groups worldwide, USIP experts conduct research and provide analysis,

resources, and training for partners in conflict zones and in Washington, DC. They specialize in violent conflicts around

the world and in issues such as advancing rule of law, countering violent extremism, electoral violence, governance,

peace processes, and the roles of religion and technology in promoting peace or supporting conflict.

https://www.usip.org/experts

Federal Register
Documents that the USIP recently published in the Federal Register are accessible online.

https://www.federalregister.gov/agencies/united-states-institute-of-peace

Grants / Fellowships
Information on USIP grants and fellowship programs is available online.

https://www.usip.org/grants-fellowships

History
In the 1960s and 1970s, veterans of the Second World War were assuming important roles in the U.S. Congress.

Several of them were men of peace with a vision. To learn who they were and what they did to promote their vision,

visit "The Origins of USIP" web page.

https://www.usip.org/about/origins-usip

Issue Areas
The "Issues Areas" web page allows visitors to explore USIP analysis, programs and publications within a topical

framework.

https://www.usip.org/issue-areas

News
The USIP posts news items on its "Press" web page.

https://www.usip.org/press

Newsletter / Bulletin
The USIP publishes a weekly newsletter (i.e., "The Weekly Bulletin") and a monthly bulletin (i.e., "Public Education
    News").

    https://www.usip.org/connect

    Podcast Network
    "USIP Events" presents same-day audio of USIP events that feature global leaders, policymakers, and practitioners, as

    they offer peaceful solutions for mitigating conflict in dangerous zones around the world. Additional audio

    productions include "Culturally Attuned" (podcast), "On Peace" (weekly discussions), and "The Peace Frequency" (in-

    depth interviews).

    https://www.usip.org/podcasts

    Publications
    USIP articles, publications, and tools are accessible online.

    https://www.usip.org/publications

    Regions
    The USIP is active in 52 countries and has staff in 18 of them.

    https://www.usip.org/regions-countries

    Social Media
    The USIP has a Facebook account.

    https://www.facebook.com/usinstituteofpeace
    The USIP tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/USIP
    The USIP posts video on its YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/user/usinstituteofpeace

    Speakers Bureau
    The Speakers Bureau connects national networks and local organizations in the United States with leading USIP

    experts for virtual and in-person speaking events on themes that are relevant to the Institute’s mission.

    https://www.usip.org/connect/usip-public-outreach

    Strategic Plan
    The 2020–2022 USIP Strategic Plan has been posted online for viewing and downloading.

    https://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/USIP-Strategic-Plan-2020-2022.pdf

       The Sources of Information were updated 1–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States
About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                                  African Development Bank




The United States Government Manual




     AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
    Avenue Jean-Paul II, 01 BP 1387, Abidjan 01, Côte d'Ivoire


    +225 20 26 10 20

    http://www.afdb.org | Email: afdb@afdb.org


      PRESIDENT                                                                              Akinwumi A. Adesina


    https://www.afdb.org/en/about-us/organisational-structure/the-president
The above list of key personnel was updated 10–2020.

The African Development Bank reduces poverty in Arica, improves living conditions for Africans, and mobilizes resources

for economic and social development throughout the continent.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The African Development Bank (AFDB) was founded following an agreement that the member states signed on August

14, 1963, in Khartoum, Sudan. The agreement became effective on September 10, 1964. By charter amendment, the

AFDB expanded its membership to include nonregional countries in 1982. The admission of nonregional member

countries more than doubled AFDB capital resources.

https://www.afdb.org/en/about-corporate-information-history/afdb-group-first-50-years
The African Development Bank (AFDB) group is a regional multilateral development finance institution. It was

established to help the institution’s regional member countries, all of which are African countries, develop

economically and to promote their social progress. With its headquarters officially in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire, the AFDB

is the premier development finance institution on the continent of Africa.

https://www.afdb.org/en/about/mission-strategy
The AFDB comprises three entities: a development bank, a development fund, and a trust fund. AFDB membership

totals 81 countries: 54 regional (African) and 27 nonregional countries. The United Arab Emirates is a contributor to the

African Development Fund (ADF), but is not a nonregional member country.

https://www.afdb.org/en/about-us/corporate-information/members
AFDB has posted 11 organograms (i.e., organizational charts) in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and

downloading.

https://www.afdb.org/en/about-us/organisational-structure

ACTIVITIES
The AFDB's mandate centers on the economic development and social progress of its regional members.

Development banks promote the investment of public and private capital in projects and programs that are likely to

contribute to the economic development of their stakeholders. Development banks finance projects that are run either

by the government or the private sector. The AFDB is one of the world's five major multilateral development banks

that provides assistance to its regional member countries to help them achieve their development goals.

https://www.afdb.org/en/about/corporate-information/african-development-bank-afdb
The ADF complements AFDB operations by providing concessional financing for high-priority development projects.

Contributing countries provide the ADF with resources to improve economic and social conditions in beneficiary

countries. These beneficiaries include countries that are increasing in economic capacity and en route to becoming the

new emerging markets or that are regarded as fragile states and require special assistance for basics levels of service

delivery.

https://www.afdb.org/en/about-us/corporate-information/african-development-fund-adf
The Nigeria Trust Fund (NTF) is a self-sustaining and revolving fund. It assists the development efforts of the AFDB's

low-income regional member countries whose economic and social conditions and prospects require concessional
financing.

https://www.afdb.org/en/about-us/corporate-information/nigeria-trust-fund-ntf



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
The General Services and Procurement Department administrates the AFDB's internal procurement.

https://www.afdb.org/en/about-us/corporate-procurement

Career Opportunities
Grade and salary data and information on current job vacancies are available online.

http://www.afdb.org/en/about-us/careers

Climate Change
The AFDB promotes building greater capacity for African countries to address climate change risks. The AFDB finances

investments that are "climate-proof," meaning that these investments are designed, installed, implemented, and

managed to reduce to a minimal level global warming's adverse effects, while maintaining the most cost-effective ratio

as possible.

https://www.afdb.org/en/topics-and-sectors/sectors/climate-change

Contact Information
The AFDB maintains some operations in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, and some functions in Tunis, Tunisia. Addresses and

phone numbers are available on the AFDB group's website, on the "Contact Us" page.

https://www.afdb.org/en/about/contact-us

Documents
The AFDB posts documents on its website.

https://www.afdb.org/en/all-documents

Evolution of an African Institution
In the 1960s, a group of African leaders designed a new institution to be 100 percent African. These leaders were

expressing a strong and spreading desire for Africans to be in charge of their own destiny. To learn more about the

institution that they eventually established and its growth over time, visit the "Bank Group's Evolution" web page.

https://www.afdb.org/en/about-corporate-information-history/bank-groups-evolution

Financial Crisis
The AFDB has knowledge products on the youth unemployment crisis in Africa and on systemic banking crises in low

income countries.

https://www.afdb.org/en/topics-and-sectors/topics/financial-crisis

Français
The AFDB website offers information and resources for visitors who read French.

https://www.afdb.org/fr

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The AFDB posts answers to FAQs on its website.

http://www.afdb.org/en/about-us/frequently-asked-questions

Glossary
The AFDB website features a glossary of acronyms.

http://www.afdb.org/en/glossary

History
A short history of the AFDB is available online.

https://www.afdb.org/en/about-us/corporate-information/history

News / Events
The AFDB website features events, interviews, loan and grant announcements, multimedia, news, press releases,

project stories, and speeches.

http://www.afdb.org/en/news-and-events

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

http://www.afdb.org/en/sitemap

Social Media
The AFDB has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/AfDBGroup/?ref=ts
The AFDB tweets announcements and newsworthy items in English and French on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/AfDB_Group
The AFDB posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/afdbcomu

Statistics
Defining achievable goals and setting realistic targets, as well as evaluating the effects of projects, depend heavily on

reliable data. The AFDB promotes improvement in the quality and quantity of statistical data on all aspects of

development.

https://www.afdb.org/en/knowledge/statistics

Web TV
The AFDB's Web TV features programs in English and French.

https://www.afdb.org/en/news-events/afdb-tv
     Where the AFDB Works
     The AFDB's website features a list of African countries where the Bank is active.

     http://www.afdb.org/en/countries

        The Sources of Information were updated 10–2020.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                  Asian Development Bank




The United States Government Manual




     ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
    Headquarters: 6 ADB Avenue, Mandaluyong City, 1550 Metro Manila, Philippines


    +632 632-4444

    +632 636-2444

    http://www.adb.org | Email: information@adb.org


    ADB North American Representative Office: 900 17th Street NW., Suite 900, Washington DC 20006


    202-728-1500

    202 728 1505
  PRESIDENT                                                                               Takehiko Nakao


https://www.adb.org/about/management/takehiko-nakao



The above list of key personnel was updated 09–2017.

The Asian Development Bank stimulates sustainable economic development and social progress in member countries to

mitigate poverty and its effects.


The Asian Development Bank (ADB) commenced operations on December 19, 1966. It comprises 67 members: 48

regional and 19 nonregional countries.


The ADB works to eradicate poverty in Asia and the Pacific. As a multilateral development finance institution, it

provides grants, loans, and technical assistance. The Bank serves its member countries, which are also its shareholders.

Through equity investments and loans, the ADB also provides direct assistance to private enterprises of developing

member countries.


To maximize the effects of its assistance on development, the ADB facilitates policy dialogues, offers advisory services,

and mobilizes financial resources through cofinancing operations involving official, commercial, and export sources of

credit. ABD operations promote three complementary agendas: environmentally sustainable growth, inclusive

economic growth, and regional integration. The Bank's core areas of development activity are education, environment,

finance, infrastructure, and regional cooperation and integration.

http://www.adb.org/print/node/179940



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
ADB projects rely on the goods and services of consultants, contractors, manufacturers, and suppliers.

http://www.adb.org/site/business-opportunities/main

Career Opportunities
The "Careers" Web page features access to the ABD career and employment system, information on its young

professional program and internships, descriptions of current job vacancies, and a summary of what the ADB looks for

in a potential employee.

http://www.adb.org/site/careers/main

Chinese
The ADB website offers information and resources for visitors who read Chinese.

https://www.adb.org/zh
Climate Change
Production and use of energy from nonrenewable sources and the unsustainable development and consumption of

other natural resources destabilize the climate and undermine long-term prosperity in Asia and the Pacific.

Devastating storms, droughts, floods, and rising sea levels disproportionately affect poor communities. While

climatologists forecast that extreme climate events will become more frequent and intense, the ADB continues its

support of sustainable growth in the region through financing and innovative technologies.

https://www.adb.org/themes/climate-change-disaster-risk-management/main

History
Conceived in the early 1960s as a financial institution that would be Asian in character and foster economic growth and

cooperation in one of the poorest regions in the world, the ADB opened in the Philippine capital of Manila in 1966. To

learn about the Bank's initial achievements and those of more recent decades, visit the "ADB History" web page.

https://www.adb.org/about/history

Members
The ADB posts a list of its regional and nonregional members and descriptions of them on its website.

https://www.adb.org/about/members

Organizational Chart
The ADB's organizational chart is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/page/203876/adb-org-chart-20170720.pdf

Publications
The ADB website offers information on books, brochures and flyers, conference proceedings, guides, papers and

briefs, policies and plans, reports, and statutory reports and official records.

http://www.adb.org/publications

Social Media
The ADB has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/AsianDevBank
The ADB tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/ADB_HQ
The ADB posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/AsianDevelopmentBank

Statistical Database System
The ADB maintains a central statistical database to store macroeconomic and social data of its developing member

countries.

https://sdbs.adb.org/sdbs | Email: sdbs@adb.org
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                 European Bank for Reconstruction and Development




The United States Government Manual




     EUROPEAN BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
    One Exchange Square, London EC2A 2JN, United Kingdom


    +44 20 7338 6000

    http://www.ebrd.com


      PRESIDENT                                                                             Sir Suma Chakrabarti


    http://www.ebrd.com/who-we-are/ebrd-president-sir-suma-chakrabarti.html
The above list of key personnel was updated 09–2017.

The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development develops open and sustainable market economies in

democratic countries.


The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) is a multilateral development bank that supports

projects in over 30 countries, from central Europe to central Asia and to the southern and eastern Mediterranean.

Investing primarily in private sector clients whose needs cannot be met fully by commercial credit and equity markets,

the EBRD promotes entrepreneurship and fosters transition toward open and sustainable market economies.


The London-based EBRD has a political mandate: It assists countries that are committed to and apply the principles of

multiparty democracy and pluralism. The Bank also conducts its affairs with a commitment to environmental protection

and sustainable energy development. In addition to benefiting the countries that receive its investments, the Bank also

serves its shareholders' interests: 66 countries from five continents, the European Union, and the European Investment

Bank.

http://www.ebrd.com/who-we-are/history-of-the-ebrd.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
Information on opportunities for consultants, contractors, and suppliers is available on the EBRD website.

http://www.ebrd.com/work-with-us/procurement.html

Career Opportunities
Information on job locations and types, benefits and rewards, and internships is available on the EBRD website.

http://www.ebrd.com/careers-at-the-ebrd.html

Contact Information
Department and country contacts are listed on the "EBRD Contacts" Web page.

http://www.ebrd.com/contacts.html

Economic Data
Economic teams publish macroeconomic and structural data series, and they survey data affecting the Bank's countries

of operation.

http://www.ebrd.com/what-we-do/economic-research-and-data/data.html

Environmental and Social Sustainability
EBRD financing supports sustainable development projects that are designed and operated in compliance with good

international practices. To help clients meet sustainability goals, the EBRD posts downloads and resources on its

website.

http://www.ebrd.com/key-sustainability-downloads.html
Green Economy Transition (GET)
By 2020, the GET approach seeks to increase the volume of green financing to 40 per cent of EBRD annual business

investment. Safeguarding the environment and strengthening ecosystems help market economies function better and,

therefore, are central to the transition process that the EBRD has promoted since its inception.

http://www.ebrd.com/what-we-do/get.html

History
In October of 1989, a month before German citizens dismantled parts of the Berlin Wall, President François Mitterrand

of France proposed the establishment of a European bank to meet the challenges of emergent economic and political

realities. In less than 2 years, the EBRD opened for business with its headquarters in London. To learn more about the

role played by the EBRD in the transition from the end of the Cold War to a new European era, visit the "History of the

EBRD" web page.

http://www.ebrd.com/who-we-are/history-of-the-ebrd.html

Organizational Chart
The EBRD's organizational chart is available on the "Structure and Management" web page in Portable Document

Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

http://www.ebrd.com/who-we-are/our-structure.html

Products / Services
Information on the EBRD's advisory services, policy reform dialogue services, and financial products is available online.

http://www.ebrd.com/what-we-do/products-and-services.html

Reports
The EBRD posts annual, donor, financial, sustainability, and transition reports on its website.

http://www.ebrd.com/news/publications.html

Sectors / Topics
The EBRD website features a section that brings together the topics that most concern the Bank and the sectors in

which it is most active.

http://www.ebrd.com/what-we-do/sectors-and-topics.html

Social Media
The EBRD tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/ebrd
The EBRD maintains a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/ebrdhq

Where EBRD Works
The EBRD website features the list of countries where the Bank is active.

http://www.ebrd.com/where-we-are.html
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                                Inter-American Defense Board




The United States Government Manual




     INTER-AMERICAN DEFENSE BOARD
    2600 Sixteenth Street NW., Washington, DC 20441


    202-939-6041

    202-319-2791

    http://iadb.jid.org | Email: protocol@jid.org


                                                                                              Vice Adm. Gonzalo
      CHAIR
                                                                                              Nicolás Ríos Polastri
The Inter-American Defense Board is the oldest permanently constituted, international military organization in the

world. It was founded by Resolution XXXIX of the Meeting of Foreign Ministers at Rio de Janeiro in January 1942. The

Board is governed according to Statutes that the General Assembly of the Organization of American States approved

in March 2006. Senior armed forces officers from the member nations staff the various agencies of the Board. Its three

major components are the Council of Delegates, the Secretariat, and the Inter-American Defense College.

http://iadb.jid.org/quienes-somos/resena-historica-de-la-sede-de-la-jid
The Board studies and recommends to member governments measures it deems necessary for the safety and security

of the hemisphere. It also acts as a technical military adviser for the Organization of American States and is involved in

projects such as disaster preparedness and humanitarian demining programs in Central and South America.


Established in 1962, the Inter-American Defense College is located on Fort Lesley J. McNair, whose buildings and

furnishings the United States Government donated. The United States hosts the College, which prepares senior military

officers and civilian functionaries for positions in their respective governments. The College offers an 11-month,

professionally-oriented, and fully accredited Masters of Science degree. Multidisciplinary in content, the curriculum

centers on the Western Hemisphere's most pressing defense and security issues.

http://www.colegio-id.org/index.php



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Documents
Documents are posted online to increase the transparency of Inter-American Defense Board activities.

http://iadb.jid.org/documents-and-publications

Events
Symposia and seminars are posted on the Board's Web site. A calendar of meetings also is available on the Web site's

home page.

https://sites.google.com/a/jid.org/iadb/eventos/simposios-y-seminarios

News
News items are available on the home page of the Board's Web site.

http://iadb.jid.org

Regional Organizations
Links to regional organizations are accessible on the "Strategic Links" Web page.

http://iadb.jid.org/strategic-links
http://iadb.jid.org/quienes-somos/contactos | Email: jid@jid.org

  For further information, contact the Inter-American Defense Board, 2600 Sixteenth Street NW.,
  Washington, DC 20441. Phone, 202-939-6041. Fax, 202-319-2791.
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                             Inter-American Development Bank




The United States Government Manual




     INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK
    Headquarters: 1300 New York Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20577


    202-623-1000

    202-623-3096

    http://www.iadb.org


      PRESIDENT                                                                             Luis A. Moreno


    http://www.iadb.org/en/about-us/office-of-the-president,19639.html
The above list of key personnel was updated 09–2017.

The Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) was established in 1959 to help accelerate economic and social

development in Latin America and the Caribbean.


The Bank has 48 member countries, 26 of which are borrowing members in Latin America and the Caribbean.

http://www.iadb.org/en/about-us/about-the-inter-american-development-bank,5995.html



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Business Opportunities
IDB projects in Latin America and the Caribbean create contract opportunities for businesses and consultants.

http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-procurement,8148.html

Career Opportunities
The IDB relies on professionals with expertise in economics, education, energy, environmental sustainability, financial

markets, institutional capacity, investment funds, rural development and disaster risk, science and technology, social

protection and health, transport, water and sanitation, and other fields to carry out its mission.

http://www.iadb.org/en/careers/careers-at-the-idb,1165.html

Data
The IDB posts datasets on its Web site.

https://data.iadb.org

Glossary
The IDB maintains a glossary on its Web site.

http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/glossary,18952.html

Key Facts
To learn at glance who leads the IDB, how many people it employs, how many countries are members, who are its

clients, and recent annual levels of its approved lending, visit the "Key Facts" section.

http://www.iadb.org/en/about-us/key-facts,18246.html

Learning Resources
Online courses are accessible on the IDB Web site.

http://www.iadb.org/en/courses/home,20468.html

Looking for Something?
Try finding it by using the "What Are You Looking For" Web page.

http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/what-are-you-looking-for,18944.html?
     Publications
     A variety of publications—annual reports, books, catalogs and brochures, databases and datasets, discussion and

     working papers, journals, magazines, monographs, newsletters—is available online.

     https://publications.iadb.org/facet-view?field=type_view

     Social Media
     The IDB tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/the_IDB
     The IDB has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/IADB.org



Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                          Inter-American Investment Corporation




The United States Government Manual




     INTER-AMERICAN INVESTMENT CORPORATION
    Headquarters: 1350 New York Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20577


    202-623-3901

    http://www.iic.org/en


      CHAIR, BOARD OF EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS                                                   Luis A. Moreno


      Chief Executive Officer                                                               James P. Scriven
http://www.iic.org/en/who-we-are/structure-and-management#.WYiXZOauhs0



The above list of key personnel was updated 09–2017.

The Inter-American Development Bank promotes development in Latin America and the Caribbean through the private

sector.


The Inter-American Investment Corporation (IIC), an affiliate of the Inter-American Development Bank based in

Washington, DC, was established in 1985 to promote the economic development of its Latin American and Caribbean

members by financing small- and medium-size private enterprises. The IIC provides project financing in the form of

direct loans and equity investments, lines of credit to local financial intermediaries, and investments in local and

regional investment funds.

http://www.iic.org/en/who-we-are/about-us#.WGLh5H0rLIU
The IIC has 45 member countries, of which 28 are in the Western Hemisphere, including Canada and the United

States, and 17 are outside the region.

http://www.iic.org/en/what-we-offer#.VumT0H0rLIU



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Career Opportunities
The ICC relies on talent and experience to carry out its mission. It recruits, hires, and maintains a staff of diverse,

motivated, and qualified professionals with expertise, leadership potential, and strong interpersonal and teamwork

skills. Current job opportunities are posted online.

http://www.iic.org/en/about-us/careers

History
A three-part history, from 1985 to 1999, from 2000 to 2012, and from 2013 to the present, is available on the IIC's Web

site.

http://www.iic.org/en/who-we-are/our-history-timeline#.WD9-D30rLIV

Key Initiatives
The IIC's Web site features a section on its most important initiatives.

http://www.iic.org/en/initiatives

Library
The IIC's Web site features a photo library.

http://www.iic.org/en/media/photo-library#.WD94730rLIU

Member Countries
The IIC Web site features two lists of member countries: regional members and other members. An interactive map
     complements the two lists.

     http://www.iic.org/en/countries

     News
     The IIC posts news items on its Web site.


     Projects
     IIC projects may be searched by country or year.

     http://www.iic.org/en/projects

     Publications
     Brochures, factsheets, and reports—some in English and Spanish, some also in French and Portuguese—are available

     online.

     http://www.iic.org/en/media/publications#.VumPI30rLIU

     Transaction Cycle
     A description of the five stages of a successful IIC transaction—business origination, eligibility review, due diligence

     and approval, closing and disbursement, and supervision and evaluation—is available online.

     http://www.iic.org/en/what-we-offer/transaction-cycle#.WD9_p30rLIU

     Social Media
     The IIC tweets announcements and other newsworthy items in Spanish on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/GrupoBID_CII
     The IIC has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/CIIGrupoBID



Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                International Monetary Fund




The United States Government Manual




     INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
    700 Nineteenth Street NW., Washington, DC 20431


    202-623-7000

    202-623-4661

    http://www.imf.org


      MANAGING DIRECTOR / CHAIR OF THE EXECUTIVE BOARD                                      Kristalina Georgieva


    https://www.imf.org/en/About/senior-officials/Bios/kristalina-georgieva
  FIRST DEPUTY MANAGING DIRECTOR                                                           Gita Gopinath


https://www.imf.org/en/About/Senior-Officials/Bios/gita-gopinath



Deputy Managing Directors


                                                                                           Bo Li


                                                                                           Kenji Okamura


                                                                                           Antoinette M. Sayeh

https://www.imf.org/en/About/senior-officials



  The above list of key personnel was updated 5–2022.



The International Monetary Fund fosters global monetary cooperation, secures financial stability, facilitates international

trade, promotes employment and sustainable economic growth, and reduces poverty worldwide.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The Final Act of the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference, signed at Bretton Woods, NH, on July 22,

1944, set forth the original Articles of Agreement of the International Monetary Fund (IMF). The Agreement became

effective on December 27, 1945, when the President, authorized by the Bretton Woods Agreements Act (22 U.S.C.

286), accepted membership for the United States in the IMF. The inaugural meeting of the Board of Governors was

held in March 1946, and the first meeting of the Executive Directors was held May 6, 1946.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2017-title22/html/USCODE-2017-title22-chap7-subchapXV-
sec286.htm
On May 31, 1968, the Board of Governors approved an amendment to the Articles of Agreement for the establishment

of a facility based on Special Drawing Rights (SDR) and for modification of certain rules and practices. The amendment

became effective on July 28, 1969, and the Special Drawing Account opened on August 6, 1969. The Special Drawing

Rights Act (22 U.S.C. 286 et seq.) authorized the United States to accept the amendment and participate in the Special

Drawing Account.

https://www.imf.org/en/About/Factsheets/Sheets/2016/08/01/14/51/Special-Drawing-Right-SDR
On April 30, 1976, the Board of Governors approved a second amendment to the Articles of Agreement, which

became effective on April 1, 1978. This amendment gave members the right to adopt exchange arrangements of their

choice while placing certain obligations on them regarding their exchange rate policies, which the IMF was to monitor

closely. The official price of gold was abolished, and the Special Drawing Account was promoted as the principal

reserve asset of the international monetary system. The Bretton Woods Agreements Act Amendments (22 U.S.C. 286e-

5) authorized the United States to accept this amendment.

https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/USCODE-2017-title22/pdf/USCODE-2017-title22-chap7-subchapXV-sec286e-
5.pdf
On June 28, 1990, the Board of Governors approved a third amendment to the Articles of Agreement, which became

effective on November 11, 1992. Under this amendment, a member's voting rights and certain related rights may be

suspended by a 70-percent majority of the executive board if the member country has been declared ineligible to use

the Fund's general resources and persists in its failure to fulfill any of its obligations under the Articles.


The IMF posts its organizational chart online.

https://www.imf.org/external/np/obp/orgcht.htm
The IMF posts an organization chart on its website. A link to the chart is part of the "IMF Senior Officials" web page.

https://www.imf.org/en/About/Organization-Chart

ACTIVITIES
The IMF has 189 member countries. It promotes international monetary cooperation through a permanent forum for

consultation and collaboration on international monetary problems; facilitates the expansion and balanced growth of

international trade; promotes exchange rate stability; assists in the establishment of an open multilateral system of

payments for current transactions among members; and gives confidence to members by making IMF resources

temporarily available to them under adequate safeguards.


The IMF helps member countries correct imbalances in their international balances of payments. It periodically

examines the economic developments and policies of its members, offers policy advice, and at a member's request

and upon executive board approval, provides financial assistance through a variety of financial facilities designed to

address specific problems. These financing mechanisms provide access to the Fund's general resources and offer

short-term assistance during crises of market confidence, compensatory financing to countries suffering declines in

export earnings, emergency assistance for countries recovering from natural disasters or armed conflict, and low-

interest rate resources to support structural adjustment and promote growth in the poorest countries. The IMF also

provides technical assistance and training to member countries.

https://www.imf.org/en/About



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The IMF's website has an alphabetical index to help visitors search for specific topics or browse content that aligns with

their interests.

https://www.imf.org/external/siteindex.htm

Archives
A catalog of the IMF's archives is available online.

https://archivescatalog.imf.org/search/simple

At a Glance
Fast facts and an overview of the IMF's founding and mission, governance and organization, and core activities are
available on "The IMF at a Glance" web page.

https://www.imf.org/en/About/Factsheets/IMF-at-a-Glance

Blog
The IMF's blog offers insightful and analytical posts on economics and finance.

https://blogs.imf.org

Bretton Woods Moment
In her video speech of October 15, 2020, Managing Director Kristalina Georgieva spoke of the necessity to seize "this

new Bretton Woods moment" (approximately 4:20 into the video). The length of the entire speech is a little over 12

minutes.

https://www.imf.org/en/News/Articles/2020/10/15/sp101520-a-new-bretton-woods-moment

Career Opportunities
In addition to economists and research assistants, the IMF relies on professionals with skills and expertise in a range of

other fields: communications, facilities management, finance and accounting, human resources, information

technology, language services, law, library science and archives, office assistance, procurement, security, and

transportation and hospitality. Information on careers, current job vacancies, and recruitment programs is available

online.

https://www.imf.org/en/About/Recruitment

Climate Change
CARBON PRICE FLOOR—The IMF counts "Climate Change" as one of its key issues. The IMF's "Climate Change" web

page, in its "Highlights" section, features the short video "The Case for an International Carbon Price Floor." The video

opens and closes with these words: "Our planet is in trouble . . . . we could have a good shot at keeping the planet

livable."

https://www.imf.org/en/Topics/climate-change
MITIGATION—Chapter 3 of the report "World Economic Outlook, October 2020: A Long and Difficult Ascent" is

dedicated to the topic of mitigating climate change. As a type of preface to the chapter's introduction, the authors

wrote: "Without further action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, the planet is on course to reach temperatures not

seen in millions of years, with potentially catastrophic implications. [Our analysis] suggests that an initial green

investment push combined with steadily rising carbon prices would deliver the needed emission reductions at

reasonable transitional global output effects, putting the global economy on a stronger and more sustainable footing

over the medium term. Carbon pricing is critical to mitigation because higher carbon prices incentivize energy

efficiency besides reallocating resources from high- to low-carbon activities. A green investment push up front would

strengthen the macroeconomy in the short term and help lower the costs of adjusting to higher carbon prices. The

transitional costs of carbon pricing consistent with net zero emissions by mid-century appear manageable and could

be reduced further as new technological innovations develop in response to carbon pricing and green research and

development subsidies. Governments can protect those most affected by mitigation by providing targeted cash

transfers financed by carbon revenues."

https://www.imf.org/~/media/Files/Publications/WEO/2020/October/English/ch3.ashx?la=en
LOW–TECH SEQUESTRATION—"Finance and Development" is the IMF's flagship magazine and electronic editorial

platform. The IMF uses the magazine to publish cutting-edge analysis of and insight into the latest trends in

economics, development, and international finance, as well as research in those fields. The December 2019 issue (vol.

56, no. 4) of the magazine featured the article "Nature's Solution to Climate Change: A Strategy To Protect Whales

Can Limit Greenhouse Gases and Global Warming." Its four authors (R. Chami, T. Cosimano, C. Fullenkamp, S.

Oztosun) wrote: "The carbon capture potential of whales is truly startling. Whales accumulate carbon in their bodies

during their long lives. When they die, they sink to the bottom of the ocean; each great whale sequesters 33 tons of

CO2 on average, taking that carbon out of the atmosphere for centuries. A tree, meanwhile, absorbs only up to 48

pounds of CO2 a year."

https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2019/12/natures-solution-to-climate-change-chami.htm

Commodity Prices
The "IMF Primary Commodity Prices" web page offers easy access to data on primary commodity prices, the

interactive commodity data portal, and the commodity terms of trade database.

https://www.imf.org/en/Research/commodity-prices

Contact Information
Contact information for general, media, and other types of inquiries is available online.

https://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/contacts/contacts.aspx | Email: publicaffairs@imf.org

Country Information
The IMF is an organization comprising 189 countries that, together, work to promote monetary cooperation, financial

stability, international trade, employment and sustainable economic growth, and to reduce poverty. An alphabetical

index of the participating countries and information on those countries are available on the IMF's website.

https://www.imf.org/en/Countries

Data
The IMF publishes data on IMF lending, exchange rates, and other economic and financial indicators.

https://www.imf.org/en/Data

Gender
The IMF counts the division along gender lines in labor markets worldwide as one of its six key issues.

https://www.imf.org/external/themes/gender

Glossary
The IMF maintains an online glossary of financial terms and acronyms.

https://www.imf.org/en/About/glossary

History
James M. Boughton's "Silent Revolution: The International Monetary Fund 1979–1989" is accessible online.

https://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/history/2001/index.htm
A chronological history of the IMF is available online.
https://www.imf.org/external/np/exr/chron/chron.asp

Inflation
RISK OF UNMOORED INFLATION EXPECTATIONS—The IMF's "Chart of the Week" blog post for 27 April 2022 was

written by Jorge Alvarez and Philip Barrett. The authors concluded their post "Inflation to be Elevated for Longer on

War, Demand, Job Markets" with the following: "[S]urging prices will have the greatest effects on vulnerable

populations, particularly in low-income countries. High overall inflation will also complicate the trade-offs for central

banks between containing price pressures and safeguarding growth. . . . While our baseline expectation is that inflation

will eventually ease, inflation could turn out higher for several reasons. Worsening supply-demand imbalances . . . and

further commodity-price gains could keep the pace of inflation persistently high. Moreover, both the [Ukraine] war and

renewed pandemic flare-ups could prolong supply disruptions, further increasing costs of intermediate inputs. In a

context of tight labor markets, nominal wage growth could also accelerate to catch up with consumer-price inflation as

workers seek higher wages to preserve their purchasing power. This would further intensify and broaden inflation

pressures, with the risk of de-anchoring inflation expectations."

https://blogs.imf.org/2022/04/27/inflation-to-be-elevated-for-longer-on-war-demand-job-markets
CENTRAL BANK INFLATION TARGETS—In the IMF blog post "War Dims Global Economic Outlook as Inflation

Accelerates" (19 APR 2022), Economic Counsellor and Director of Research Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas wrote: "Inflation

has become a clear and present danger for many countries. Even prior to the war, it surged on the back of soaring

commodity prices and supply-demand imbalances. Many central banks, such as the Federal Reserve, had already

moved toward tightening monetary policy. War-related disruptions amplify those pressures. We now project inflation

will remain elevated for much longer. In the United States and some European countries, it has reached its highest

level in more than 40 years, in the context of tight labor markets. The risk is rising that inflation expectations drift away

from central bank inflation targets, prompting a more aggressive tightening response from policymakers. Furthermore,

increases in food and fuel prices may also significantly increase the prospect of social unrest in poorer countries."

https://blogs.imf.org/2022/04/19/war-dims-global-economic-outlook-as-inflation-accelerates

Language Resources
The IMF provides information on its website in Arabic, Chinese, French, Japanese, Russian, and Spanish. Language tags

are visible at the top and bottom of the IMF's home page.

https://www.imf.org

News
The IMF posts podcasts, newsworthy items about various countries, and the latest news on its website.

https://www.imf.org/en/news
The "What's New Archive" allows easy access to recently posted items of interest.

https://www.imf.org/en/Whats-New-Archive

Publications
The IMF's "Finance and Development" magazine and "Fiscal Monitor" biannual report are available online in Portable

Document Format (PDF). Its "New and Noteworthy" newsletter and other publications are also accessible online.

https://www.imf.org/en/publications
    Site Map
    The IMF site map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse for content that aligns with their interests.

    https://www.imf.org/external/sitemap.htm

    Social Media
    The "IMF Social Hub" allows easy access to the IMF's Facebook page, Instagram photos and videos, LinkedIn account,

    Tweets and replies, and YouTube channel.

    https://www.imf.org/en/Social-Hub

    Special Drawing Rights (SDRs)
    A 5-minute video explaining the SDR, the international reserve asset that the IMF created to supplement the official

    reserves of its member countries, is available online.

    https://www.imf.org/external/mmedia/view.aspx?vid=5027851809001

    U.S. Economy
    On July 22, 2021, the IMF published its "United States: 2021 Article IV Consultation." The staff report for the

    consultation noted that "The new administration's policies have put the U.S. economy on a strong footing. An effective

    vaccine rollout has put the number of new COVID–19 cases on a firmly downward path. At the same time,

    unprecedented fiscal support is quickly restoring the economy back to full employment and generating positive

    outward spillovers to the world economy. These efforts have not been costless: the path for public debt is far higher;

    the current account deficit has grown; and very accommodative financial conditions have led to increased corporate

    and nonbank leverage and rising valuations across a range of assets. The pandemic continues to weigh heavily on

    those at the lower end of the income distribution, exposing longstanding inequities in access to quality healthcare and

    education (many of which have an important gender and racial dimension)."

    https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/CR/Issues/2021/07/22/United-States-2021-Article-IV-Consultation-Press-Release-
    Staff-Report-and-Statement-by-the-462540

    Videos
    The IMF posts videos in Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian, and Spanish on its website.

    https://www.imf.org/en/videos/index

        The Sources of Information were updated 5–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy
Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                          International Organization for Migration




The United States Government Manual




     INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR MIGRATION
    Headquarters: 17 Route des Morillons, C.P. 17, CH–1211 Geneva 19, Switzerland. Mailing address, P.O. Box 71, CH–1211,

    Geneva 19, Switzerland


    011-41-22-717-9111

    http://www.iom.int | Email: hq@iom.int


    Washington Office: Suite 700, 1752 N Street NW., Washington, DC 20036


    202-862-1826

    Email: IOMWashington@iom.int
New York Office: 122 E. 42d Street, 48th Floor, New York, NY 10168


212-681-7000

Email: newyork@iom.int


  DIRECTOR GENERAL                                                                         António Vitorino




  DEPUTY DIRECTORS GENERAL


  Operations                                                                               Ugochi F. Daniels


  Management and Reform                                                                    Amy E. Pope


https://www.iom.int/office-director-general



  The above list of key personnel was updated 3–2022.



The International Organization for Migration analyzes and addresses underlying issues of migration; deals with the

operational challenges of migration management; promotes economic and social development through migration; and

champions the dignity and well-being of migrants, while confronting xenophobic narratives that hurt them.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
Established in 1951, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) is the leading intergovernmental organization in

the field of migration. It was first known as the Provisional Intergovernmental Committee for the Movement of

Migrants from Europe. The Committee was active during the 1950s, a time of confusion, displacement, and grief in

Western Europe, after the Second World War.

https://www.iom.int/iom-history
With 174 Member States, an additional 8 states holding observer status, and a presence in over 100 countries, the IOM

promotes humane and orderly migration for the benefit of all. It does so by providing services and advice to migrants

and governments, while working in close cooperation with governmental, intergovernmental, and nongovernmental

partners. The IOM has observer status to the United Nations.

https://www.iom.int/members-and-observers
Its structure is decentralized, and this decentralization has enabled the IOM to acquire the capacity to deliver an ever-

increasing number and diversity of projects at the request of Member States. The Organization's field structure is

composed of centers (administrative, African, and global) and offices (country, liaison, and regional).

https://www.iom.int/organizational-structure
The IOM's organizational chart is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

http://www.iom.int/sites/default/files/Organigram.pdf
ACTIVITIES
The IOM works with its partners in the following areas: meeting the operational challenges of migration management,

increasing understanding of migration issues, encouraging social and economic development through migration, and

upholding the human dignity and well-being of migrants.


The Organization has been at the forefront of emergency response to ensure assistance and protection to stranded

migrants and displaced persons. It has a lead role under the UN Cluster Approach in camp coordination and

management in natural disasters and is a key partner in emergency shelter, logistics, health, protection, and early

recovery.


IOM expertise and services support the following activities: secure, reliable, and cost-effective assistance for migrating

persons; humane and orderly management of migration and the effective respect for migrants' human rights;

technical cooperation and operational assistance for building national capacities and facilitating cooperation on issues

relevant to migration; helping states to integrate migrants into their new environment and to engage diasporas as

development partners; advising states in the development and delivery of programs and technical expertise to combat

migrant smuggling and human trafficking; working with national health systems to reduce mortality, morbidity, and

disabilities and to enhance access to rights-based health and well-being services throughout the migration cycle; and

partnering with states to address labor migration.

https://www.iom.int/our-work



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Blog
The IOM maintains a blog.

http://weblog.iom.int

Business Opportunities
Information on procurement opportunities is available online.

https://www.iom.int/procurement-opportunities

Career Opportunities
Current job vacancies in various countries are posted online.

https://www.iom.int/recruitment

Climate Change
The "Institutional Strategy on Migration, Environment and Climate Change 2021–2030" (OCT 2021) promotes a

comprehensive, evidence, and rights-based approach to migration in the context of environmental degradation,

climate change, and disasters, for the benefit of migrants and societies.

https://environmentalmigration.iom.int/resources/institutional-strategy-migration-environment-and-climate-change-
2021-2030
The "IOM Strategic Vision 2019–2023: Setting a course for IOM" (NOV 2019) addresses the problem of climate change
in several places. On page 7, it says: "While some groups will be directly affected by climate-induced disasters—such

as flooding, droughts and extreme weather events—others will be affected by growing desertification, coastal erosion

and infrastructural instability stemming from resource scarcity. This, when combined with continued inequality,

ongoing fragility and demographic change, will lead to increased internal, regional and international mobility as

individuals, having lost hope in the future of their own countries, search for sustainable livelihoods for themselves and

their families. Large-scale internal and international mass movements are likely to become more frequent and will

evolve more quickly, posing new challenges for overstretched international humanitarian response in regions with

limited statehood."

https://environmentalmigration.iom.int/sites/g/files/tmzbdl1411/files/C-110-INF-1%20-
%20IOM%20Strategic%20Vision.pdf

Contact Information
Swiss phone numbers for contacting and addresses for corresponding with and visiting IOM headquarters are

available online.

https://www.iom.int/contact-us | Email: hq@iom.int
The Media and Communications Division is responsible for media relations. Email addresses and phone numbers are

available for IOM spokespeople and communications, media, press, and public information officers, on the "Media

Contacts" web page.

https://www.iom.int/media-contacts | Email: media@iom.int

Countries
IOM maintains more than 590 country offices and sub-offices worldwide.

https://www.iom.int/where-we-work

Data / Research
IOM data and research are available online.

https://www.iom.int/data-and-research

Español / Français
Spanish and French versions of the website can be accessed by using language links at the top of the home page, on

its right side.

http://www.iom.int

Evaluation
The "IOM Evaluation" web page has recent products that the Office of the Director has proposed.

https://evaluation.iom.int

Glossary
A list of key migration terms that is based on the IOM's "Glossary on Migration" is available online.

http://www.iom.int/key-migration-terms

History
Originally known as the Provisional Intergovernmental Committee for the Movement of Migrants from Europe, the

IOM got its start amidst the chaos and displacement of war. Today, the IOM is the leading international agency

focusing on migration. To learn more of the IOM story, visit the "IOM History" page.

http://www.iom.int/iom-history

Internal Audit Reports
Executive summaries of internal audit reports are posted online.

https://www.iom.int/executive-summaries-and-management-responses-and-actions

Press Room
The IOM posts featured stories, news, situation reports, speeches, and statements on its website.

http://www.iom.int/press-room

Publications
The Department of International Cooperation and Partnerships supports the Migration Policy Research Division, which

is where the publications unit is located. The IOM produces many publications, which include National Migration

Profiles, the Migration Research Series, the World Migration Report, and other studies and reports. It also produces

flyers, information sheets, journals, manuals, and thematic catalogues.

http://publications.iom.int

Regional Offices
Regional office personnel review and endorse projects and provide technical support to Country Offices. Descriptions

of and contact information for the IOM's nine regional offices are available online.

http://www.iom.int/regional-offices

Site Map
The website map allows visitors to look for specific topics or to browse content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.iom.int/sitemap

Social Media
The IOM has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/IOM
The IOM tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/UNmigration
The IOM posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/IOMMigration

United Nations
Information on the IOM's Office to the United Nations is available online.

https://unofficeny.iom.int/iom-office-united-nations | Email: unofficeny@iom.int

  The Sources of Information were updated 3–2022.
Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                              Organization of American States




The United States Government Manual




     ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES
    Seventeenth Street and Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20006


    202-370-5000

    202-458-3967

    http://www.oas.org/en


      Secretary General                                                                     LUIS ALMAGRO LEMES


    https://www.oas.org/en/about/secretary_general.asp
  Assistant Secretary General                                                                Nestor Mendez


http://www.oas.org/en/about/assistant_secretary_general.asp



  The above list of key personnel was updated 3–2022.



The Organization of American States seeks an order of peace and justice among its member states, promotes their

solidarity and strengthens their collaboration, and defends their sovereignty, territorial integrity, and independence.


The Organization of American States (OAS) brings together the countries of the Western Hemisphere to strengthen

cooperation and advance common interests. At the core of the OAS mission is a commitment to democracy. Building

on this foundation, OAS works to promote good governance, strengthen human rights, foster peace and security,

expand trade, and address the complex problems caused by poverty, drugs, and corruption. Through decisions made

by its political bodies and programs carried out by its General Secretariat, OAS promotes greater inter-American

cooperation and understanding.


OAS member states have intensified their cooperation since the end of the cold war, taking on new and important

challenges. In 1994, the region's 34 democratically elected presidents and prime ministers met in Miami for the First

Summit of the Americas, where they established broad political, economic, and social development goals. They have

continued to meet periodically since then to examine common interests and priorities. Through the ongoing Summits

of the Americas process, the region's leaders have entrusted the OAS with a growing number of responsibilities to

help advance the countries' shared vision.


With four official languages—English, Spanish, Portuguese, and French—the OAS reflects the rich diversity of peoples

and cultures across the Americas. The OAS has 35 member states: the independent nations of North, Central, and

South America, and of the Caribbean. Since 1962, Cuba has been barred from participation by resolution of the Eighth

Meeting of Consultation of Ministers of Foreign Affairs. Countries from all around the world are permanent observers,

closely following the issues that are critical to the Americas and often providing key financial support for OAS

programs.


Member states set major policies and goals through the General Assembly, which gathers the hemisphere's foreign

ministers once a year in regular session. The Permanent Council, made up of ambassadors appointed by member

states, meets regularly at OAS headquarters in Washington, DC, to guide ongoing policies and actions. The

chairmanship of the Permanent Council rotates every 3 months, in alphabetical order of countries. Each member state

has an equal voice, and most decisions are made through consensus.


Also under the OAS umbrella are several specialized agencies that have considerable autonomy: the Pan American

Health Organization in Washington, DC; the Inter-American Children's Institute in Montevideo, Uruguay; the Inter-

American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture in San Jose, Costa Rica; and the Pan American Institute of

Geography and History and the Inter-American Indian Institute, both in Mexico City.


In 1948, at the Ninth International Conference of American States, 21 nations of the hemisphere signed the OAS

Charter: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba (barred from participation), Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, United States of

America, Uruguay, and Venezuela.


Subsequently, 14 other countries joined the OAS by signing and ratifying the Charter. They were Barbados, Trinidad

and Tobago, Jamaica, Grenada, Suriname, Dominica, Saint Lucia, Antigua and Barbuda, Saint Vincent and the

Grenadines, the Bahamas, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Canada, Belize, and Guyana. This brings the number of member states

to 35.

http://www.oas.org/en/about/who_we_are.asp



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
The "Topics" web page presents a collection of popular topics in alphabetical order.

http://www.oas.org/en/topics/default.asp

Career Opportunities
Information on employment, consultancies, and internships is available online.

http://www.oas.org/dhrs/dhr/employment_opportunities.asp

Climate Change
In 2016, the OAS's Department of Sustainable Development published the report "Climate change: A comparative

overview of the rights based approach in the Americas." In the report's forward, Michael Burger described it as giving

"readers a comparative overview that may serve as an important reference for governments, judges, NGOs, business

actors and anybody else involved in shaping the global post-2030 agenda."

https://www.oas.org/en/sedi/dsd/docs/climate_change.pdf

Conferences
A calendar of conferences is available online.

http://www.apps.oas.org/oasmeetings/default.aspx?Lang=EN

Contact Information
Phone and fax numbers and the OAS postal and street address are available on the "Contact Us" web page.

https://www.oas.org/en/contactus.asp

Documents
The most important OAS documents, including its founding Charter and the Inter-American Democratic Charter, are

available on its website. Along with these essential documents, links to other key reference material—such as annual

reports of the Secretary General, OAS resolutions, agreements, and treaties—are also available.

http://www.oas.org/en/information_center/default.asp

History
A short history of the OAS is available.
http://www.oas.org/en/about/our_history.asp

Language Assistance
The OAS maintains English and Spanish versions of its website. Some web pages are also available in French and

Portuguese. Language tags appear above the search box in the top right corner of most of the site's pages.

http://www.oas.org/en

Media Center
Newsletters, press releases, and speeches by OAS leaders are posted in the media center.

http://www.oas.org/en/media_center/press_releases.asp

Members States
Information on the 35 independent states of the Americas—all of which have ratified the OAS Charter and are

member states—is available on the OAS website.

http://www.oas.org/en/member_states/default.asp

Organizational Structure
The "Our Structure" web page is a good starting point for learning about the major organs of the OAS.

https://www.oas.org/en/about/our_structure.asp

Organizational List
The "Organizational List" web page brings informational resources on the OAS's component parts together in one

place.

http://www.oas.org/en/about/organizational_list.asp

Permanent Representatives
A list of permanent representatives to the OAS is available on its website.

http://www.oas.org/en/about/authorities.asp

Publications
OAS publications in English and Spanish are available online.

http://www.oas.org/en/information_center/publications.asp

Scholarships
Information on OAS scholarships is available online.

http://www.oas.org/en/scholarships

Social Media
The OAS tweets announcements, news, and other noteworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/oas_official
The OAS has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/OASofficial
     The OAS posts video news on its Vimeo channel.

     https://vimeo.com/channels/oasvideonews

     Staff Directory
     The OAS maintains an online staff directory. To see the complete directory, leave all fields blank and click on the

     search button.

     https://www.oas.org/ext/en/tools/Directory

        The above Sources of Information were updated 3–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                                       United Nations




The United States Government Manual




     UNITED NATIONS
    United Nations, New York, NY 10017


    212-963-1234

    http://www.un.org


    United Nations Office at Geneva: Palais des Nations, 1211 Geneva 10, Switzerland


    United Nations Office at Vienna: Vienna International Centre, P.O. Box 500, A–1400, Vienna, Austria


    Washington, DC: United Nations Information Centre, Suite 500, 1775 K Street NW., Washington, DC 20006
202-331-8670

202-331-9191

http://www.unicwash.org | Email: unicdc@unic.org


  SECRETARY–GENERAL                                                                   António Guterres


https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/biography

  Deputy Secretary-General                                                            Amina J. Mohammed


https://www.un.org/sg/en/dsg/index.shtml

  Director-General, United Nations Office at Geneva                                   Tatiana Valovaya




  Director-General, United Nations Office at Vienna                                   Ghada Fathi Waly




  Director-General, United Nations Office at Nairobi                                  Zainab Hawa Bangura


https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/senior-management-group

  Officer in Charge, Washington DC Information Centre                                 Stefania Piffanelli


http://www.unicwash.org/staff



  The above list of key personnel was updated 2–2022.



The United Nations supports tolerance and peaceful coexistence among the nations; seeks to maintain peace and

security among them; opposes the use of armed force, except in the common interest; and promotes the economic and

social advancement of all peoples.


ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION
The United Nations is an international organization that was set up in accordance with a charter that was drafted by

governments that were represented at the Conference on International Organization meeting in San Francisco. The

Charter was signed on June 26, 1945, and came into force on October 24, 1945, when the required number of

ratifications and accessions had been made by the signatories. Amendments increasing membership of the Security

Council and the Economic and Social Council came into effect on August 31, 1965.


The United Nations now consists of 193 member states, of which 51 are founding members.


A chart of the United Nations System's principal organs is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for

downloading and online viewing.
https://www.un.org/en/pdfs/18-00159e_un_system_chart_17x11_4c_en_web.pdf
The purposes of the United Nations set out in the Charter are to maintain international peace and security; to develop

friendly relations among nations; to achieve international cooperation in solving international problems of an

economic, social, cultural, or humanitarian character and in promoting respect for human rights; and to be a center for

harmonizing the actions of nations in the attainment of these common ends.

https://www.un.org/en/sections/about-un/overview/index.html

PRINCIPAL ORGANS
The principal organs of the United Nations are the Economic and Social Council, General Assembly, International Court

of Justice, Secretariat, Security Council, and Trusteeship Council.


Economic and Social Council
This organ is responsible, under the authority of the General Assembly, for the economic and social programs of the

United Nations. Its functions include making or initiating studies, reports, and recommendations on international

economic, social, cultural, educational, health, and related matters; promoting respect for and observance of human

rights and fundamental freedoms for all; calling international conferences and preparing draft conventions for

submission to the General Assembly on matters within its competence; negotiating agreements with the specialized

agencies and defining their relationship with the United Nations; coordinating the activities of the specialized agencies;

and consulting with nongovernmental organizations concerned with matters within its competence. The Council

consists of 54 members of the United Nations elected by the General Assembly for 3-year terms; 18 are elected each

year.


The Council usually holds two regular sessions a year. It has also held a number of special sessions.

https://www.un.org/ecosoc/en

General Assembly
All states that are members of the United Nations are members of the General Assembly. Its functions are to consider

and discuss any matter within the scope of the Charter of the United Nations and to make recommendations to the

members of the United Nations and other organs. It approves the budget of the organization, the expenses of which

are borne by the members as apportioned by the General Assembly.


The General Assembly may call the attention of the Security Council to situations likely to endanger international peace

and security, may initiate studies, and may receive and consider reports from other organs of the United Nations.

Under the "Uniting for Peace" resolution adopted by the General Assembly in November 1950, if the Security Council

fails to act on an apparent threat to or breach of the peace or act of aggression because of lack of unanimity of its five

permanent members, the Assembly itself may take up the matter within 24 hours—in emergency special session—and

recommend collective measures, including, in case of a breach of the peace or act of aggression, use of armed force

when necessary to maintain or restore international peace and security.


The General Assembly normally meets in regular annual session from September through December. It also has met in

special sessions and emergency special sessions.

http://www.un.org/en/ga
International Court of Justice
The International Court of Justice is the principal judicial organ of the United Nations. It has its seat at The Hague, the

Netherlands. All members of the United Nations are ipso facto parties to the Statute of the Court. Nonmembers of the

United Nations may become parties to the Statute of the Court on conditions prescribed by the General Assembly on

the recommendation of the Security Council.


The jurisdiction of the Court comprises all cases that the parties refer to it and all matters specially provided for in the

Charter of the United Nations or in treaties and conventions in force.


The Court consists of 15 judges known as members of the Court. They are elected for 9-year terms by the General

Assembly and the Security Council, voting independently, and may be reelected.

http://www.icj-cij.org/homepage/index.php?lang=en

Secretariat
The Secretariat consists of a Secretary-General and "such staff as the Organization may require." The Secretary-

General, who is appointed by the General Assembly on the recommendation of the Security Council, is the chief

administrative officer of the United Nations. He acts in that capacity for the General Assembly, the Security Council, the

Economic and Social Council, and the Trusteeship Council. Under the Charter, the Secretary-General "may bring to the

attention of the Security Council any matter that in his opinion may threaten the maintenance of international peace

and security."

http://www.un.org/en/sections/about-un/secretariat/index.html

Security Council
The Security Council consists of 15 members, of which 5—the People's Republic of China, France, Russia, the United

Kingdom, and the United States of America—are permanent members. The 10 nonpermanent members are elected

for 2-year terms by the General Assembly. The primary responsibility of the Security Council is to act on behalf of the

members of the United Nations in maintenance of international peace and security. Measures that may be employed

by the Security Council are outlined in the Charter.


The Security Council, together with the General Assembly, also elects the judges of the International Court of Justice

and makes a recommendation to the General Assembly on the appointment of the Secretary-General of the

organization.


The Security Council first met in London on January 17, 1946, and is so organized as to be able to function

continuously.

http://www.un.org/en/sc

Trusteeship Council
The Trusteeship Council was initially established to consist of any member states that administered trust territories,

permanent members of the Security Council that did not administer trust territories, and enough other

nonadministering countries elected by the General Assembly for 3-year terms to ensure that membership would be

equally divided between administering and nonadministering members. Under authority of the General Assembly, the

Council considered reports from members administering trust territories, examined petitions from trust territory
inhabitants, and provided for periodic inspection visits to trust territories.


With the independence of Palau, the last remaining United Nations trust territory, the Trusteeship Council formally

suspended operations after nearly half a century. The Council will henceforth meet only on an extraordinary basis, as

the need may arise.

http://www.un.org/en/decolonization/trusteeship.shtml



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Index
An alphabetical index is available on the United Nations' website to help visitors search for specific topics or browse

content that aligns with their interests.

https://www.un.org/en/site-index

Career Opportunities
United Nations staff members coordinate relief in humanitarian crises, disarm child soldiers, monitor elections, provide

administrative and logistical support for carrying out complex mandates, and carry out a host of other functions

around the world.

https://careers.un.org/lbw/Home.aspx

Children in Detention
Many children are held in inhuman conditions and in adult facilities—in violation of their human rights—where they

are at high risk of violence, rape, and sexual assault, including acts of torture and cruel, inhuman, or degrading

treatment or punishment. The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights recently released the "Global Study

on Children Deprived of Liberty" (OCT 2019).

https://www.ohchr.org/EN/HRBodies/CRC/StudyChildrenDeprivedLiberty/Pages/Index.aspx

Climate Change
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has published "Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science

Basis," which is the contribution of Working Group I to the sixth assessment report. Working Group I members have

compiled the most up-to-date physical assessment of the climate system and climate change. They brought together

the latest advances in climate science and combined multiple lines of evidence from paleoclimate, observations,

process understanding, and global and regional climate simulations. In the summary for policymakers, the report

states: "Observed increases in well-mixed greenhouse gas concentrations since around 1750 are unequivocally caused

by human activities. . . . concentrations have continued to increase in the atmosphere, reaching annual averages of 410

ppm for carbon dioxide, 1866 ppb for methane, and 332 ppb for nitrous oxide in 2019."

https://www.ipcc.ch/report/sixth-assessment-report-working-group-i
The IPCC has released a video synopsis of its "Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis." In the video (1:10),

Professor Panmao Zhai of the China Meteorological Administration and cochair of the IPCC's Working Group I for the

sixth assessment report cycle summarized the report's climate-change message: Human activity and behavior are the

main causes of changes that are intensifying, rapid, and widespread.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e7xW1MfXjLA
In southern Madagascar, an ongoing drought that started in 2019 has eliminated nearly all sources of food. The

drought has brought severe hunger, and climate change is causing the drought. The World Food Programme of the

United Nations has sounded the alarm to raise awareness and stimulate action to provide relief from the catastrophe.

https://www.wfp.org/stories/dont-look-other-way-madagascar-grip-drought-and-famine
On November 13, 2021, Secretary-General António Guterres released a statement on the conclusion of the United

Nations Climate Change Conference COP26. He wrote: "Our fragile planet is hanging by a thread. We are still

knocking on the door of climate catastrophe. It is time to go into emergency mode."

https://www.un.org/sg/en/node/260645

Cooler Cities
The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) is a global authority for setting the environmental agenda. It

promotes the coherent implementation of the environmental dimension of sustainable development within the United

Nations system and serves as an authoritative advocate for the global environment. "Beating the Heat: A Sustainable

Cooling Handbook for Cities" is a guide that offers planners an encyclopedia of proven options to help cool cities. To

develop the handbook, UNEP collaborated with the Clean Cooling Collaborative, Cool Coalition, Global Covenant of

Mayors for Climate and Energy, Rocky Mountain Institute, and Mission Innovation.

https://www.unep.org/resources/report/beating-heat-sustainable-cooling-handbook-cities

Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID–19)
The United Nations maintains "COVID–19 Response" web pages where it posts informational resources and its most

recent updates on the pandemic.

https://www.un.org/en/coronavirus
The Department of Global Communications has posted the photo essay "We're All in This Together" as part of the

United Nations' "COVID–19 Response" section on its website.

https://www.un.org/en/coronavirus/covid-19-photo-essay-we%E2%80%99re-all-together

Documents
Launched in 1993 and updated in 2016, the Official Document System (ODS) is an online database of United Nations

documents that has full-text, born-digital documents published from 1993 onward. The ODS also includes scanned

documents that were published between 1946 and 1993. Documents are available in the official languages of the

United Nations. Some documents are also available in German.

https://documents.un.org/prod/ods.nsf/home.xsp

Empowering the Next Generation
In the face of crises whose effects are global in scale and scope, the Department of Economic and Social Affairs

identifies an important source of hope: the next generation because it is different.

https://www.un.org/development/desa/dspd/2019/02/the-generation-that-can-change-the-world-if-we-let-them

Essential UN Information
"The Essential UN" web page brings together in one place the most important information on United Nations activities,
funding, priorities, and programs.

https://www.un.org/en/essential-un

Food Loss and Waste
The Food and Agriculture Organization maintains the "Food Loss and Waste Database," which is the largest online

collection of data on food loss, food waste, and the causes that are reported for the loss and waste. The data and

information come from openly accessible reports and studies that measure food loss and waste across food products,

stages of the value chain, and geographical areas. The database may be used by anyone who seeks information on

food loss and waste and who has Internet access.

http://www.fao.org/platform-food-loss-waste/flw-data/en

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
Dag Hammarskjöld Library staff members post answers to FAQs.

https://ask.un.org

Global Issues
The "Global Issues" web page offers convenient access to a trove of information on aging, atomic energy, children,

climate change, decolonization, democracy, food, population, refugees, water, women, and more.

https://www.un.org/en/global-issues

History
More than 75 years after its creation, the United Nations continues to support international peace and security efforts,

give humanitarian assistance to those in need, protect human rights, and uphold international law. "The History of the

United Nations" web page tells the story of those efforts.

https://www.un.org/en/about-us/history-of-the-un

Human Rights
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights and a short history of this document are posted on the United Nation's

website.

https://www.un.org/en/about-us/universal-declaration-of-human-rights

International Maritime Organization (IMO)
The IMO is a specialized United Nations agency whose responsibilities include shipping safety and security and

preventing ships from polluting the atmosphere and marine environment. The work of the IMO supports the United

Nations' Sustainable Development Goals. The "Affiliated Bodies and Programmes" web page has a collection of links

that provide convenient access to the websites of IMO affiliates and IMO programs.

http://www.imo.org/en/About/Pages/Affiliated-Bodies-and-Programmes.aspx

Library
The Dag Hammarskjöld Library is accessible online.

https://www.un.org/library
Mine Awareness
The United Nations Mine Action Service observes International Mine Awareness Day each year on April 4th. To hear

the United Nation's global advocate's 2019 message, watch the 3-minute video.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LcWiyvxpkwE

News
The News Centre provides breaking news coverage of developments around the United Nations system, offering quick

access to news-related products and resources.

https://news.un.org/en

Non-English Readers
The United Nations provides versions of its website in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian, and Spanish. Language options

are available on the site's welcome page.

http://www.un.org

Official Languages
The United Nations has designated six languages as official languages: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian, and

Spanish. The work of the United Nations includes communicating issues of global importance clearly and concisely.

Accuracy in interpretation and translation makes the difference between communication that is clear and concise and

communication that distorts and rambles.

https://www.un.org/en/our-work/official-languages

Plastic Pollution
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations released its "Assessment of Agricultural Plastics and

Their Sustainability—A Call For Action" (2021). In the assessment's foreword, the organization's Deputy Director Maria

Helena Semedo wrote: "Soils are one of the main receptors of agricultural plastics and are known to contain larger

quantities of microplastics than oceans. . . . This report serves as a loud call to coordinated and decisive action to

facilitate good management practices and curb the disastrous use of plastics across the agricultural sectors."

https://www.fao.org/publications/card/en/c/CB7856EN

Publications
Books, reports, and data are available from the online bookshop.

https://shop.un.org

Social Media
Official United Nations social media include Facebook, Flickr, Tumblr, Twitter, YouTube, and other accounts.

https://www.un.org/en/get-involved/social-media

Sustainable Development
The United Nations promotes 17 sustainable development goals to end poverty, to ensure prosperity for all people,

and to protect Earth's biosphere, as part of a development agenda.

https://sdgs.un.org/goals
     System Organizations Directory
     The Charter of the United Nations established the organizations that constitute the United Nations system. The

     directory presents these organizations in categories with links to their web pages.

     https://unsceb.org/structure

     Web TV / Video
     The United Nation's Web TV Channel is accessible around the clock. Its programming includes selected live broadcasts

     of United Nations meetings and events and prerecorded video features and documentaries on various global issues.

     https://media.un.org/en/webtv

     Wildfires
     The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) is a global authority for setting the environmental agenda. It

     promotes the coherent implementation of the environmental dimension of sustainable development within the United

     Nations system and serves as an authoritative advocate for the global environment. "Spreading Like Wildfire—The

     Rising Threat of Extraordinary Landscape Fires" is a report to which over 50 experts from government agencies,

     international organizations, and research institutions, contributed worldwide. Their conclusions indicate that humans

     face an extreme situation that must be addressed synchronically, at the local and on a global level, with an immediate

     and robust response, and in ways that support ecosystems and synergize with their natural processes.

     https://www.unep.org/resources/report/spreading-wildfire-rising-threat-extraordinary-landscape-fires

        The Sources of Information were updated 2–2022.




Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                                      World Bank Group
                                  International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
                                International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes
                                           International Development Association
                                              International Finance Corporation
                                         Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency




The United States Government Manual




     WORLD BANK GROUP
    Headquarters: 1818 H Street NW., Washington, DC 20433


    202-473-1000

    202-477-6391

    http://www.worldbank.org
  PRESIDENT                                                                                 David R. Malpass


http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/leadership/managers



  The above personnel table was updated 5–2022.



The World Bank Group promotes shared global prosperity and seeks to end extreme poverty.


The World Bank Group (WBG) comprises five institutions: the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development

(IBRD), the International Development Association (IDA), the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the Multilateral

Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), and the International Centre for the Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID).

These WBG institutions work together to help developing countries find answers to tough global and local

development challenges that range from climate change adaptation to food security, to fighting corruption and more.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/what-we-do
The IBRD and the IDA serve as the WBG's primary economic and social development institutions. Together, these two

development banks constitute the World Bank. Donor countries and countries with borrowing rights, a total of 189

countries, support and benefit from the World Bank. The activities of the IFC, MIGA, and ICSID complement those of

the IBRD and IDA.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/leadership



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

A–Z Topics
An alphabetical list of topics helps visitors learn about the WBG's many and diverse activities.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic

Access to Information
In 2010, the World Bank adopted its landmark disclosure policy: The World Bank Policy on Access to Information. It

also has undertaken numerous initiatives to inform and educate the public. These open access initiatives include Open

Data, Open Finances, and Open Knowledge Repository.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/access-to-information

Blog
The World Bank posts items by featured bloggers on its website.

http://blogs.worldbank.org

Career Opportunities
The WBG typically hires people with strong academic backgrounds, a broad understanding of development issues,

and international work experience. In more than 170 countries, it employees professionals who specialize in economics,
education, engineering, finance, public health, and many other fields. About 40 percent of World Bank staff members

work in more than 110 developing countries.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/careers

Climate Change
GAS FLARING—The World Bank's Global Gas Flaring Reduction Partnership is a multidonor trust fund whose purpose

is to end routine gas flaring at oil production sites around the world. Participating in the partnership are governments,

multilateral organizations, and oil companies.

https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/gasflaringreduction/about
INVESTMENT FUNDS—Since the inception of this climate finance mechanism, donor countries have contributed over

8 billion dollars in support of scaling up mitigation and adaptation action in developing and middle-income countries.

The World Bank holds these public resources in trust and disburses them as grants, concessional loans, and risk

mitigation instruments to recipient countries through multilateral development banks.

https://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/
MIGRATION—The World Bank report "Groundswell: Preparing for Internal Climate Migration" (2018) found that by

midcentury the adverse effects of climate change in three densely populated regions of the world could force more

than 140 million people to relocate within their respective countries. Concerted action, including global reductions in

greenhouse gas emissions and development planning, could reduce internal migration by as much as 80 percent.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2018/03/19/meet-the-human-faces-of-climate-migration

Contact Information
General information for contacting the World Bank is available on its website.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/contacts

Countries / Regions
The "Where We Work" web page allows visitors to browse WGB locations by region or country group.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/country

Data
The World Bank's website allows free and open access to global development data.

http://data.worldbank.org
The microdata library facilitates access to data collected through sample surveys of households, business

establishments, and other facilities. These sets of microdata may also be derived from agricultural, housing, or

population censuses or through an administrative data collection processes. The Library also contains supporting

documentation from censuses and surveys that the World Bank and other international organizations, statistical

agencies, and other agencies in low and middle-income countries conducted or supported.

http://microdata.worldbank.org/index.php/home

Enabling Business
The World Bank Group is formulating a new approach to assessing the business and investment climate in economies

around the world.
https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/business-enabling-environment

Food Security
On April 19, 2022, at an event that the U.S. Department of the Treasury hosted, WBG President David R. Malpass

delivered remarks on “Tackling Food Insecurity: The Challenge and Call To Action." His remarks included the following

paragraph: "We see a deepening of the crisis in the following numbers: The World Bank food price index reached an

all-time high, rising 11.5 percent in March, a year-on-year increase of 37 percent. Fertilizer prices also surged in March,

up nearly 20 percent since January. The cost of urea has tripled since January 2021. We also see a shift in relative

prices, with food prices going up more than CPI. Projections show this trend continuing."

https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/speech/2022/04/19/remarks-by-world-bank-group-president-david-malpass-to-
the-u-s-treasury-s-event-on-tackling-food-insecurity-the-challeng

History
Founded in 1944, and not long thereafter referred to as the World Bank, the International Bank for Reconstruction and

Development (IBRD) expanded to become a group of five development institutions. In the aftermath of World War II,

IBRD loans helped countries overcome the devastation and rebuild. Over time, the Bank's focus shifted from

reconstruction to development, particularly to development of infrastructure: dams, electrical grids, irrigation systems,

and roads. To learn more about the inception and growth of the World Bank, visit the "History" web page.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/history
The "World Bank Group Archives" website supports the institutional memory of the World Bank Group and provides

access to records of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Development

Association. The website also features online historical resources and information products: exhibits on the Archives'

collection and World Bank history, General International Standard Archival Description (ISAD(G)) finding aids, and

transcripts of oral history interviews.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/archives

Libraries
The Library Network is a group of libraries and resource centers that support the work of the World Bank Group

(WBG) and International Monetary Fund (IMF). The libraries are located in Washington, DC; however, their services

extend to resident missions and country offices.

https://library.worldbankimflib.org/en/about-us.html

News
The World Bank posts press releases and other newsworthy items on its website.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/news

Open Learning Campus
The Open Learning Campus offers educational opportunities that allow diverse audiences to learn at their own pace. It

helps prepare people seeking to address the tough development challenges of the 21st century.

https://olc.worldbank.org

Organizational Chart
The World Bank posts its organizational chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/404071412346998230/wbg-org-chart.pdf

Partnerships
The World Bank participates in global partnerships. Visit the "Partners" web page to learn about some of them.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/partners

Podcasts
The World Bank's "All Multimedia" web page allows visitors to access a trove of podcasts on diverse topics: climate

change, energy development, food, indigenous communities, immigration and forced displacement, pollution,

sanitation, sustainability, tourism and more.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/multimedia?multimedia_class_exact=Audio&qterm=&lang_exact=English

Poverty / Inequality
The "Poverty and Inequality Platform" is a website that allows visitors to access the World Bank Group's most recent

data on inequality, poverty, and shared prosperity.

https://pip.worldbank.org/home

Projects
The "Projects and Operations" web page allows visitors to browse or search for projects by country or area, sector, or

theme.

http://projects.worldbank.org

Publications / Research
The "Open Knowledge Repository" allows users to browse and search for thousands of publications.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/reference

Social Media
FACEBOOK—The World Bank has an account.

https://www.facebook.com/worldbank
TWITTER—The World Bank tweets announcements and other newsworthy items.

https://twitter.com/worldbank
YOUTUBE—The World Bank posts videos on its channel.

https://www.youtube.com/WorldBank

Speaker's Bureau
The Speaker's Bureau serves as the official liaison between the World Bank Group and its visitors, who include business

leaders, governmental representatives, students and teachers, youth organizations, and other professionals.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/speakers-bureau | Email: speakersbureau@worldbank.org

  The Sources of Information were updated 5–2022.
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) officially came into existence in 1944. It

promotes economic, social, and environmental progress in developing nations by reducing poverty.


The Bank lends funds at market-determined interest rates, provides advice, and serves as a catalyst to stimulate

outside investments. Its resources come primarily from funds raised in the world capital markets, its retained

earnings, and repayments on its loans.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/what-we-do/brief/ibrd



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Activities and Achievements
The IBRD helps countries craft policies and shape investments, manage crises and prevent them, and create

markets and access additional resources. To learn about the results of these IBRD activities, visit the "Results"

web page.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/who-we-are/news/campaigns/2018/ibrd-results-page

Countries
The Governments of the 189 member countries own the IBRD.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/leadership/members

Organizational Chart
The IBRD and International Development Association are represented on the World Bank's organizational chart,

which is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/404071412346998230/wbg-org-chart.pdf

International Centre                                         for          Settlement                       of
Investment Disputes
Headquarters: 1818 H Street NW., MSN J2-200, Washington, DC 20433


202-458-1534

202-522-2615

http://icsid.worldbank.org/en | Email: ICSIDsecretariat@worldbank.org


  PRESIDENT                                               David R. Malpass


  Secretary-General                                       Megan Kinnear


https://icsid.worldbank.org/about/secretariat/staff
  The above personnel table was updated 7–2021.



The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) is an autonomous international institution

and a World Bank Group affiliate that provides an independent forum for conciliation and arbitration of
international investment disputes. By providing an impartial system for dispute settlement, it facilitates foreign

investment. The Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other

States established the ICSID, setting forth its mandate, organization, and core functions. The executive directors

of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development formulated this multilateral treaty, which entered

into force in 1966, to further the World Bank's goal of promoting international investment.


The ICSID has a composite structure comprising an administrative council and secretariat. Each member state

holds one seat on the Administrative Council, whose mandate is to address organizational matters related to

ICSID's institutional framework. The Secretariat consists of about 70 professionals who administer arbitration and

conciliation cases and support other ICSID activities.

https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/about/default.aspx



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archives
The ICSID archives contain annual reports, events, featured videos, model clauses, and news and

announcements.

https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/resources/Archives.aspx

Contact Information
General information for contacting ICSID is available online.

https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/about/Contact-us.aspx

Convention
The ICSID Convention is available in 20 languages; however, its official version is available in 3 languages:

English, French, and Spanish.

https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/resources/ICSID-Convention-in-other-Languages.aspx

Member States
A database of ICSID member states is available online.

https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/about/Database-of-Member-States.aspx

Publications
The ICSID publishes specialized texts on international investment law and investment dispute resolution

procedures.
https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/resources/ICSID-Publications.aspx

Related Websites
A list of links to public and commercial websites that may be useful for research in the field of international

investment law and practice is available on the ICSID website.

https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/resources/Other-Related-Websites.aspx

Resources Overview
The ICSID Secretariat promotes greater awareness of the ICSID dispute settlement process and the development

of international law on foreign investment by posting information resources on its website.

https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/Resources/default.aspx

Social Media
The ICSID tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/icsid

Structure
This separation of functions within the ICSID enhances impartiality and independence in the resolution of

disputes.

https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/about/Structure.aspx

International Development Association
Established in 1960, the International Development Association (IDA) reduces poverty by providing loans, or

"credits," and grants for programs that boost economic growth, improve living conditions, and reduce

inequalities. The IDA complements the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), which is

the original lending arm of the World Bank. The IDA and IBRD share the same staff and headquarters and

evaluate projects using the same standards.


The IDA lends money on concessional terms, which means that IDA loans, or credits, have a zero or very low

interest charge and repayments extend from 25 to 38 years. The IDA also provides grants to countries at risk of

debt distress. In addition to loans and grants, the IDA provides significant levels of debt relief.

http://ida.worldbank.org/about/who-we-are



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Articles of Agreement
The IDA's Articles of Agreement became effective in 1960. They are available online in Portable Document

Format.

http://ida.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/IDA-articles-of-agreement.pdf

Climate
Climate change threatens poorer people globally, with the potential to force more than 100 million people back
into poverty by 2030. The IDA is making plans to help manage this threat of enormous scope and scale.

http://ida.worldbank.org/theme/climate

Countries
Seventy-five countries are eligible to receive IDA resources.

http://ida.worldbank.org/about/borrowing-countries
A list of the approximately 50 contributor countries is available on the IDA's website.

http://ida.worldbank.org/about/contributor-countries

Crisis Financing
The IDA has a history of involvement in various aspects of crisis response, including providing financial support.

http://ida.worldbank.org/financing/crisis-financing

History
Australia, Canada, China, Germany, India, Italy, Malaysia, Norway, Pakistan, Sudan, Sweden, Thailand, United

Kingdom, United States, and Vietnam launched the IDA on September 24, 1960, with an initial funding of 912.7

million dollars.

http://ida.worldbank.org/about/history

News / Publications
The IDA posts press releases and other newsworthy items online.

http://ida.worldbank.org/news

Organizational Chart
The IDA and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development are included on the World Bank's

organizational chart, which is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/404071412346998230/wbg-org-chart.pdf

Resources / Policy
Every 3 years, donors meet to replenish IDA resources and review its policy framework. The replenishment

process typically consists of four formal meetings over the course of 1 year. Four IDA18 replenishment meetings

were held in 2016.

http://ida.worldbank.org/financing/replenishments/ida18-overview

Results
The IDA's website features an overview of the results of the IDA's efforts in the world's poorest countries by

country, theme, and topic.

http://ida.worldbank.org/results

Social Media
The IDA has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/IDA.WBG/?ref=nf
The IDA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6A79B12D02618711&feature=plcp

International Finance Corporation
Headquarters: 2121 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20433


202-473-7711

202-974-4384

http://www.ifc.org


  PRESIDENT                                               David R. Malpass


  Managing Director                                       Makhtar Diop


https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/CORP_EXT_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/About+IFC_New/Leader
ship/



  The above personnel table was updated 7–2021.



The International Finance Corporation (IFC), a World Bank Group institution, was established in 1956 to promote

productive private enterprise in developing member countries.


The Corporation pursues its objective principally through direct debt and equity investments in projects that

establish new businesses or expand, modify, or diversify existing businesses. It also encourages cofinancing by

other investors and lenders.


Additionally, to developing member countries, the IFC provides advisory services and technical assistance in

capital market development, corporate restructuring, foreign investment, and privatization.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/about+ifc_new



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Articles of Agreement
The official version of the IFC Articles of Agreement is the English version that each member country signs.

Translations of the official version are available in Arabic, Chinese, French, Japanese, Portuguese, Russian, and

Spanish.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/CORP_EXT_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/About+IFC_New/IFC+G
overnance/Articles/

Bonds
In 2013, the IFC helped transform the green bond market by issuing a 1 billion dollar global benchmark green

bond. The IFC is currently investing in the Green Cornerstone Bond Fund, which buys green bonds issued by
banks in Africa, Asia, Central Asia, Eastern Europe, Latin America, and the Middle East. The Green Cornerstone

Bond Fund is a partnership involving the IFC and the European asset manager Amundi.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/results/2017/12/01/green-bonds

Career Opportunities
The IFC posts career opportunities.

http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/Careers_Ext_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/IFC+Careers

Climate
The IFC is increasing its climate-related investments to address climate change—a fundamental threat to

development, with the potential to impact millions, threatening agricultural livelihoods, increasing the incidence

of natural disasters and affecting water, energy, and food supplies.

http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/Topics_Ext_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/Climate+Business

Contact Information
General information is available on the IFC's website.

http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/about+ifc_new/contacts

Countries
The IFC operates in more than 100 countries.

http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/about+ifc_new/Where+We+
Work

Expertise
The IFC's areas of expertise include agribusiness and forestry; financial institutions; funds; health and education;

infrastructure; manufacturing; oil, gas, and mining; public-private partnerships; telecoms, media, and technology;

and tourism, retail, and property.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/CORP_EXT_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/solutions/expertise

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The IFC posts answers to FAQs online.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/about+ifc_new/faqs

Funding
The IFC raises funds for lending activities by issuing debt obligations in international capital markets. IFC

borrowings are diversified by country, currency, source, and maturity to enhance flexibility and cost effectiveness.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/CORP_EXT_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/About+IFC_New/IFC+G
overnance/Funding/

History
Opened in 1956 with $100 million in capital, the IFC has been creating jobs and raising living standards for six

decades.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/CORP_EXT_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/About+IFC_New/IFC+Hi
story/

Media
The "Communications Contacts" page contains communications and public affairs contact information, as well as

contact information associated with IFC accountability and the various spheres of IFC expertise and regional

activity.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/NEWS_EXT_CONTENT/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/News+and+Events/M
edia+Contacts/

Organizational Chart
The IFC posts its organizational chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/7973ac004a4483708622bf10cc70d6a1/IFC+organization+chart.pdf?
MOD=AJPERES

Press Releases
The IFC posts press releases in Arabic, Bahasa Indonesia, Chinese, English, French, German, Japanese,

Montenegrin, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Tajik, Turkish, and Ukranian.

https://ifcextapps.ifc.org/ifcext/pressroom/ifcpressroom.nsf/MorePressReleases/?OpenView&Start=1&Count=25

Publications
A search tool allows visitors to search IFC publications by language, region, and topic. The advanced option

allows users to refine their search by IFC department, industry, and publication type.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/publications_ext_content/ifc_external_publication_site/publications

Social Media
The IFC has a Facebook account.

https://www.facebook.com/IFCwbg
The IFC tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

https://twitter.com/IFC_org
The IFC posts videos on its YouTube channel.

https://www.youtube.com/user/IFCvideocasts

Stories
The IFC posts stories highlighting the achievements of its clients who affect people’s lives in a favorable and

notable way.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/NEWS_EXT_CONTENT/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/News+and+Events/N
ews/Impact-Stories

Sustainability
The IFC partners with industry and other stakeholders to find ways that open opportunities for economically,

socially, and environmentally sustainable private investment.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/Topics_Ext_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/Sustainability-At-IFC
Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
Headquarters: 1818 H Street NW., Washington, DC 20433


202-458-2538

202-522-0316

http://www.miga.org


  PRESIDENT                                                   David R. Malpass


  Executive Vice President                                    Hiroshi Matano


https://www.miga.org/about/management



  The above personnel table was updated 7–2021.



The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), a World Bank Group institution, was formally constituted

in 1988.


Working with public and private insurers, MIGA promotes foreign direct investment in developing countries to

support economic growth, reduce poverty, and improve the quality of people's lives. Due to its status as a World

Bank Group institution, MIGA's guarantees protect investments against noncommercial risks and help investors

gain access to funding sources with improved financial terms and conditions.

https://www.miga.org/who-we-are



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Access to Information
​MIGA’s policy on accessing information defines its obligations to disclose information on itself and its activities.

https://www.miga.org/projects/access-to-information/

Career Opportunities
The MIGA advertises available positions on the World Bank's job vacancies page.

https://www.miga.org/who-we-are/careers

Contact Information
General information is available on the MIGA's website.

https://www.miga.org/contact

Convention
The "Convention Establishing the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency" went into effect on April 12, 1988.

The Council of Governors amended it in 2010. The Convention is available online in Portable Document Format
(PDF).

https://www.miga.org/who-we-are/miga-convention

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The MIGA posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.miga.org/who-we-are/frequently-asked-questions

History
A timeline and short history of the MIGA are available on its website.

https://www.miga.org/who-we-are/history

Member Countries
The names of the 181 member countries—156 developing, 25 industrialized—are available on the MIGA's

website.

https://www.miga.org/who-we-are/member-countries

News
The MIGA posts press releases on its website.

https://www.miga.org/news/press-releases

Organizational Chart
The MIGA posts its organizational chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/268791412196376513/miga.pdf

Projects
The MIGA provides investment insurance, or guarantees, for projects in a variety of sectors, covering all regions

of the world.

https://www.miga.org/projects

Reports
The MIGA posts its annual reports online.

https://www.miga.org/Pages/Resources/Reports/AnnualReports.aspx

Small Investment
The small investment program facilitates investment in small and medium-size enterprises that are active in the

agribusiness, finance, manufacturing, and services sectors. This MIGA program has a streamlined approval

process, which allows investors to acquire MIGA coverage quickly..

https://www.miga.org/investment-guarantees/small-investment-program/
The application for th​e small investment program is available online.

https://www.miga.org/Documents/SIP_Application.pdf#search=SIP%20Application

Social Media
     The MIGA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/miga
     The MIGA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/migaworldbank



Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                International Bank for Reconstruction and Development




The United States Government Manual




     INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
    The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) officially came into existence in 1944. It promotes

    economic, social, and environmental progress in developing nations by reducing poverty.


    The Bank lends funds at market-determined interest rates, provides advice, and serves as a catalyst to stimulate

    outside investments. Its resources come primarily from funds raised in the world capital markets, its retained earnings,

    and repayments on its loans.

    http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/what-we-do/brief/ibrd
     SOURCES OF INFORMATION

     Activities and Achievements
     The IBRD helps countries craft policies and shape investments, manage crises and prevent them, and create markets

     and access additional resources. To learn about the results of these IBRD activities, visit the "Results" web page.

     http://www.worldbank.org/en/who-we-are/news/campaigns/2018/ibrd-results-page

     Countries
     The Governments of the 189 member countries own the IBRD.

     http://www.worldbank.org/en/about/leadership/members

     Organizational Chart
     The IBRD and International Development Association are represented on the World Bank's organizational chart, which

     is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

     http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/404071412346998230/wbg-org-chart.pdf



Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes




The United States Government Manual




     INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR SETTLEMENT OF INVESTMENT DISPUTES
    Headquarters: 1818 H Street NW., MSN J2-200, Washington, DC 20433


    202-458-1534

    202-522-2615

    http://icsid.worldbank.org/en | Email: ICSIDsecretariat@worldbank.org


      PRESIDENT                                                                               David R. Malpass


      Secretary-General                                                                       Megan Kinnear
https://icsid.worldbank.org/about/secretariat/staff



  The above personnel table was updated 7–2021.



The International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID) is an autonomous international institution and a

World Bank Group affiliate that provides an independent forum for conciliation and arbitration of international

investment disputes. By providing an impartial system for dispute settlement, it facilitates foreign investment. The

Convention on the Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States established the

ICSID, setting forth its mandate, organization, and core functions. The executive directors of the International Bank for

Reconstruction and Development formulated this multilateral treaty, which entered into force in 1966, to further the

World Bank's goal of promoting international investment.


The ICSID has a composite structure comprising an administrative council and secretariat. Each member state holds

one seat on the Administrative Council, whose mandate is to address organizational matters related to ICSID's

institutional framework. The Secretariat consists of about 70 professionals who administer arbitration and conciliation

cases and support other ICSID activities.

https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/about/default.aspx



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Archives
The ICSID archives contain annual reports, events, featured videos, model clauses, and news and announcements.

https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/resources/Archives.aspx

Contact Information
General information for contacting ICSID is available online.

https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/about/Contact-us.aspx

Convention
The ICSID Convention is available in 20 languages; however, its official version is available in 3 languages: English,

French, and Spanish.

https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/resources/ICSID-Convention-in-other-Languages.aspx

Member States
A database of ICSID member states is available online.

https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/about/Database-of-Member-States.aspx

Publications
The ICSID publishes specialized texts on international investment law and investment dispute resolution procedures.

https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/resources/ICSID-Publications.aspx
     Related Websites
     A list of links to public and commercial websites that may be useful for research in the field of international investment

     law and practice is available on the ICSID website.

     https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/resources/Other-Related-Websites.aspx

     Resources Overview
     The ICSID Secretariat promotes greater awareness of the ICSID dispute settlement process and the development of

     international law on foreign investment by posting information resources on its website.

     https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/Resources/default.aspx

     Social Media
     The ICSID tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/icsid

     Structure
     This separation of functions within the ICSID enhances impartiality and independence in the resolution of disputes.

     https://icsid.worldbank.org/en/Pages/about/Structure.aspx



Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                           Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                  Search                                                    Search
                                                                                            Search




                                             International Development Association




The United States Government Manual




     INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
    Established in 1960, the International Development Association (IDA) reduces poverty by providing loans, or "credits,"

    and grants for programs that boost economic growth, improve living conditions, and reduce inequalities. The IDA

    complements the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), which is the original lending arm of

    the World Bank. The IDA and IBRD share the same staff and headquarters and evaluate projects using the same

    standards.


    The IDA lends money on concessional terms, which means that IDA loans, or credits, have a zero or very low interest

    charge and repayments extend from 25 to 38 years. The IDA also provides grants to countries at risk of debt distress.

    In addition to loans and grants, the IDA provides significant levels of debt relief.
http://ida.worldbank.org/about/who-we-are



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Articles of Agreement
The IDA's Articles of Agreement became effective in 1960. They are available online in Portable Document Format.

http://ida.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/IDA-articles-of-agreement.pdf

Climate
Climate change threatens poorer people globally, with the potential to force more than 100 million people back into

poverty by 2030. The IDA is making plans to help manage this threat of enormous scope and scale.

http://ida.worldbank.org/theme/climate

Countries
Seventy-five countries are eligible to receive IDA resources.

http://ida.worldbank.org/about/borrowing-countries
A list of the approximately 50 contributor countries is available on the IDA's website.

http://ida.worldbank.org/about/contributor-countries

Crisis Financing
The IDA has a history of involvement in various aspects of crisis response, including providing financial support.

http://ida.worldbank.org/financing/crisis-financing

History
Australia, Canada, China, Germany, India, Italy, Malaysia, Norway, Pakistan, Sudan, Sweden, Thailand, United Kingdom,

United States, and Vietnam launched the IDA on September 24, 1960, with an initial funding of 912.7 million dollars.

http://ida.worldbank.org/about/history

News / Publications
The IDA posts press releases and other newsworthy items online.

http://ida.worldbank.org/news

Organizational Chart
The IDA and International Bank for Reconstruction and Development are included on the World Bank's organizational

chart, which is available in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/404071412346998230/wbg-org-chart.pdf

Resources / Policy
Every 3 years, donors meet to replenish IDA resources and review its policy framework. The replenishment process

typically consists of four formal meetings over the course of 1 year. Four IDA18 replenishment meetings were held in

2016.
     http://ida.worldbank.org/financing/replenishments/ida18-overview

     Results
     The IDA's website features an overview of the results of the IDA's efforts in the world's poorest countries by country,

     theme, and topic.

     http://ida.worldbank.org/results

     Social Media
     The IDA has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/IDA.WBG/?ref=nf
     The IDA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6A79B12D02618711&feature=plcp



Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                         Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                Search                                                    Search
                                                                                          Search




                                             International Finance Corporation




The United States Government Manual




     INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION
    Headquarters: 2121 Pennsylvania Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20433


    202-473-7711

    202-974-4384

    http://www.ifc.org


      PRESIDENT                                                                             David R. Malpass


      Managing Director                                                                     Makhtar Diop
https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/CORP_EXT_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/About+IFC_New/Leadership/



  The above personnel table was updated 7–2021.



The International Finance Corporation (IFC), a World Bank Group institution, was established in 1956 to promote

productive private enterprise in developing member countries.


The Corporation pursues its objective principally through direct debt and equity investments in projects that establish

new businesses or expand, modify, or diversify existing businesses. It also encourages cofinancing by other investors

and lenders.


Additionally, to developing member countries, the IFC provides advisory services and technical assistance in capital

market development, corporate restructuring, foreign investment, and privatization.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/about+ifc_new



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Articles of Agreement
The official version of the IFC Articles of Agreement is the English version that each member country signs.

Translations of the official version are available in Arabic, Chinese, French, Japanese, Portuguese, Russian, and Spanish.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/CORP_EXT_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/About+IFC_New/IFC+Govern
ance/Articles/

Bonds
In 2013, the IFC helped transform the green bond market by issuing a 1 billion dollar global benchmark green bond.

The IFC is currently investing in the Green Cornerstone Bond Fund, which buys green bonds issued by banks in Africa,

Asia, Central Asia, Eastern Europe, Latin America, and the Middle East. The Green Cornerstone Bond Fund is a

partnership involving the IFC and the European asset manager Amundi.

http://www.worldbank.org/en/results/2017/12/01/green-bonds

Career Opportunities
The IFC posts career opportunities.

http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/Careers_Ext_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/IFC+Careers

Climate
The IFC is increasing its climate-related investments to address climate change—a fundamental threat to

development, with the potential to impact millions, threatening agricultural livelihoods, increasing the incidence of

natural disasters and affecting water, energy, and food supplies.

http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/Topics_Ext_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/Climate+Business

Contact Information
General information is available on the IFC's website.

http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/about+ifc_new/contacts

Countries
The IFC operates in more than 100 countries.

http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/about+ifc_new/Where+We+Work

Expertise
The IFC's areas of expertise include agribusiness and forestry; financial institutions; funds; health and education;

infrastructure; manufacturing; oil, gas, and mining; public-private partnerships; telecoms, media, and technology; and

tourism, retail, and property.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/CORP_EXT_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/solutions/expertise

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The IFC posts answers to FAQs online.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/corp_ext_content/ifc_external_corporate_site/about+ifc_new/faqs

Funding
The IFC raises funds for lending activities by issuing debt obligations in international capital markets. IFC borrowings

are diversified by country, currency, source, and maturity to enhance flexibility and cost effectiveness.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/CORP_EXT_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/About+IFC_New/IFC+Govern
ance/Funding/

History
Opened in 1956 with $100 million in capital, the IFC has been creating jobs and raising living standards for six decades.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/CORP_EXT_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/About+IFC_New/IFC+History/

Media
The "Communications Contacts" page contains communications and public affairs contact information, as well as

contact information associated with IFC accountability and the various spheres of IFC expertise and regional activity.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/NEWS_EXT_CONTENT/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/News+and+Events/Media+
Contacts/

Organizational Chart
The IFC posts its organizational chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/7973ac004a4483708622bf10cc70d6a1/IFC+organization+chart.pdf?
MOD=AJPERES

Press Releases
The IFC posts press releases in Arabic, Bahasa Indonesia, Chinese, English, French, German, Japanese, Montenegrin,

Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Tajik, Turkish, and Ukranian.

https://ifcextapps.ifc.org/ifcext/pressroom/ifcpressroom.nsf/MorePressReleases/?OpenView&Start=1&Count=25

Publications
     A search tool allows visitors to search IFC publications by language, region, and topic. The advanced option allows

     users to refine their search by IFC department, industry, and publication type.

     https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/publications_ext_content/ifc_external_publication_site/publications

     Social Media
     The IFC has a Facebook account.

     https://www.facebook.com/IFCwbg
     The IFC tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

     https://twitter.com/IFC_org
     The IFC posts videos on its YouTube channel.

     https://www.youtube.com/user/IFCvideocasts

     Stories
     The IFC posts stories highlighting the achievements of its clients who affect people’s lives in a favorable and notable

     way.

     https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/NEWS_EXT_CONTENT/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/News+and+Events/News/I
     mpact-Stories

     Sustainability
     The IFC partners with industry and other stakeholders to find ways that open opportunities for economically, socially,

     and environmentally sustainable private investment.

     https://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/Topics_Ext_Content/IFC_External_Corporate_Site/Sustainability-At-IFC



Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us



Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
                                          Welcome to the United States Government Manual




  Getting Started
To begin searching within the

Government Manual simply type

in a keyword or phrase

to find your match.




                                 Search                                                    Search
                                                                                           Search




                                          Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency




The United States Government Manual




     MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY
    Headquarters: 1818 H Street NW., Washington, DC 20433


    202-458-2538

    202-522-0316

    http://www.miga.org


      PRESIDENT                                                                              David R. Malpass


      Executive Vice President                                                               Hiroshi Matano
https://www.miga.org/about/management



  The above personnel table was updated 7–2021.



The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), a World Bank Group institution, was formally constituted in

1988.


Working with public and private insurers, MIGA promotes foreign direct investment in developing countries to support

economic growth, reduce poverty, and improve the quality of people's lives. Due to its status as a World Bank Group

institution, MIGA's guarantees protect investments against noncommercial risks and help investors gain access to

funding sources with improved financial terms and conditions.

https://www.miga.org/who-we-are



SOURCES OF INFORMATION

Access to Information
​MIGA’s policy on accessing information defines its obligations to disclose information on itself and its activities.

https://www.miga.org/projects/access-to-information/

Career Opportunities
The MIGA advertises available positions on the World Bank's job vacancies page.

https://www.miga.org/who-we-are/careers

Contact Information
General information is available on the MIGA's website.

https://www.miga.org/contact

Convention
The "Convention Establishing the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency" went into effect on April 12, 1988. The

Council of Governors amended it in 2010. The Convention is available online in Portable Document Format (PDF).

https://www.miga.org/who-we-are/miga-convention

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
The MIGA posts answers to FAQs on its website.

https://www.miga.org/who-we-are/frequently-asked-questions

History
A timeline and short history of the MIGA are available on its website.

https://www.miga.org/who-we-are/history

Member Countries
    The names of the 181 member countries—156 developing, 25 industrialized—are available on the MIGA's website.

    https://www.miga.org/who-we-are/member-countries

    News
    The MIGA posts press releases on its website.

    https://www.miga.org/news/press-releases

    Organizational Chart
    The MIGA posts its organizational chart in Portable Document Format (PDF) for viewing and downloading.

    http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/268791412196376513/miga.pdf

    Projects
    The MIGA provides investment insurance, or guarantees, for projects in a variety of sectors, covering all regions of the

    world.

    https://www.miga.org/projects

    Reports
    The MIGA posts its annual reports online.

    https://www.miga.org/Pages/Resources/Reports/AnnualReports.aspx

    Small Investment
    The small investment program facilitates investment in small and medium-size enterprises that are active in the

    agribusiness, finance, manufacturing, and services sectors. This MIGA program has a streamlined approval process,

    which allows investors to acquire MIGA coverage quickly..

    https://www.miga.org/investment-guarantees/small-investment-program/
    The application for th​e small investment program is available online.

    https://www.miga.org/Documents/SIP_Application.pdf#search=SIP%20Application

    Social Media
    The MIGA tweets announcements and other newsworthy items on Twitter.

    https://twitter.com/miga
    The MIGA posts videos on its YouTube channel.

    https://www.youtube.com/migaworldbank



Home


The Government of the United States


About


Contact Us
Privacy


Accessibility


Freedom of Information Act


No FEAR act
