WHO monographs on

selected
medicinal
plants
Volume 4
    WHO
 monographs
  on selected
medicinal plants
     VOLUME 4
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data

WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants. Vol. 4.

1. Plants, Medicinal. 2. Angiosperms. 3. Medicine, Traditional. I. WHO Consultation on Selected Medicinal
     Plants (4th: 2005: Salerno-Paestum, Italy) II. World Health Organization.

ISBN 978 92 4 154705 5                           (NLM classiﬁcation: QV 766)




                                       © World Health Organization 2009

All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization can be obtained from WHO Press,
World Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264;
fax: +41 22 791 4857; e-mail: bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to reproduce or translate
WHO publications – whether for sale or for noncommercial distribution – should be addressed to WHO
Press, at the above address (fax: +41 22 791 4806; e-mail: permissions@who.int).

The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression
of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.

The mention of speciﬁc companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed
or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not
mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial
capital letters.

All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information
contained in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any
kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the
reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.

Printed in Spain
                            Contents




Acknowledgements                                     v
Introduction                                         1
General technical notices                            5

Monographs (in alphabetical order of plant name)
Fructus Agni Casti                                   9
Cortex Berberidis                                   30
Gummi Boswellii                                     48
Semen Cardamomi                                     61
Fructus Chebulae                                    71
Semen Cucurbitae                                    83
Folium Cynarae                                      92
Cortex Granati                                     108
Pericarpium Granati                                117
Folium Guavae                                      127
Lichen Islandicus                                  140
Fructus Macrocarponii                              149
Cortex Magnoliae                                   167
Herba Millefolii                                   179
Fructus Momordicae                                 192
Fructus Myrtilli                                   210
Radix Panacis Quinquefolii                         226
Cortex Phellodendron                               244
Rhizoma Picrorhizae                                258
Oleum Ricini                                       271
Aetheroleum Rosmarini                              284
Folium Rosmarini                                   294
Cortex Salicis                                     309
Fructus Tribuli                                    323
Flos Trifolii                                      335

                                                     iii
 Contents


 Ramulus cum Uncis Uncariae                               353
 Cortex Viburni Prunifolii                                364
 Radix Withaniae                                          373

 Annex 1
 Participants of the Fourth WHO Consultation
 on Selected Medicinal Plants Salerno-Paestum,
 Italy, 3–6 October 2005                                  392
 Annex 2
 Cumulative index (in alphabetical order of plant name)   395
 Annex 3
 Cumulative index (in alphabetical order of plant
 material of interest)                                    397
 Annex 4
 Cumulative index of medicinal plants (in alphabetical
 order of Latin binomial plant name)                      400
 Annex 5
 Cumulative index of major chemical constituents
 (by compound name in alphabetical order)                 406
 Annex 6
 Cumulative index of major chemical constituents
 (ordered by CAS number)                                  430
 Annex 7
 Cumulative index of major chemical constituents
 (ordered by molecular formula)                           437




iv
                     Acknowledgements




Special acknowledgement is due to Professor Norman R. Farnsworth,
Professor Harry H.S. Fong, and Professor Gail B. Mahady of the WHO
Collaborating Centre for Traditional Medicine, College of Pharmacy,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA, for drafting and re-
vising the monographs. Special acknowledgement is also due to Dr Ray-
mond Boudet-Dalbin of the Laboratoire de Chimie Thérapeutique, Uni-
versity of René Descartes, Paris, France, for drawing the chemical
structures and for compiling the index of major chemical constituents in-
cluding information on their molecular formula and CAS numbers. The
photograph for the front cover was kindly provided by the Research
Center for Medicinal Plant Resources, National Institute of Biomedical
Innovation, Tsukuba City, Japan.
    WHO also acknowledges with thanks the valuable work of the ap-
proximately 200 experts including 81 national health authorities, who
provided comments and advice on the draft texts; those who submitted
comments through the World Self-Medication Industry (a nongovern-
mental organization in ofﬁcial relations with WHO) and the Internation-
al Federation of Pharmacists (a nongovernmental organization in ofﬁcial
relations with WHO); and those who participated in the Fourth WHO
Consultation on Selected Medicinal Plants held in Salerno-Paestum, Italy,
in October 2005 to review the monographs (see Annex 1).
    Sincere appreciation is extended to the Ministry of Health of Italy, the
Government of the Province of Campagna, Italy, the Municipal Govern-
ment of Salerno, Italy, and the State University of Salerno, who hosted the
above-mentioned Fourth WHO Consultation and supported it ﬁnancial-
ly. Finally, WHO wishes to express thanks to Mr Raymond Tsai, Boston,
USA, Dr Hermann Garden, Basel, Switzerland, Ms Lynn Morra, Abu
Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, and Ms Tina Lu, Rochester, USA, for their
indispensable assistance in ﬁnalizing and editing the manuscripts.




                                                                               v
                           Introduction




Increasing role of the WHO monographs on selected
medicinal plants
Over the past two decades, there has been a tremendous increase in the
use of herbal medicine; however, there is still a signiﬁcant lack of research
data in this ﬁeld. Therefore since 1999, WHO has published three vol-
umes of the WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants: volume 1
includes 28 monographs; volume 2 contains an additional 30 monographs;
and volume 3 provides 31 monographs. Including the 28 new monographs
published in this volume, a total of 118 monographs in four volumes are
now available on the WHO web site (http://www.who.int/medicinedocs/
en/m/abstract/Js14213e/).
    Due to the diversity of medicinal plants and herbal medicines, it is dif-
ﬁcult for WHO to continue to develop more monographs on commonly
used medicinal plants. One of the objectives of WHO monographs is to
provide a model that will support countries in developing their own na-
tional or regional monographs on medicinal plants or national formular-
ies on herbal medicines. Experts can be trained through the process of
developing country-speciﬁc or regional monographs, and national capac-
ity in this ﬁeld can thus be built up.
    For example, at WHO’s regional training workshop on regulation of
herbal medicines held for the WHO European Region, in September
2003, the participating national drug regulatory authorities of many of the
Newly Independent States (NIS) submitted their request to WHO di-
rectly, for assistance in the development of monographs on medicinal
plants commonly used in NIS.
    In order to respond to their urgent need, WHO initiated a new project
to develop a set of regional (NIS) monographs on commonly used me-
dicinal plants, based on available scientiﬁc information relating to their
safety, efﬁcacy and quality, which will facilitate the creation of effective
and practical regulatory and quality assurance measures on herbal medi-
cines. WHO has been working with 15 national drug regulatory authori-
ties interested in this publication in NIS, Countries of Central and Eastern

                                                                           1
Introduction


Europe (CCEE) and their neighbouring countries, in close collaboration
with the WHO Regional Ofﬁce for Europe. The 13 new monographs on
commonly used medicinal plants in NIS have been drafted based on the
format of the WHO monographs by the experts in NIS and CCEE coun-
tries with the support of experts, national health authorities and NGOs
within and also outside the NIS and CCEE countries. The WHO mono-
graphs on medicinal plants commonly used in NIS have been completed
and will be published soon. Based on the NIS countries model, in the fu-
ture, WHO would like to cooperate with more countries or regions to
develop their monographs on commonly used medicinal plants.

Preparation of monographs for volume 4
Selection of medicinal plants
The selection of medicinal plants for inclusion in the WHO monographs
is based on worldwide use. The medicinal plants selected must meet two
major criteria: (1) they must be in common use in at least two WHO Re-
gions; and (2) there must be sufﬁcient scientiﬁc data available to satisfy
the requirements of the various sections in the monograph format.
    The recommended selection criteria discussed at the Third WHO
Consultation on Selected Medicinal Plants (Ottawa, Canada, July 2001)
were applied to the preparation of volume 4 of the WHO monographs.

Preparation
During the preparation of volume 4, more than 200 experts were involved
in addition to members of WHO’s Expert Advisory Panel on Traditional
Medicine, a signiﬁcant expansion compared to the numbers involved in
the previous three volumes. National drug regulatory authorities in
81 countries participated in the process, again a greater number than for
the previous volumes. This global network of active players facilitated
wider access to the available scientiﬁc references and information, in terms
of both quality and quantity. This considerable level of support contrib-
uted greatly to the efﬁciency of the preparation process.
   The Fourth WHO Consultation on Selected Medicinal Plants was held
in Salerno-Paestum, Italy, in October 2005 to review and ﬁnalize the draft
monographs. Thirty-four experts and drug regulatory authorities from
WHO Member States participated (Annex 1). Following extensive dis-
cussion, 28 of the 32 draft monographs were adopted for inclusion.

Changes in format in volume 4
A description of selected sections of the monographs is given in the
General technical notices, which reﬂect the above-mentioned format

2
                                                                   Introduction


changes. For easy reference, two cumulative indexes are provided as an-
nexes. Annex 2 lists the monographs in alphabetical order of the plant
name, while Annex 3 is arranged according to the plant materials of in-
terest. For the convenience of readers, an additional cumulative list of
plant names (scientiﬁc name followed by family name) which appeared
under the heading “deﬁnition” in each monograph, has been added (An-
nex 4). In response to the recommendation of the Ottawa Consultation
in 2001, a cumulative index of major chemical constituents arranged in
alphabetical order (Annex 5), a cumulative index ordered by Chemical
Abstracts Service (CAS) number (Annex 6) and a cumulative index or-
dered by molecular formula (Annex 7) have also been included in this
volume.
    Under the heading “Geographical distribution”, an attempt has been
made to describe the geographical distribution of the plant, i.e. its natural
distribution, where it is cultivated, and conditions of cultivation, harvest-
ing and storage. This has been a challenge, owing to the lack of data based
on established national good agricultural practices and/or good collection
practices (GACP) for medicinal plants. In 2007, WHO published the
WHO guidelines on good manufacturing practices (GMP) for herbal med-
icines, which provide general technical guidance on obtaining medicinal
plant materials of good quality for the production of herbal medicines in
the overall context of quality assurance and control of herbal medicines.
WHO also compiled new guidelines on assessing quality for safety of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues which were
published in 2007. It is hoped that these guidelines will facilitate the im-
plementation of GMP for herbal medicines at the national level, and the
development of national quality standards/speciﬁcations for herbal medi-
cines, which in turn should bridge the current information gap in this
area.
    At the consultation, the following technical issues were pointed out
for consideration during the preparation of the monographs:
      s Specify extract according to original literature, whenever possible.
      s Posology: as a general rule make clear that a given posology has
        been found either in the report of clinical trials or referring to tra-
        ditional indications. These guidelines have been followed in the
        preparation of this volume wherever possible.
      s Provide posologies as they relate to the speciﬁc indications –
        the dosage forms have to be consistent with their respective
        indications.
      s Speciﬁc posologies should be indicated for speciﬁc uses and dos-
        age forms whenever available.

                                                                             3
Introduction


Purpose and content of monographs
Although the monographs include one section on “medicinal uses” with
three categories of information, the purpose of the monographs was
clearly explained in the introduction to volume 1, and it is unnecessary to
repeat it here. But it should be noted that the word “monograph” is used
as a technical term only. It does not have the same meaning as “mono-
graph” in any type of pharmacopoeia. In addition, it is reiterated here that
this publication is not intended to replace any ofﬁcial compendia such as
pharmacopoeias, formularies or legislative documents.
   It should also be emphasized that the descriptions included in the sec-
tion on medicinal uses should not be taken as implying WHO’s ofﬁcial
endorsement or approval. They merely represent the systematic collec-
tion of scientiﬁc information available at the time of preparation, for the
purpose of information exchange.
   Finally, the Fourth WHO Consultation on selected medicinal plants
recommended WHO to update existing monographs in view of the avail-
ability of new data and of the format change that has been employed for
volumes 3 and 4, and that this process should be given priority over the
development of new monographs, if resources are limited. This volume
might therefore be the last volume of WHO monographs on commonly
used medicinal plants. We should like to express our appreciation to all
the experts, national health authorities, WHO collaborating centres and
NGOs for their efforts, technical contributions and support in the prepa-
ration of the four volumes of WHO monographs on selected medicinal
plants.
   In the future, WHO will consider updates of existing volumes of
monographs and will focus on providing technical assistance for national
capacity building through development of sets of regional and/or sub-
regional monographs by transferring the know-how and by mobilizing
the established global network.


Dr Xiaorui Zhang
Coordinator
Traditional Medicine
Department of Essential Medicines and Pharmaceutical Policy
World Health Organization
Geneva, Switzerland




4
                General technical notices




These WHO monographs are not pharmacopoeial monographs. Their
purpose is to provide scientiﬁc information on the safety, efﬁcacy and
quality control/quality assurance of widely used medicinal plants, in or-
der to facilitate their appropriate use in WHO’s Member States; to pro-
vide models to assist WHO’s Member States in developing their own
monographs or formularies for these and other herbal medicines; and to
facilitate information exchange among WHO’s Member States.
   The format used for volume 4 follows that of volume 3, which was es-
sentially that of volume 2, with the following modiﬁcation made: to keep
relevant sections together, Adverse reactions appears immediately after
the section on Pharmacology. The titles of three categories under the Me-
dicinal uses have been changed to the following:
      s Uses supported by clinical data
      s Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
      s Uses described in traditional medicine
   The Deﬁnition provides the Latin binomial name, the most impor-
tant criterion in quality assurance. Latin binomial synonyms and ver-
nacular names, listed in Synonyms and Selected vernacular names respec-
tively, are names used in commerce or by local consumers. The
monographs place outdated botanical nomenclature in the synonyms
category, based on the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature.
The vernacular names comprise an alphabetical list of selected names
from individual countries worldwide, in particular from areas where the
medicinal plant is in common use. They refer to the medicinal plant itself
not the medicinal plant part, which is identical to the monograph name.
The lists are not complete, but reﬂect the names of the concerned me-
dicinal plant appearing in the ofﬁcial monographs and reference books
consulted and those in the Natural Products Alert (NAPRALERT) data-
base (a database of literature from around the world on ethnomedical,
biological and chemical information on medicinal plants, fungi and ma-
rine organisms, located at the WHO Collaborating Centre for Tradition-
al Medicine at the University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA).
While every effort has been made to delete names referring to the

                                                                        5
General technical notices


medicinal plant part, the relevant section of each monograph may still
include these.
    Geographical distribution is not normally found in ofﬁcial compendia,
but is included here to provide additional quality assurance information.
The detailed botanical description under Description is intended for qual-
ity assurance at the stages of production and collection; the description of
the crude drug material under Plant material of interest is for the same
purpose at the manufacturing and commerce stages.
    General identity tests, Purity tests and Chemical assays are all normal
compendial components included under those headings in these mono-
graphs. Where purity tests do not specify accepted limits, those limits
should be set in accordance with national requirements by the appropri-
ate authorities of Member States.
    Each medicinal plant and the speciﬁc plant part used as crude drug
material contains active or major chemical constituents with a characteris-
tic proﬁle that can be used for chemical quality control and quality assur-
ance. These constituents are described in the Major chemical constituents.
    Descriptions included in Medicinal uses should not be taken as imply-
ing WHO’s ofﬁcial endorsement or approval for such uses. They merely
represent the systematic collection of scientiﬁc information available at
the time of preparation, for information exchange.
    The ﬁrst category, Uses supported by clinical data, includes medical in-
dications that are well established in some countries and have been vali-
dated by clinical studies documented in the scientiﬁc literature. Clinical
trials may be controlled, randomized, double-blind studies, open trials, co-
hort studies or well documented observations on therapeutic applications.
    The second category, Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well estab-
lished documents, includes medicinal uses that are well established in
many countries and are included in ofﬁcial pharmacopoeias or govern-
mental monographs. Uses having a pharmacologically plausible basis are
also included, as well as information resulting from clinical studies that
clearly need to be repeated because of conﬂicting results.
    The third category, Uses described in traditional medicine, refers to
indications described in unofﬁcial pharmacopoeias and other literature,
and to traditional uses. Their appropriateness could not be assessed, be-
cause sufﬁcient data to support the claims could not be found in the lit-
erature. Traditional uses that address severe pathologies, such as cancer,
AIDS, hepatitis, etc., as they relate to these modern biomedical terms,
should only be included under the third heading if pharmacological data
or robust ethnopharmacological/ethnobotanical reports are available to
support the claims.

6
                                                     General technical notices


    The Experimental pharmacology section includes only the results of
investigations that prove or disprove the cited medicinal uses. Abbrevi-
ated details of the best-performed studies have been included in this sec-
tion. Other published experimental data that are not associated with the
medicinal uses have not been included, to avoid confusion.
    The details included in the References have been checked against the
original sources wherever possible. For references in languages other than
English, except for those in Chinese, Japanese and Korean, the title is
given in the original language, except in cases where an English summary
is available.




                                                                            7
8
                     Fructus Agni Casti




Deﬁnition
Fructus Agni Casti consists of the dried, ripe fruits of Vitex agnus-castus
L. (Lamiaceae) (1, 2).

Synonyms
Agnus-castus vulgaris Carr., Vitex verticillata Lam. (3).

Selected vernacular names
Abraham’s balm, Abrahamsstrauch, agneau-chaste, agnocasto, agnos-cas-
to cumune, agnus-castus, angarf, ârbol casto, ârbolde la castidad, arbre au
poivre, athlak, banjankusht, barátcserje, bish barmagh aghaji, chaste tree,
chasteberry, common chaste tree, daribrahim, felfele barry, fanfangosht,
gatileira comum, gattilier, gattilier commun, hab an nasl, hab el fakd, hab
a khouraf, hayit, hemp tree, jurema, kaff maryam, kef-meriem, kerwa,
Keuschbaum, Keuschlamm, kyskhedstrae, lilac chastetree, lygos, Mönchs-
pfeffer, Mönchspfeller, monk’s pepper, monk’s pepper tree, Müllen, non’s
peppertree, panj angosht, panjangusht, pape falso, peperella, petite poivre,
pimiento menor, poivre de moine, poivre sauvage, ranukabija mah, saget-
ree, sauzgatillo, seiyo-ninzin-boku, shajerat Ebrahim, shagareh Ibrahim,
sinduvara, tree of chastity, true chaste tree, vitex, vitiu, wild lavender,
Yemen safrani (1–7).

Geographical distribution
Native to the Mediterranean region and Asia (2, 4, 8). Cultivated in warm
temperate regions of the world, and obtained primarily from Mediterra-
nean countries, especially Albania and Morocco (3, 9).

Description
A small tree or deciduous shrub, approximately 1–6 m in height, with aro-
matic odour. Leaves: opposite, long-petiolate, palmately-compound with
3–9 stipulate leaﬂets; leaﬂet blade linear-lanceolate, apex and base acumi-
nate, 1.5–10.0 cm long, 0.5–2.0 cm wide; the central leaﬂet is the longest,

                                                                          9
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


dark green and glabrous above, velvety white-tomentose below; margin
entire to sparsely toothed. Inﬂorescence: terminal panicle, 12.0–17.5 cm
long, and composed of many sessile-subsessile cymes. Flower: perfect,
campanulate symmetric, white-tomentose; calyx 5-toothed, campanulate,
2.0–2.5 cm long; corolla blue, pink, yellowish or white, salverform,
tube 6–7 mm long, limb 2-lipped, upper lip 2-lobed, lower lip 3-lobed;
stamens 4, exerted, 2 long, 2 short, inserted near top of corolla tube, alter-
nate with corolla lobes; ovary superior, style exerted, stigma biﬁd. Fruit:
drupe, globose to subglobose, 2–4 mm in diameter, reddish (3, 4).

Plant material of interest: dried ripe fruits
General appearance
Mature fruit is round to ovoid, 2–4 mm in diameter, glandular hairy, ex-
tremely hard, reddish-brown to black, slightly rough, and usually accom-
panied by a short pedicel and some smaller, immature fruits in close
groups of up to six. The apex has a slight depression with 4 faint grooves
at right angles to one another. A tubular persistent calyx with 5 short,
often indistinct, teeth covers half to three quarters of the surface. The ca-
lyx is grey-green and tomentose (1).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: faintly aromatic; taste: slightly aromatic and bitter (4, 9, 10).

Microscopic characteristics
Fruit: The exocarp is brown and narrow, consisting of parenchymatous
cells with thin walls and partially ligniﬁed cells with many pitted thicken-
ings on the inside. In surface view, the exocarp shows an epidermis of
polygonal cells with thickened walls and some with large, conspicuous,
simple pits; among the cells are short-stalked glandular trichomes with
unicellular or multicellular heads and some short covering trichomes. In
cross-section, the fruit shows small epicarp cells covered with a thick cu-
ticle. The mesocarp consists of several layers of isodiametric parenchyma
cells with slightly thickened and pitted cell walls; occasionally these cells
have brownish granular contents. The walls of the outer mesocarp cells
are brown whereas those of the inner cells lack colour. The inner meso-
carp consists of ﬁnely pitted sclerenchymatous cells, some with moder-
ately thickened walls, others consisting of isodiametric stone cells with a
small lumen. In the outer part, very small brown-coloured vascular bun-
dles are arranged in a circle. Towards the endocarp the cells become small-
er and their cell walls thicker; the innermost cell layers consist of small
sclereids with a small branched lumen. The seeds are small, having large

10
                                                             Fructus Agni Casti


cotyledons surrounded by thin-walled, large parenchymatous cells that
have ribbed thickenings. The nutritive tissue and the cells of the germ
contain aleurone grains and oil globules. Calyx: composed of outer epi-
dermis of small, isodiametric polygonal cells, densely covered by short,
bent or undulate, unicellular or bicellular covering trichomes of fairly
uniform length; inner epidermal cells a little larger, walls slightly wavy,
some thickened; trichomes absent (1).

Powdered plant material
Greyish to dark brown, with a musty, slightly aromatic odour and un-
pleasant, bitter taste, reminiscent of sage; abundant, more or less isodia-
metric stone cells with walls of varying thickness and degree of pitting;
ovoid ligniﬁed cells with thin bands of reticulate thickening; fragments of
calyx with closely-spaced, short covering and glandular trichomes on the
outer side and birefractive elongated sclereids on the inner side; epicarp
cells with large pits in the outer wall; thin-walled parenchymatous cells
and globules of ﬁxed oil; small glandular trichomes (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (4, 9, 11), thin-layer chromatog-
raphy for the presence of agnuside and aucubin (1), and high-performance
liquid chromatography for the presence of the marker compounds, casticin
and agnuside (1, 12) and for the biologically active diterpenes vitexilactone,
rotundifuran and 6B,7B-diacetoxy-13-hydroxy-labda-8,14-diene (12).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (13).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2.0% (1).

Total ash
Not more than 8.0% (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 2.0% (1).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 8.0% (9).

                                                                            11
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Loss on drying
Not more than 10.0% (1).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (13). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (13)
and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with ref-
erence to contaminants and residues (14) and pesticide residues (15).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (14).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (14).

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 0.05% agnuside and 0.08% casticin calculated on
the basis of dried drug by high-performance liquid chromatography (1).

Major chemical constituents
Up to 2.0% essential oil with bornyl acetate, 1,8-cineol, limonene, A-pinene
and B-pinene being primary constituents. Flavonoids, iridoids and diter-
penes represent major groups of secondary constituents found in the fruit
(4, 5). Casticin, in concentrations up to 0.2% (12) is considered the major
ﬂavonoid, with chrysosplenetin, chrysosplenol D, cynaroside, 5-hydroxy-
3,4´,6,7-tetramethoxyﬂavone, 6-hydroxykaempferol, isorhamnetin, luteo-
lin and luteolin 6-C-glycoside (isoorientin) derivatives being other com-
pounds of this class. Diterpene constituents include vitexilactone
(0.001–0.004%), 6B,7B-diacetoxy-13-hydroxylabda-8,14-diene, rotundi-
furan, and vitexlactam A (3, 5, 16–18). The structures of representative
ﬂavonoids, iridoids and diterpenes are presented below.

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Orally for the symptomatic treatment of gynaecological disorders includ-
ing corpus luteum insufﬁciency and hyperprolactinaemia (19), premen-
strual syndrome (20–25), menstrual irregularities (26, 27), cyclic mastalgia
(28, 29) and also to treat hormonally-induced acne (30, 31).

12
                                                                                              Fructus Agni Casti

                                   OH
                                                                            R1         R2      R3
                                        O
                                            R1
                                                            Casticin    CH3           OCH3     CH3
        O                 O
R3
                                                 Chrysosplenol D            H         OCH3     CH3
     R2                       R2
                                                         Cynaroside         H           H      Glc
                OH        O


                    Glc                                                                                             O
    O            O H                                                         HN                            O
R               H                  Aucubin R = H
                      O                                                 O
                                   Agnuside      R = p-HB
    HO          H
            H                                                          CH3        OH                 CH3       OH
                                        HO                                             CH3                          CH3
                                                                                       H                            H
                          O                         O
p-HB =                    C                                             H    H                      H    H
                               Glc =          OH
                                                                H3C    CH3 O   CH3           H3C   CH3 O   CH3
                                        HO
        HO                                                                        O                            O
                                                    OH
p-hydroxybenzoyl -D-glucopyranosyl                              Vitexlactam A                Vitexilactone


Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Orally for the treatment of endometrial hyperplasia and secondary amen-
orrhoea (32); endocrine-dependent dermatoses (dermatitis symmetrica
dysmenorrhoica (Matzenauer-Polland syndrome)) acne vulgaris, eczema,
acne rosacea), hypermenorrhoea (33), infertility due to hyperprolactin-
aemia and luteal phase defect (34). Used to treat ﬁbroid cysts and infertil-
ity, to stop miscarriages due to progesterone insufﬁciency, to help expel
the placenta after birth (35) and also as a digestive aid, sedative, anti-infec-
tive and for the treatment of hot ﬂushes (36).

Uses described in traditional medicine
Used as an anaphrodisiac, calefacient, contraceptive, emmenagogue, seda-
tive and as a tonic (5).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Receptor binding
Numerous mechanisms have been proposed for the many activities of the
crude drug. Extracts of the fruit have been shown to act as dopamine ago-
nists in vitro and in vivo. The binding of an 80% ethanol extract of the
fruit and various fractions of the extract to the dopamine D2 and other re-
ceptors was evaluated both by radioligand binding studies and by super-

                                                                                                                        13
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


fusion experiments (35). The extract bound to the dopamine D2 and opioid
(μ and K subtype) receptors with a range of median inhibitory concentra-
tions between 40 and 70 μg/ml. Binding was not observed for the hista-
mine H1 and benzodiazepine receptor or the serotonin transporter. Two
diterpenes isolated from the hexane fraction of the extract, rotundifuran
and 6B,7B-diacetoxy-13-hydroxy-labda-8,14-diene, exhibited inhibitory
actions on dopamine D2 receptor binding with a median inhibitory con-
centration of 45 and 79 μg/ml, respectively (16, 37). While lipophilic frac-
tions of the extract bound to the μ- and K-opioid receptors, binding to
D-opioid receptors was inhibited mainly by an aqueous fraction of the ex-
tract. In superfusion experiments, the aqueous fraction of a methanol ex-
tract inhibited the release of acetylcholine in a concentration-dependent
manner. In addition, the D2 receptor antagonist, piperone, antagonized the
effect of the extract suggesting a dopaminergic action mediated by D2 re-
ceptor activation. A labdane diterpene, A-acetoxy-13-hydroxylabdadiene,
isolated from a fruit extract, was found to displace 125I-sulpiride from re-
combinant human D2 receptor binding sites in a dose-dependent manner
(38). This group also demonstrated that rotundifuran, at a concentration
of 100 MM, signiﬁcantly inhibited the secretion of prolactin from cultured
rat pituitary cells (p < 0.05). In addition, rotundifuran inhibited forskolin-
induced prolactin and cyclic adenosine monophosphate secretion in rat
pituitary cells, when added to the medium at a concentration range of 10–
100 MM (38). Bicyclic clerodane diterpenes have also been isolated from
extracts of the fruit and were found to have a 10-fold higher activity than
rotundifuran for inhibiting synthesis of cyclic adenosine monophosphate
and release of prolactin in prolactin secreting cells of the rat pituitary by
binding directly to the D2 receptors (39).
     In membrane preparations from rat corpus striatum, a lyophilized
60% ethanol extract of the fruit at a concentration of 0.5 mg/ml displaced
125
    I-sulpiride from dopamine D2 receptor binding sites in a dose-depen-
dent manner (40). An extract of the fruit as well as the synthetic dopamine
agonist (lisuride) signiﬁcantly inhibited basal and thyroid releasing hor-
mone-stimulated secretion of prolactin by rat pituitary cells in vitro (41).
     A reduction in the concentrations of endogenous opioids during the
late luteal phase has also been proposed as one of the mechanisms which
may induce the symptoms of premenstrual syndrome, such as mood
swings, headaches and water retention (39). A number of fruit extracts and
chromatographic fractions have been tested in vitro for their ability to
displace receptor binding ligands to the M-, K-, and D-opioid receptors (37,
42). The extract and butanol, chloroform and hexane fractions bound to

14
                                                            Fructus Agni Casti


the M- and K-receptors, while the aqueous extract was more active in the
D-opioid receptor. No binding in the orphan opioid receptor was noted.
    Rat brain striatal tissue was preincubated with 3H-choline. Treatment
of the preincubated tissue with a fruit extract inhibited electrically stimu-
lated release of 3H-acetylcholine with a median inhibitory concentration
of 30 Mg/ml (37). The inhibitory effect was reduced by co-incubation of
the tissues with spiroperidol. Atropine partially reduced the inhibitory
effects of the fruit extract suggesting that the extract may also work on the
cholinergic receptors (37).
    Several extracts of chaste berry have been shown to bind to the estro-
gen receptor and have weak estrogenic effects, suggesting that chaste ber-
ry may also affect the estrogen/progesterone balance (43–45). A fruit ex-
tract dose-dependently bound to both estrogen receptor isotypes, but
binding appeared to be more selective for estrogen receptor B than estro-
gen receptor A (45). The extract also dose-dependently inhibited the se-
cretion of progesterone from human granuloma cells (44), an effect that is
mediated by estrogen receptor B, as it can be blocked by tamoxifen. Fur-
thermore one in vivo study has shown that treatment of ovariectomized
rats with an undeﬁned extract of the fruit (dose not stated) increased uter-
ine growth, and the expression of uterine c-myc mRNA levels and liver
ceruloplasm mRNA levels, indicating an estrogenic effect (43).
    A methanol extract of the crude drug bound to both estrogen recep-
tor A and estrogen receptor B, and induced the expression of estrogen-
dependent genes, progesterone receptor, and pS2 (presenelin-2) in
Ishikawa cells (an estrogen-dependent endometrial adenocarcinoma cell
line) (45). Signiﬁcant binding afﬁnity for both estrogen receptor A and
estrogen receptor B, with a median inhibitory concentration of 46.3 μg/
ml and 64.0 μg/ml, respectively, and the afﬁnity for estrogen receptor A
and estrogen receptor B was not signiﬁcantly different (45). In Ishikawa
cells, the extract exhibited weak estrogenic activity, as indicated by up-
regulation of the progesterone receptor mRNA; however alkaline phos-
phatase activity was not changed. In S30 breast cancer cells, the presen-
elin-2 gene was up-regulated in the presence of 20.0 μg/ml of the same
extract. Based on bioassay-guided isolation, the “estrogenic” compo-
nent from the fruit extract was identiﬁed as linoleic acid, which also
bound to estrogen receptor A and estrogen receptor B (46). Like the ex-
tract, linoleic acid also induced expression of the progesterone receptor
mRNA in Ishikawa cells, at a concentration of 1 μg/ml, indicating that
binding produced a biological estrogenic effect in vitro. In addition, low
concentrations of the extract or linoleic acid (10 Mg/ml) up-regulate the
expression of estrogen receptor B mRNA in the estrogen receptor+

                                                                           15
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


hormone-dependent T47D:A18 cell line, a further indication of estrogen-
ic activity (46).
Effect on prolactin secretion
An ethanol extract of the fruit (1:10 with ethanol, 62%), in a range of con-
centrations from 0.41 to 3.3 mg/ml, signiﬁcantly inhibited basal and thy-
roid stimulating hormone-stimulated prolactin secretion from rat primary
pituitary cell cultures in vitro (p < 0.05) (41, 47). At a concentration of
3.3 mg/ml the inhibition was 80% for basal secretion and 65% for stimu-
lated secretion. These results were conﬁrmed in another study demonstrat-
ing signiﬁcant inhibition of prolactin release from rat pituitary cells by the
extract at concentrations of 0.5 mg/ml for basal secretion and 0.125 mg/ml
for stimulated secretions (41). Furthermore, inhibition of prolactin secre-
tion from rat pituitary cells was also observed after treatment with an ex-
tract of the fruit at concentrations of 460 μg/ml (p < 0.0003) for basal secre-
tion and 115 μg/ml for stimulated secretion (p < 0.01) (41). The inhibitory
effect of a fruit extract on prolactin secretion was investigated in male rats
(48). Intravenous administration of a 53% ethanol fruit extract containing
20 mg/ml of water-soluble constituents signiﬁcantly inhibited stress-
induced prolactin secretion as compared with the baseline (p < 0.05) (48).

Toxicology
The median lethal dose of an ethanol extract of the fruit after a single in-
tragastric or intraperitoneal injection was greater than 2.0 g/kg body
weight (bw) in rats and mice, and no deaths were reported (4).
   In a 28-day subacute toxicity study the no-observed-effect level was
50.0 mg/kg bw; chronic administration over 26 weeks resulted in a no-
observed-effect level of 40.0 mg/kg bw (4). No genotoxic effects were
observed when the same extract was tested in the thymidine kinase muta-
tion assay in mammalian cell lines, the unscheduled DNA repair assay in rat
hepatocytes or in the micronucleus assay of murine bone marrow cells (4).

Clinical pharmacology
Approximately 32 clinical trials have assessed the safety and efﬁcacy of
various fruit extracts or tinctures (53–70% ethanol) for the treatment of
acne, corpus luteum insufﬁciency, cyclic breast pain, hyperprolactinae-
mia, menopausal symptoms, increasing lactation, premenstrual syndrome,
uterine bleeding disorders and miscellaneous menstrual irregularities (47).
A review of all of the clinical data is beyond the scope of this monograph;
for the complete details of all trials please refer to the cited references (4,
47). Most of the studies were open, uncontrolled studies investigating the
effects of the extracts on menstrual cycle abnormalities or premenstrual

16
                                                            Fructus Agni Casti


syndrome. One double-blind placebo-controlled study investigated a
fruit extract in treatment of luteal phase defects due to hyperprolactinae-
mia (19). Two other double-blind placebo-controlled studies investigated
fruit extracts in treatment of premenstrual syndrome (24, 49).
Abnormal menstrual cycles and infertility
Since 1954 at least 17 studies have assessed the effects of extracts of the
fruit on a variety of menstrual cycle disorders including amenorrhoea,
oligomenorrhoea, polymenorrhoea, corpus luteum insufﬁciency and in-
fertility (4). Two double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trials and sev-
eral observational studies have investigated the effect of various extracts
of the fruit on corpus luteal phase dysfunction and infertility (19, 34). The
products tested were all ethanol extracts (53–70% ethanol), and the doses
used in these investigations were: 20 drops twice daily; 15 drops three
times daily; 30 drops twice daily; or one to two tablets or capsules daily.
    A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
52 women with luteal phase defects due to latent hyperprolactinaemia as-
sessed the efﬁcacy of a dried fruit extract (19). The aim of the study was to
ﬁnd out whether elevated pituitary prolactin levels could be reduced and if
deﬁcits in luteal phase length and luteal phase progesterone synthesis could
be normalized. Blood for hormone analysis was taken on days 5–8 and day
20 of the menstrual cycle, before and after 3 months of therapy. Latent
hyperprolactinaemia was analysed by monitoring the prolactin release 15
and 30 min after intravenous administration of 200 Mg of thyroid hormone.
Thirty-seven cases (placebo: n = 20; treatment: n = 17) were included in the
ﬁnal statistical analysis. After 3 months of treatment with the extract at a
dose of 20 mg per day, prolactin release was reduced; a signiﬁcant increase
in the length of the luteal phase (10.5 days; p < 0.05) was observed. Deﬁcits
in luteal progesterone synthesis were eliminated. These changes only oc-
curred in women in the treatment group, no change was observed in the
placebo group. All other hormonal parameters remained unchanged, ex-
cept for 17-B-estradiol, which increased during the luteal phase in women
in the treatment group. The overall length of the menstrual cycle did not
change, suggesting that there was a corresponding shortening of the folli-
cular phase. Two women in the group given the extract had become preg-
nant by the end of the study. No side-effects were reported.
    The second randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study as-
sessed the efﬁcacy of a 53% ethanol extract of the crude drug in 96 infer-
tile women (34). The outcome criteria included pregnancy or menstrual
bleeding in women with secondary amenorrhoea or improved luteal hor-
mone concentrations. The women were administered 30 drops twice dai-
ly for 3 months. Sixty-six women completed the study, but no statisti-

                                                                           17
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


cally signiﬁcant results were found (p = 0.069). In the women with
amenorrhoea or luteal phase dysfunction, pregnancy resulted twice as of-
ten in women in the treatment group (15%) as in those in the placebo
group (7%); however no statistical analysis was reported.
   In open (uncontrolled) trials involving 48 women who were infertile
due to luteal-phase dysfunction, the efﬁcacy of a fruit extract for the nor-
malization of progesterone concentrations was determined (50). The in-
clusion criteria were normal prolactin levels (below 20 ng/ml), normal
results in the prolactin and thyroid-stimulating hormone stimulation tests
and an abnormally low serum progesterone level (below 12.0 ng/ml) on
the 20th day of the cycle. Treatment consisted of a fruit extract, 40 drops
daily, without any other medication for 3 months. Forty-ﬁve women
completed the studies (3 were excluded because of concurrent hormone
use). The outcome of therapy was assessed by the normalization of the
mid-luteal progesterone level and by correction (lengthening) of any pre-
existing shortening of the phases of the cycle. Treatment was deemed suc-
cessful in 39 of the 45 patients. Seven women became pregnant; serum
progesterone was restored to normal in 25 patients (> 12 ng/ml) and in
seven women there was a trend towards normalization of progesterone
levels. However, no statistical analysis was performed.
   Two larger post-marketing trials, involving 479 women, assessed the
safety and efﬁcacy of fruit extracts for the treatment of oligomenorrhoea
or polymenorrhoea (50). The women were treated with 30 drops of the
extract twice daily and the outcome measured was the bleeding-free inter-
val. An increase in the bleeding-free interval was observed after 35 days in
187/287 women receiving treatment for oligomenorrhoea and after
26 days in 139/192 women receiving treatment for polymenorrhoea.
Acne treatment
Two uncontrolled clinical studies and one observational report have as-
sessed the effects of extracts of the fruit on acne due to hormone imbalance
(30, 31, 33). In one open study, 118 people with acne were treated with a
fruit extract (20 drops twice daily for 4–6 weeks, then 15 drops twice daily
for 1–2 years) and the results were compared with those of conventional
treatments for acne (31). Patients treated with the fruit extract reported a
quicker healing rate after 6 weeks and after 3 months of therapy, 70% of
patients treated with the fruit extract had complete healing.
Cyclic breast pain (mastalgia)
Breast pain (mastalgia) is a common complaint usually classiﬁed as cycli-
cal (associated with the menstrual cycle) or non-cyclical (not associated
with the menstrual cycle). Mild premenstrual breast discomfort, lasting

18
                                                              Fructus Agni Casti


for 1–4 days prior to menstruation that resolves upon the initiation of
menstruation, is considered to be within normal physiology. Non-cyclic
breast pain lasting for ﬁve or more days should be brought to the atten-
tion of a health care provider. Several open (uncontrolled) trials (28, 51–
56) and three randomized controlled clinical trials (28, 29, 56–58) have
assessed the safety and efﬁcacy of extracts of the fruit for the treatment of
cyclic mastalgia.
   A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial involving
104 women with cyclic breast pain (at least 3 cycles) assessed the effects of
a preparation of the fruit (tincture 1:5 equivalent to 2 g of the fruit in 53%
ethanol) for the treatment of cyclic breast pain (58). The patients were
treated with either placebo, tincture (30 drops twice daily), or tablets (one
tablet twice daily) for three cycles. Patients assessed the intensity of breast
pain once per cycle using a visual analogue scale and also recorded the
presence of menstrual bleeding and the intensity of pain in a diary. Prolac-
tin levels were also measured during the premenstrual week of cycles one
and three. At the end of the third cycle of treatment, a signiﬁcant reduc-
tion in breast pain was observed in the treated patients as compared with
those who received placebo (tincture, p = 0.006; tablets, p = 0.0076). Nei-
ther the tablets nor the tincture of crude drug had any effect on concentra-
tions of progesterone, follicle stimulating hormone or luteinizing hor-
mone. While the basal prolactin levels decreased in both treatment groups,
this was not statistically signiﬁcant when compared with placebo (58).
   A second randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind study with a
similar design compared the tincture (30 drops = 1.8 ml, twice daily for
3 cycles) with placebo for the treatment of 97 women (n = 48 in the treat-
ment group; 49 in the placebo group) who had had breast pain at least
5 days prior to menses in the last cycle before the study (57). A visual
analogue scale was used for assessment of the efﬁcacy. Intensity of breast
pain diminished more quickly in the group that received the tincture. The
study design and duration were similar to that of Wuttke et al. (57, 58).
The results of this study showed a decrease in the visual analogue scale
scores of women in both the treatment and the placebo groups. However,
compared with women in the placebo group, those in the treatment group
had signiﬁcantly lower visual analogue scale values at the end of each cy-
cle (p = 0.018, 0.006 and 0.064 for cycles 1, 2 and 3, respectively).
   In a randomized, placebo-controlled trial the effects of a Vitex agnus-
castus solution and a placebo (double-blind) were compared with that of
gestagen (lynestrenol) in 160 women with mastalgia (59). A complete re-
mission, or improvement of symptoms, was reported in 82.1%, 74.5%,
and 36.8% of the patients in the gestagen, chaste tree, and placebo groups,

                                                                             19
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


respectively. The difference in effect between treatment and placebo was
signiﬁcant (p < 0.01). No signiﬁcant differences were found between the
two treatments (59).
   Numerous open studies have assessed the effect of a solution of Vitex
agnus-castus (VAC solution) for the treatment of over 1700 women with
mastalgia (28, 29, 51, 52, 54–56). All of these studies assessed the efﬁcacy
of one product, VAC solution, at a dose of 45–75 drops per day for
1–6 menstrual cycles. Two studies compared VAC treatment with ly-
nestrenol (5 mg daily on days 12–24 of each cycle). Elimination of symp-
toms was observed in 46–81.5% of treated women; improvement of
symptoms in 12–39.6% and no effect in 6.5–29%. Reported side-effects
included circulatory disturbances, acne and weight gain.
Premenstrual syndrome
Premenstrual syndrome refers to the regular occurrence of affective
symptoms such as depressive moods, irritability, anxiety, confusion and
social withdrawal, as well as somatic symptoms including breast tender-
ness or heaviness and breast pain (mastalgia), abdominal bloating, crav-
ings, fatigue and headache.
   Twelve clinical trials have assessed the efﬁcacy of extracts of the fruit
for the symptomatic treatment of premenstrual syndrome (22–24, 26, 27
49, 58–63). Of these studies, only three were randomized controlled trials
and two were double-blind (22, 49, 63). A positive placebo effect was
ruled out by one randomized placebo-controlled study carried out in
compliance with good clinical practice (63). In this study, patients (n = 86)
with premenstrual syndrome were given either a chaste tree fruit extract
(60% ethanol), in the form of a product called “Z 440”, one 20-mg tablet
daily or a placebo (n = 84) during three consecutive menstrual cycles.
Diagnosis was made according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
for Mental Disorders. The main efﬁcacy variable was change from base-
line to end-point (end of the third cycle) in the patient’s self-assessment of
six premenstrual syndrome symptoms (irritability, mood alteration, an-
ger, headache, breast fullness, and other symptoms including bloating). A
secondary efﬁcacy variable was change in Clinical Global Impressions
score for the factors: severity of condition, global improvement, and risk–
beneﬁt. Mean improvement in patient’s self-assessment was signiﬁcantly
greater in the women in the treatment group than in women who received
the placebo (p < 0.001). Clinical Global Impressions scores for each of the
three factors also revealed signiﬁcant superiority of the treatment relative
to placebo (p < 0.001). Responder rates (> 50% reduction in symptoms)
were 52% and 24% for treatment and placebo, respectively. Adverse
events reported in the active treatment arm (n = 4) included acne, multiple

20
                                                             Fructus Agni Casti


abscesses, inter-menstrual bleeding and urticaria; in the placebo arm (n =
3) the adverse events were acne, early menstrual period and gastric upset.
    A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving
217 women with self-diagnosed premenstrual syndrome according to a
modiﬁed version of the Menstrual Distress Questionnaire, a rating scale
covering most of the important symptoms, assessed the efﬁcacy of the
fruit for the management of symptoms of premenstrual syndrome (49).
Subjects were treated with either a powder of the dried fruit (300-mg tab-
lets; two tablets three times daily; n = 105) or a soy-based placebo (n =
112) for a period of 3 months, after which they all completed the Men-
strual Distress Questionnaire again. Other than a statistically signiﬁcant
difference in effect between the active powder and the soy-based placebo
for the symptom “feel jittery and restless” (p = 0.05), no other statistically
signiﬁcant results were reported. Unfortunately, soy was a poor choice
for use as a placebo, as it is not considered to be biologically inert.
    A multi-centre, randomized, double-blind, controlled clinical trial
compared the activity of a dried ethanol extract of the fruit with that of
pyridoxine (vitamin B6) in the treatment of women with premenstrual
syndrome (22). The intent-to-treat population included 127 women: 61 of
whom were given one capsule of extract plus one placebo capsule daily
for three cycles, while 66 were given one capsule of placebo twice daily on
days 1–15 of their cycle, followed by one capsule (100 mg) of pyridoxine
twice daily on days 16–35. Therapeutic response was assessed using the
Premenstrual Tension Syndrome scale, the Clinical Global Impressions
scale, and by recording six characteristic symptoms of premenstrual syn-
drome (breast tenderness, oedema, inner tension, headache, constipation
and depression). Therapeutic efﬁcacy was assessed by both patients and
physicians at the end of the trial. Initial mean scores on the Premenstrual
Tension Syndrome scale were higher in the group treated with the chaste
tree extract (15.2) than in those treated with pyridoxine (11.9). By the end
of therapy, the mean absolute change in Premenstrual Tension Syndrome
score in each group was 5.1, representing a reduction of 10.1 and 6.8, re-
spectively, for the chaste tree and pyridoxine-treated groups (p < 0.038,
both groups, 95% conﬁdence interval –6.4261 to –0.1670). Therefore no
difference was evident between the two treatment groups. The Clinical
Global Impressions scale showed that 77.1% of the women who received
chaste berry and 60.6% of those treated with pyridoxine showed im-
provement. Adverse events were rare, but included gastrointestinal com-
plaints, skin reactions and transient headache.
    Six post-marketing studies assessed the safety and efﬁcacy of various
extracts of the fruit in 8391 female patients with menstrual abnormalities

                                                                            21
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


or symptoms of premenstrual syndrome (23, 26, 27, 58, 60, 62). Three
open (uncontrolled) trials (24, 26, 59) also investigated the effect of vari-
ous fruit extracts on menstrual abnormalities. The dose ranged from 40–
42 drops or 1 capsule daily, for 1 day to 9 years and the outcomes mea-
sured included the physician’s and patient’s self-assessments. Elimination
of symptoms was observed in 29–42% of patients; improvements in
symptoms were observed in 51–59% of patients and symptoms were un-
changed in 1–10% of patients. Adverse events were reported in 1–5% of
patients and were generally not reported to be serious. The limitations of
these studies include the lack of a control group and the fact that most did
not distinguish between premenstrual syndrome and the other menstrual
disorders.
    An open (uncontrolled) clinical trial involving 50 women (43 of whom
completed the study) with late luteal phase dysphoric disorder (Diagnos-
tic and Statistical Manual for Mental Disorders) assessed the effect of an
ethanol fruit extract on the management of premenstrual syndrome (59).
Thirteen of the subjects were concurrently taking oral contraceptives. Af-
ter 2 months of baseline observation, one tablet of the extract was admin-
istered daily for three cycles, followed by a post-treatment phase lasting
three cycles. Treatment effectiveness was evaluated using both the Men-
strual Distress Questionnaire and the visual analogue scale. The Menstru-
al Distress Questionnaire was ﬁlled out by patients at the end of the ﬁrst
cycle and again during cycles 3 and 6. The visual analogue scale was com-
pleted twice per cycle, once in the late luteal phase when symptoms peaked
and once after menstruation during the follicular phase. By the end of the
third cycle, the Menstrual Distress Questionnaire scores were reduced by
42.5% (p < 0.001), with a 50% reduction in the score in 20/43 patients. By
the end of the post-treatment period, the scores remained approximately
20% below baseline (p < 0.001). The main improvements following treat-
ment were reported for symptoms of breast tenderness, behavioural
changes, negative feelings and oedema. The average late-luteal phase vi-
sual analogue scale score was reduced by 47.2% during the 3-month treat-
ment phase (p < 0.01), and remained at 21.7% below baseline (p < 0.001)
during the post-treatment phase. By contrast, the follicular phase score
did not signiﬁcantly change. The number of days with premenstrual syn-
drome symptoms was slightly reduced from 7.5 to 6 days, and the con-
comitant use of oral contraceptives had no signiﬁcant effect on any of the
parameters investigated. Twenty patients (47%) reported 37 adverse
events during the treatment and post-treatment periods (59).
    An open (uncontrolled) study involving 36 women with premenstrual
syndrome assessed the effect of a 58% ethanol extract of the fruit for the

22
                                                            Fructus Agni Casti


management of premenstrual syndrome symptoms (24). The women were
treated with 40 drops of the extract daily over three cycles and the out-
comes measured were a reduction in physical and psychological symp-
toms such as headache, swollen breasts, breast tenderness, bloating, fa-
tigue and psychological changes such as increased appetite, sugar craving,
nervousness and restlessness, anxiety, irritability, lack of concentration,
depression, crying spells, mood changes and aggressiveness. The duration
of the luteal phase was also determined. After 3 months of treatment,
69% of women had a reduction in physical symptoms and 80% showed a
reduction in psychological symptoms (p < 0.05). The duration of the luteal
phase was lengthened from 5.4 to 11.4 days. A randomized open (uncon-
trolled) trial assessed a tincture of the fruit (10 g tincture containing
2 g fruit in 53% ethanol) for the treatment of premenstrual syndrome.
Women were treated with 30 drops twice daily in combination with vita-
min E (400 mg daily). Treatment signiﬁcantly reduced the symptoms of
irritability or anxiety (p = 0.028), breast tenderness (p = 0.0001) and mas-
talgia (p = 0.015) (61).
    A randomized single-blind study compared the efﬁcacy of ﬂuoxetine,
a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor with that of the crude drug (64).
Forty-one patients with premenstrual dysphoric disorder according to
the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders were randomly
allocated to the group receiving ﬂuoxetine or that receiving the extract for
2 months. The outcomes measured included the Penn daily symptom re-
port, the Hamilton depression rating scale, and the clinical global impres-
sion severity of illness and improvement scales. After 2 months, 68.4% of
patients had responded to ﬂuoxetine and 57.9% to the crude drug extract.
There was no statistically signiﬁcant difference between the groups in the
rate of responders. However, ﬂuoxetine was more effective in alleviating
the psychological symptoms, while the extract reduced the physical
symptoms (64).
Effects on lactation
Only one randomized, double-blind controlled trial examined the effect
of the fruit in lactating women (65). Women were treated with the fruit
extract (15 drops three times daily) or vitamin B1 (no dose stated) or as-
signed to the control group (details not stated). Lactation in all groups
increased up to day 10 postpartum; from days 10–20 a decrease in lacta-
tion was observed in women in the control and vitamin B1-treated groups.
Lactation in women in the group treated with the fruit extract increased
or was maintained up to day 20. Lactating women with poor milk pro-
duction treated with a fruit extract were able to effectively increase pro-
duction. No statistical analyses were performed.

                                                                           23
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Adverse reactions
Adverse reactions have been reported in some clinical trials. A review of
30 studies involving 11 506 subjects reported a total of 246 adverse events,
thus representing an adverse reaction rate of approximately 2% (4). The
major reactions reported included acne, changes to the menstrual cycle,
dizziness, gastrointestinal distress, increased menstrual ﬂow, nausea, skin
reactions, urticaria and weight gain (4). Minor adverse events include fa-
tigue, hair loss, increased intraocular pressure, palpitations, polyurea,
sweating and vaginitis (4, 57).

Contraindications
Fructus Agni Casti should not be used during pregnancy (35).

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
General
Patients reporting a feeling of tension and swelling of the breasts or men-
strual disturbances should consult a health care provider for a medical
diagnosis (66).

Drug interactions
Although no interactions have been documented, the reported dopamin-
ergic effect may reduce the efﬁcacy of dopamine-receptor antagonists (3).
Furthermore, due to its potential hormonal effects, Fructus Agni Casti
may interfere with the effectiveness of oral contraceptives and hormone
replacement therapy (67).

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
Intragastric administration of an ethanol fruit extract to male and female
rats at doses up to 80 times the recommended human daily dose had no
effect on fertility, mating behaviour, pregnancy or lactation (3). No patho-
logical changes were observed in any of the offspring of treated animals
when compared with those animals treated with vehicle control (3).

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
Intragastric administration of an ethanol fruit extract to rats and rabbits at
doses up to 100 and 74 times higher than the human daily dose, respec-

24
                                                            Fructus Agni Casti


tively, was not teratogenic and did not affect maternal health as compared
with controls (3).

Nursing mothers
One study in rats assessed the effect of a fruit extract administered orally
to lactating dams on their offspring (68). A decrease in milk consumption
in the offspring was observed and a high rate of mortality resulted com-
pared with untreated animals. Normal milk consumption patterns were
resumed in the offspring when the dams were no longer given the extract
(68). No further data are available; therefore the use of the crude drug by
nursing mothers is not recommended.

Paediatric use
No safety data are available, therefore the use of the crude drug in chil-
dren under the age of 12 years is not recommended.

Other precautions
Estrogen-dependent breast cancer patients should use Fructus Agni Cas-
ti preparations with caution, as weak estrogenic effects have been reported
in vitro (45, 46).

Dosage forms
Crude drug, extracts, ﬂuidextracts, tinctures and infusions. The dried ber-
ries should be stored in airtight non-plastic containers and protected from
light, heat, moisture and insect infestation (4).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Dry native extract: 8.3–12.5:1 (w/w), approximately 1.0% casticin: 1 tablet
containing 2.6–4.2 mg native extract, swallowed whole with some liquid each
morning (4).
Dry native extract: 9.58–11.5:1 (w/w): 1 tablet containing 3.5–4.2 mg na-
tive extract each morning with some liquid (22).
Dry native extract: 6.0–12.0:1 (w/w), approximately 0.6% casticin. For
premenstrual syndrome: 1 tablet containing 20 mg native extract daily
with water (63).
Fluidextract: 1:1 (g/ml), 70% alcohol (v/v): 0.5–1.0 ml (9).
Tincture: ethanol 58% (100 g of aqueous-alcoholic solution contains 9 g
of 1:5 tincture): 40 drops, once daily with some liquid each morning (4).

                                                                           25
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Tincture: ethanol 53% (10 g of the solution contains 2 g crude drug moth-
er tincture): 30 drops twice daily (25, 28, 34).
Tablet: containing 162 mg of crude drug mother tincture (1:10 with 62%
ethanol), twice daily (57).
Hydroalcoholic extracts (50–70% v/v): corresponding to 30–40 mg dried
fruit (4, 69).


References
1. The United States Pharmacopeia. 29. Rockville, MD, United States Pharma-
    copeia Convention, 2005.
2. Farmacopea homeopática de los estados unidos mexicanos. Mexico City, Sec-
    retaría de salud, Comisión permanente de la farmacopea de los Estados Uni-
    dos Mexicanos, 1998 [in Spanish].
3. Abel G. Vitex. In: Hänsel R, et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutisch-
    en Praxis. Vol. 6 (P–Z). Berlin, Springer, 1994:1183–1196.
4. Upton R, ed. Chaste tree fruit, American herbal pharmacopoeia and thera-
    peutic compendium. Santa Cruz, CA, American Herbal Pharmacopoeia,
    2001.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
6. Parsa A. Flore de l’Iran, Vol. VIII. Tehran, University of Tehran, 1960 (Pub-
    lication No. 613).
7. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
8. Tyler VE. Herbs of choice. Binghampton, NY, Pharmaceutical Products
    Press, Haworth Press, 1994:137.
9. British Herbal Pharmacopoeia, 4th ed. Exeter, British Herbal Medicine As-
    sociation, 1996.
10. Hänsel R, Sticher O, Steinegger E. Pharmakognosie-Phytopharmazie. Ber-
    lin, Springer-Verlag, 1999 [in German].
11. Anon. Chase tree fruit. Agni casti fructus. Pharmeuropa, 2003, 15:661–663.
12. Hoberg E, Meier B, Sticher O. Quantitative high performance liquid chro-
    matography analysis of casticin in the fruits of Vitex agnus-castus. Pharma-
    ceutical Biology, 2001, 39:57–61.
13. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed, Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
14. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
15. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).

26
                                                                Fructus Agni Casti


16. Hoberg E et al. Diterpenoids from the fruits of Vitex agnus-castus. Phyto-
    chemistry, 1999, 52:1555–1558.
17. Li SH, et al. Vitexlactam A, a novel labdane diterpene lactam from the fruits
    of Vitex agnus castus. Tetrahedron Letters, 2002, 43:5131–5134.
18. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisi-
    er, 1995.
19. Milewicz A et al. Vitex agnus-castus Extrakt zur Behandlung von Regeltem-
    poanomalien infolge latenter Hyperprolaktinämie: Ergebnisse einer ran-
    domisierten Plazebo-kontrollierten Doppelblindstudie. Arzneimittel-For-
    schung, 1993, 43:752–756 [in German].
20. Loch EG, Selle H, Boblitz N. Treatment of premenstrual syndrome with a
    phytopharmaceutical formulation containing Vitex agnus-castus. Journal of
    Women’s Health and Gender Based Medicine, 2000, 9:315–320.
21. Meier B, Hoberg E. Agni-casti fructus. New ﬁndings on quality and effec-
    tiveness. Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1999, 20:140–158 [in German].
22. Lauritzen C et al. Treatment of premenstrual tension syndrome with Vitex
    agnus-castus; controlled double-blind study versus pyridoxine. Phytomedi-
    cine, 1997, 4:183–189.
23. Dittmar FW et al. Prämenstruelles Syndrom: Behandlung mit einem Phyto-
    pharmakon. TW Gynäkologie, 1992, 5:60–68.
24. Coeugniet E, Elek E, Kühnast R. Das prämenstruelle Syndrom (PMS) und
    seine Behandlung [Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) and its treatment].
    Ärztezeitchrift für Naturaheilverf, 1986, 27:619–622.
25. Wuttke W et al. Dopaminergic compounds in Vitex agnus castus. In: Lowe
    D, Rietbrock N eds. Phytopharmaka in Forschung und klinischer Anwend-
    ung. Darmstadt, Steinkopff, 1995:S81–S91.
26. Loch EG et al. Die Behandlung von Blutungsstörungen mit Vitex-agnus-
    castus-Tinktur. Der Frauenarzt, 1991, 32:867–870.
27. Loch EG, Kaiser E. Diagnostik und Therapie dyshormonaler Blutungen in
    der Praxis. Gynäkologie Praxis, 1990, 14:489–495.
28. Halaska M et al. Treatment of cyclical mastalgia with a solution containing an
    extract of Vitex agnus-castus: recent results of a placebo-controlled double-
    blind study. Breast, 1999, 8:175–181.
29. Kubista E, Müller G, Spona J. Behandlung der Mastopathie mit zyklischer
    Mastodynie: Klinische Ergebnisse und Hormonproﬁle. Gynäkologische
    Rundschau, 1986, 26:65–79.
30. Amann W. Akne vulgaris and Agnus castus (Agnolyt®). Zeitschrift für Allge-
    meinmedizin, 1975, 51:1645–1648 [in German].
31. Giss G, Rothenberg W. Phytotherapeutische Behandlung der Akne.
    Zeitschrift für Haut- und Geschlechtskrankheiten, 1968, 43:645–647.
32. Probst V, Roth O. A vegetable extract with a hormone-like action. Deutsche
    Medizin Wochenschrift, 1954, 79:1271–1274.
33. Bleier W. Phytotherapy in irregular menstrual cycles or bleeding periods
    and other gynaecological disorders of endocrine origin. Zentralblatt für
    Gynäkologie, 1959, 81:701–709 [in German].

                                                                               27
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


34. Gerhard I et al. Mastodynon bei weiblicher Sterilität: Randomisierte plaze-
    bokontrollierte klinische Doppelblindstudie. Forschende Komplementärme-
    dizin, 1998, 20:272–278 [in German].
35. Roemheld-Hamm B. Chasteberry. American Family Physician, 2005, 72:821–824.
36. Christie S, Walker AF. Vitex agnus-castus L.: (1) A review of its traditional
    and modern therapeutic use: (2) Current use from a survey of practitioners.
    European Journal of Herbal Medicine, 1997, 3:29–45.
37. Meier B et al. Pharmacological activities of Vitex agnus-castus extracts in
    vitro. Phytomedicine, 2000, 7:373–381.
38. Christoffel V et al. Prolactin inhibiting dopaminergic activity of diterpenes from
    Vitex agnus-castus. In: Loew D, Blume H, Dingermann TH, eds. Phytophar-
    maka V, Forschung und klinische Anwendung. Darmstadt, Steinkopff, 1999.
39. Jarry H et al. Diterpenes isolated from Vitex agnus castus BNO 1095 inhibit
    prolactin secretion via speciﬁc interaction with dopamine D2 receptors in the
    pituitary [abstract]. 10. Jahrestagung der Gesellschaft für Phytotherapie, 11–
    13 November 1999. Münster, Köln, Science Data Supply, 1999(suppl):3–4.
40. Jarry H et al. In vitro prolactin but not LH and FSH release is inhibited by
    compounds in extracts of Agnus castus: direct evidence for a dopaminergic
    principle by the dopamine receptor assay. Experimental and Clinical Endo-
    crinology, 1994, 102: 448–454.
41. Sliutz G et al. Agnus castus extracts inhibit prolactin secretion of rat pituitary
    cells. Hormone Metabolism Research, 1993, 25:253–255.
42. Brugisser R et al. Untersuchungen an Opioid-Rezeptoren mit Vitex agnus-
    castus L. Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1999, 20:154 [in German].
43. Eagon CL et al. Medicinal botanicals: estrogenicity in rat uterus and liver.
    Proceedings of the American Association of Cancer Research, 1997, 38:193.
44. Jarry H et al. Erste Hinweise für Estrogen-wirkende Inhaltstoffe im Vitex
    agnus-castus: Effekte auf die in-vitro Steroidsekretion von humanen Granu-
    losa-und porcinen Luteal-Zellen. Menopause, 2000, 4:12–13.
45. Liu J et al. Evaluation of estrogenic activity of plant extracts for the potential
    treatment of menopausal symptoms. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chem-
    istry, 2001, 49:2472–2479.
46. Liu J et al. Isolation of linoleic acid as an estrogenic compound from the fruits
    of Vitex agnus-castus L. (chaste-berry). Phytomedicine, 2004, 11:18–23.
47. Mahady GB et al. Vitex agnus castus. In: Coates P et al. eds. Encyclopedia of
    dietary supplements. London, Informa Healthcare, 2005.
48. Jarry H et al. Agnus castus als dopaminerges Wirkprinzip in Mastodynon.
    Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1991, 12:77–82.
49. Turner S, Mills S. A double-blind clinical trial on a herbal remedy for premenstrual
    syndrome: a case study. Complementary Therapy in Medicine, 1993, 1:73–77.
50. Mergner R. Zyklusstörungen: Therapie mit einem Vitex–agnus-castus-halti-
    gen Kombinationsarzneimittel. Der Kassenarzt, 1992, 7:51–60.
51. Fournier D, Grumbrecht C. Behandlung der Mastopathie, Mastodynie und
    des prämenstruellen Syndroms. Verleich medikamentöser Behandlung zu
    unbehandelten Kontrollen. Therapiewoche, 1987, 37:430–434.

28
                                                                Fructus Agni Casti


52. Gregl A. Klinik und Therapie der Mastodynie. Die Medizinische Welt, 1985,
    36:242–246.
53. Kress D, Thanner E. Behandlung der Mastopathie: möglichst risikoarm. Me-
    dizinische Klinik, 1981, 76:566–567 [in German].
54. Roeder D. Zur Therapie der Mastodynie und Mastopathie mit Mastodynon.
    [On the treatment of mastodynia and mastopathy with Mastodynon]. Die
    Medizinische Welt, 1976, 27:591–592.
55. Opitz G, Liebl A. Zur konservativen Behandlung der Mastopathie mit Mas-
    todynon. Therapie der Gegenwart, 1980, 119:804–809.
56. Schwalbe E. Ein Beitrag zur Behandlung der Mastodynie. Zeitschrift für
    Allgemeinmedizin, 1979, 55:1239–1242 [in German].
57. Wuttke W, et al. Behandlung zyklusabhängiger Brustschmerzen mit einem
    Agnus-castus-haltigen Arzneimittel. Ergebnisse einer randomisierten plaze-
    bokontrollierten Doppelblindstudie. Geburtshilfe und Frauenheilkunde,
    1997, 57:569–574 [in German].
58. Feldman HU et al. Therapie bei Gelbkörperschwäche bzw. Prämenstruellem
    Syndrom mit Vitex–agnus-castus-Tinktur. Gyne, 1990, 11:421–425 [in German].
59. Berger D et al. Efﬁcacy of Vitex agnus-castus L. extract Ze 440 in patients
    with premenstrual syndrome (PMS). Archive of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
    2000, 264:150–153.
60. Liebl A. Behandlung des prämenstruellen Syndroms: Agnus-castus-haltiges
    Kombinationsarzneimittel im Test. TW Gynäkologie, 1992, 5:147–154.
61. Meyl C. Therapie des prämenstruellen Syndroms. Vergleich einer kom-
    binierten Behandlung von Mastodynon und Vitamin E mit der Vitamin E-
    Monotherapie. Therapeutikon, 1991, 5:518–525.
62. Peters-Welte C, Albrecht M. Regeltempostörungen und PMS: Vitex agnus-castus
    in einer Anwendungsbeobachtung. TW Gynäkologie, 1994, 7:49 [in German].
63. Schellenberg R et al. Treatment for the premenstrual syndrome with agnus
    castus extract: prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled study. British
    Medical Journal, 2001, 322:134–137.
64. Atmaca M et al. Fluoxetine versus Vitex agnus castus extract in the treatment
    of premenstrual dysphoric disorder. Human Psychopharmacology, 2003,
    18:191–195.
65. Mohr H. Clinical investigations of means to increase lactation. Deutsche Me-
    dizin Wochenschrift, 1954, 79:1513–1516 [in German].
66. Blumenthal M, Goldberg A, Brinckmann J. Herbal medicine. Expanded
    Commission E monographs. Austin, TX, American Botanical Council, 2000.
67. Boon H, Smith M. The complete natural medicine guide to the 50 most com-
    mon medicinal herbs, 2nd ed. Toronto, Robert Rose, 2004.
68. Winterhoff H, Münster C, Gorkow C. Die Hemmung der Laktation bei Rat-
    ten als indirekter Beweis für die Senkung von Prolaktin durch Agnus castus.
    Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1991, 12:175–179 [in German].
69. Blumenthal M et al. The complete German Commission E Monographs:
    Therapeutic guide to herbal medicines. Austin, TX, American Botanical
    Council, 1998

                                                                               29
                      Cortex Berberidis




Deﬁnition
Cortex Berberidis consists of the dried stem bark of Berberis vulgaris L.
(Berberidaceae) (1, 2).

Synonyms
No information was found.

Selected vernacular names
Agracejo, aigret, aigribouet, almindelig berberis, ameer Paris, anbarba-
ris, barberry, berberi, Berberitze, berbero, berberry, berbis, cigret, cigre-
tier, common barberry, crespino, crespino commune, epine-vinette, es-
pino cambrón, European barberry, Gemeiner Sauerdorn, harilik
kukerpuu, jaundice-berry, khichirma, kirsing, libdane, oad alreeah, pip-
rage, pipperidge, Rocky Mountain grape, salq, Sauerdorn, skerpa, snow-
berry, surtorn, tarab, trailing mahonia, uqdah, vincllier, venittier, zerk,
zereshk (1, 3–5).

Geographical distribution
Found in Europe and North Asia, and naturalized in North America (2, 5).

Description
An erect, deciduous, heavily branched thorny shrub, up to 2 metres high.
The thorny branches are angular, deeply grooved, initially brownish-
yellow, later becoming grey-white. The thorns are 1–2 cm long and pro-
trude horizontally. The leaves are compound, obovate to elliptoid 2–4 cm
long, and bear leaﬂets with dentate margins and spine. The ﬂowers are
5–7 cm long in yellow, dense, hanging clusters. Sepals (6) are yellow and
petals (6) are orange at the base. Ovary is superior with a ﬂat stigma. The
edible fruit is a bright, scarlet, oblong-cylindrical berry, 10–13 mm long
and 6 mm thick, containing 2 seeds. The exocarp is membranous-coria-
ceous (5, 6).

30
                                                            Cortex Berberidis


Plant material of interest: dried stem bark
General appearance
Crude drug may be small, ﬂat and irregular shaped, up to 2.0 mm thick,
or curved pieces up to 0.5 mm thick; outer surface dark yellowish-grey
with shallow, longitudinal furrows, or thicker pieces with deeper cracks
and ﬁssures. Occasionally, black apothecia of lichens are present. Inner
surface dark yellow to brown, distinctly longitudinally striated and glis-
tening, frequently with patches of paler yellow wood attached. Fracture
in the outer part is short, and readily separates, but fracture in the inner
part is ﬁbrous (1, 5).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: faint aromatic; taste: bitter and imparts a yellow colour to the
saliva (1).

Microscopic characteristics
Outer rhytidome consists of successive areas of thin-walled, ligniﬁed cork
cells alternating with dark yellowish-brown areas of dead cortex and sec-
ondary phloem. The secondary phloem contains tangential bands of ﬁ-
bres, usually one or two cells wide, alternating with wider bands of sieve
tissue and separated by medullary rays, 2–4 cells wide. The phloem ﬁbres
are small, yellow, thick walled and ligniﬁed with very numerous, con-
spicuous pits. Phloem consists of narrow sieve tubes and small-celled pa-
renchyma cells. Many of the medullary ray cells contain one or occasion-
ally two large prism crystals of calcium oxalate per cell. Other medullary
ray cells contain starch granules and some medullary ray cells, especially
those adjacent to the phloem ﬁbres, will develop into stone cells with
moderately thickened walls (1).

Powdered plant material
Yellowish-brown, containing fragments of thin-walled, ligniﬁed, poly-
gonal cork cells; abundant short, yellow ﬁbres occurring singly or in
small groups with thick, ligniﬁed walls and very numerous pits; thin-
walled sieve tubes and associated parenchyma; prism crystals of calcium
oxalate in medullary ray cells and scattered, individual crystals, occa-
sionally twinned; small, simple starch granules, rounded to ovoid;
groups of rectangular stone cells with moderately thickened walls and
numerous pits; abundant groups of yellowish-brown crushed paren-
chyma; occasional ligniﬁed ﬁbres and vessels from the adherent
xylem (1).

                                                                          31
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations as well as thin-layer chroma-
tography (1).

Purity tests
Microbiology
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (7).

Chemical
To be established according to national requirements.

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2% (1).

Total ash
Not more than 10% (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 2.5% (1).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 12% (1).

Alcohol-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Loss on drying
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum sum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more
than 0.05 mg/kg (8). For other pesticides, see the European pharmaco-
poeia (8) and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (7) and pesticide resi-
dues (9).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (7).

32
                                                              Cortex Berberidis


Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (7).

Chemical assays
To be established according to national requirements. Since the major
constituents are berberine and related alkaloids, the high-performance
liquid chromatography method of analysis established for berberine in
Rhizoma Hydrastis (10) may be employed for standardization.

Major chemical constituents
The major constituents are isoquinoline alkaloids, principally berberine,
occurring at a concentration up to 4.5%. Other major alkaloids include
oxyacanthine (0.04%), berbamine (0.6–1.2%), columbamine (0.3%), ja-
trorrhizine (0.4%) and magnoﬂorine (2.1%) (11–13). Structures of ber-
bamine, berberine, columbamine, jatrorrhizine and magnoﬂorine are pre-
sented below.

                                                                     O
              Berbamine                                                  O
                                                  Berberine
      OCH3
             OCH3
              H3CO                                             N+
                                               H3CO

        H                           N                  OCH3         OH
                    O                    CH3                             OCH3
  N                           H                 Columbamine
  CH3


               O                                               N+
                                               H3CO
        OH                                             OCH3



Jatrorrhizine                OCH3               H3CO
                                    OH
                                                                N+ CH3
                                                  HO
                                                          H      CH3
                                                  HO
                        N+
H3CO
                                                H3CO            Magnoflorine
         OCH3




Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

                                                                             33
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Used orally for the treatment of digestive complaints, such as dyspepsia,
diarrhoea, gastritis, feelings of distention and ﬂatulence (1).
   Although no clinical trials evaluating Cortex Berberidis have been
conducted, the most relevant active principle is known to be berberine.
Berberine has been shown to be effective for the treatment of bacterially-
induced diarrhoea (14–20), ocular trachoma (21) and cutaneous leishma-
niasis (22–25).

Uses described in traditional medicine
Used orally for the treatment of cystitis, dysmenorrhoea, eczema, fever,
haemorrhoids, inﬂammation, menorrhagia, nasal congestion, rheuma-
tism, tinnitus and vaginitis (4, 26, 27). Also used as a cholagogue, diuretic,
emmenagogue, haemostat, laxative and a tonic (4).

Pharmacology
Since no clinical studies have directly evaluated Cortex Berberidis for any
therapeutic effect and there have been very few pharmacological studies
on extracts of the bark, this section focuses on the pharmacology and
clinical studies of the major alkaloid constituents, particularly berberine.
The correlation of these data with the activity of the crude drug or ex-
tracts thereof requires further investigation.

Experimental pharmacology
Antidiarrhoeal activity
In vitro, Vibrio cholerae grows in a medium containing berberine, but
fails to produce diarrhoea-inducing toxins (28). It has been hypothesized
that the antidiarrhoeal activity of berberine is due to localized effects on
the intestinal tract and not to bactericidal activity. The suggested mecha-
nism by which berberine exerts this action is through the activation of
A2-adrenoceptors and by reducing cyclic adenosine monophosphate pro-
duction through the inhibition of the activity of adenylate cyclase (29),
which in turn decreases intestinal motility (30). Berberine inhibits in vivo
and in vitro intestinal secretions induced by cholera toxin (31–34).
    Berberine, at a concentration of 10.0 mg/loop, reduced intestinal se-
cretion stimulated by the heat-labile toxin of Escherichia coli in the ligated
rabbit intestine loop model by 70% in situ, and inhibited the secretory
response of the heat stable toxin of E. coli in mice (35, 36). Berberine, at
concentrations up to 500 μM, stimulated ion transport responses in hu-
man colonic mucosa that were non-speciﬁc for calcium ions or cyclic ad-

34
                                                            Cortex Berberidis


enosine monophosphate-mediated signals. In cultured intestinal epithelial
monolayers, berberine inhibits calcium and cyclic adenosine monophos-
phate-mediated responses, indicating that the drug exerts a direct anti-
secretory effect on the epithelial cells through the inhibition of mucosal
chloride secretion (37).
Anti-inﬂammatory activity
Treatment of mice with berberine, at a dose of 10.0 mg/kg body weight
(bw) for 3–12 days, inhibited the development of adjuvant-induced ar-
thritis (38). Berberine, administered to mice at a dose of 10.0 mg/kg bw,
inhibited serotonin-induced hind paw oedema (26). Berberine also pos-
sessed dose-dependent antinociceptive activity, which was assessed by the
inhibition of 1,4-benzoquinone-induced writhing movements as well as
antipyretic activity in animals with increased rectal temperature (26). In-
tragastric administration of berberine at a dose of 7.5 or 15.0 mg/kg bw to
rats with trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid-induced colitis reduced histologi-
cal lesions, morphological damage and myeloperoxidase activity after
1 week of treatment (39).
    In in vitro studies, berberine also inhibited the production of the in-
ﬂammatory cytokine interleukin-8 in rectal mucosal cells at a concentra-
tion of 10-5 M (39). Treatment of a human oesophageal squamous cell car-
cinoma cell line, YES-2, with berberine (8.0–32.0 μM) for 24 hours reduced
the expression of messenger ribonucleic acid for the inﬂammatory cy-
tokine interleukin-6 (40).
    The anti-inﬂammatory properties of an ethanol extract of the bark,
three alkaloid fractions, the major alkaloid berberine, and oxyacanthine
isolated from the crude drug were assessed after intragastric administra-
tion to mice at various doses (41). The outcome assessed was a reduction
in the acute inﬂammatory response in the carrageenan- and zymosan-in-
duced hind paw oedema model. The results indicated that ethanol extract
had the greatest anti-inﬂammatory effects. The ability of the ethanol ex-
tract to alter in vivo and in vitro complement activity was also determined
in mice. The ethanol extract also reduced chronic inﬂammation in this
model of adjuvant arthritis. The protoberberine fractions Bv2, Bv3 and
berberine suppressed a delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction. Fraction
Bv1 and berberine diminished antibody response in mice (41).
Antiplatelet effects
Berberine signiﬁcantly inhibited rabbit platelet aggregation induced by
adenosine diphosphate, arachidonic acid, collagen or calcium ionophore
A23187 (p < 0.01) (42). In vitro, berberine signiﬁcantly inhibited synthe-
sis of thromboxane A2 in rabbit platelets induced by adenosine diphos-

                                                                          35
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


phate, arachidonic acid or collagen, in which collagen-induced throm-
boxane A2 synthesis was also inhibited (42). In vivo, the plasma
prostacyclin level was reduced by 34.6% during a 30-min period after
intravenous administration of 50.0 mg/kg bw of berberine to rabbits.
These results suggest that berberine inhibits arachidonic acid metabolism
in rabbit platelets and endothelial cells at two or more sites: cyclooxyge-
nase in the arachidonic acid cascade and possibly the enzyme(s) for arachi-
donic acid liberation from membrane phospholipids (42).
Antimicrobial activity
A methanol extract of the bark and berberine inhibited the growth of
Helicobacter pylori in vitro. Berberine inhibited the growth of 15 strains
of H. pylori, with a minimum inhibitory concentration of 12.5 μg/ml
(range 0.78–25.0 μg/ml) (43). The antibacterial activity of berberine against
Staphylococcus aureus at a sub-inhibitory dose was potentiated by the ﬂa-
vones chrysosplenol-D and chrysoplenetin, from Artemisia annua. The
potentiation is due to the inhibition of an S. aureus multidrug resistance
pump (44). Berberine had a minimum inhibitory concentration of 25–
50 μg/ml against S. aureus and Mycobacterium smegmatis (45, 46). The
antimicrobial activity of berberine was evaluated against 17 microorgan-
isms including two Gram-negative bacteria, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Escherichia coli (both resistant and sensitive), two Gram-positive bacte-
ria, Bacillus subtilis and S. aureus, Zoogloea ramigera, six ﬁlamentous
fungi, Penicillium chrysogenum, Aspergillus niger, Aureobasidium pullu-
lans (black and white strain), Trichoderma viride (original green strain
and brown mutant), Fusarium nivale, Microsporum gypseum and two
yeasts, Candida albicans and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (47).
    The results demonstrated that the minimum inhibitory concentration,
minimum microbicidal concentration and minimum microbistatic con-
centrations varied considerably depending on the microorganism tested.
In general, the sensitivity of the microorganisms to berberine in decreas-
ing order was as follows: S. aureus > P. aeruginosa S (sensitive) > E. coli
(sensitive) > P. aeruginosa R (resistant) > E. coli (resistant) > B. subtilis
> Z. ramigera > C. albicans > S. cerevisiae > A. pullulans > T. viride
(brown) > M. gypseum > A. niger > F. nivale > P. chrysogenum
> T. viride (green).
    Berberine weakly inhibited the growth of Bacillus subtilis and Salmo-
nella enteritidis in vitro at a concentration of 1 mg/ml and 0.5 mg/ml, re-
spectively (48). Berberine also weakly inhibited the growth of Clostridi-
um perfringens in vitro (150 μg/ml), and, at a concentration of 1.0 mg/ml,
weakly inhibited the growth of Entamoeba histolytica, Giardia lamblia

36
                                                            Cortex Berberidis


and Trichomonas vaginalis and induced morphological changes in the
parasites (49).

Cardiovascular effects
Berberine has been reported to have protective effects against cardiac ar-
rhythmias and severe congestive heart failure (50–52). This physiological
effect is due to the ability of berberine to prolong action potential dura-
tion and inhibit the inward rectiﬁer potassium current and outward de-
layed rectiﬁer potassium current (50–100 μM). Berberine has also been
shown to inhibit the human ether-a-go-go-related channel expression in
Xenopus oocytes (median effective dose was 95 μM). In rats, Langendorff
perfusion of an isolated heart was performed using verapamil to bring
about acute heart failure. Treatment of the heart with berberine (10 μmol/l)
before the use of verapamil signiﬁcantly reduced the degree of heart fail-
ure as compared with the control group (p < 0.001) (52).

Effects on smooth muscle
Berberine, at a concentration of 1 μM, relaxed norepinephrine-precon-
tracted isolated rat aorta strips (53). Berberine induced relaxation in iso-
lated precontracted rat mesenteric arteries at a concentration of 10-5 M
(54, 55). At a concentration of 0.1–100 μM, berberine suppressed basal
tone and induced a concentration-dependent relaxation of phenyleph-
rine-precontracted rabbit corpus cavernosum in vitro (56). Intracavern-
ous injection of berberine to anaesthetized rabbits at a dose of 5.0 mg/kg
increased intracavernosal pressure from 12.7 to 63.4 mmHg, and the du-
ration of tumescence ranged from 11.5 to 43.7 minutes (56). Berberine
inhibited norepinephrine and phenylephrine-induced contractions in
prostate strips isolated from rabbit (57).
    The effects and mechanism of berberine on the intracellular free calci-
um concentration in the smooth muscle cells of guinea-pig colon were
assessed in vitro using bi-wavelength spectrophotometry in suspensions
of these cells. In the resting state, berberine had no signiﬁcant effects on
free calcium concentration, but inhibited the increase in free calcium lev-
els induced by 60 mm potassium chloride in a concentration-dependent
manner. The median inhibitory concentration was 34.09 μM. At concen-
trations of 30 and 100 μM, berberine inhibited the elevation of free calci-
um evoked by 10 μM of acetylcholine in the presence or absence of extra-
cellular calcium. These data suggest that berberine inhibits the inﬂux of
extracellular calcium and calcium release from intracellular stores in the
smooth muscle cells of colon, indicating that berberine may be a calcium
channel blocker (58).

                                                                          37
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Immunological effects
Berberine inhibited the proliferation of mouse spleen cells induced by T-
dependent mitogens (concanavalin A) and phytohaemagglutinin. Spleen
cells were obtained from mice treated with berberine at a dose of 10.0 mg/
kg bw for 3 days (38).
   Intragastric administration of an extract of the cortex to rats for 6 weeks
increased production of antigen-speciﬁc immunoglobulin M (59). Intra-
peritoneal administration of berberine to mice, at a daily dose of 10.0 mg/
kg bw for 3 days before the induction of tubulointerstitial nephritis, sig-
niﬁcantly (p = 0.001) reduced pathological injury and improved renal
function, as well as decreasing the number of CD3+, CD4+ and CD8+
T-lymphocytes as compared with controls (60).
Miscellaneous activity
Intraperitoneal administration of 150.0 mg/kg bw of cyclophosphamide
caused serious haemorrhagic cystitis in rats after 12 hr, including bladder
oedema, haemorrhage and dramatic elevation of nitric oxide metabolites
in urine and in plasma. Rats were pretreated with one or two doses of
berberine at 50.0, 100.0 or 200.0 mg/kg bw intraperitoneally then chal-
lenged with cyclophosphamide (150 mg/kg, intraperitoneally). The re-
sults indicated that pretreatment of rats with berberine reduced cyclo-
phosphamide-induced cystitis in a dose-dependent manner. Furthermore,
two doses of berberine showed greater protection against cyclophosph-
amide urotoxicity than a single dose. In addition, a single dose of 200.0 mg/
kg bw berberine, or two doses of 100.0 and two doses of 200.0 mg/kg bw
berberine could completely block cyclophosphamide-induced bladder
oedema and haemorrhage, as well as the increase in nitric oxide metabo-
lites in rat urine and plasma (61).
Toxicology
The oral median lethal dose of berberine in mice was 329 mg/kg bw (62).
Oral administration of berberine (2.75 g) to dogs produced severe gastro-
intestinal irritation, profuse watery diarrhoea, salivation, muscular tremors
and paralysis. Respiration was not affected. Postmortem analysis of the
intestines found them to be contracted, inﬂamed, and empty or containing
mucous and watery ﬂuid. An oral dose of 25.0 mg/kg bw of berberine sul-
fate induced depression lasting for 6 to 8 hours; 50 mg/kg bw caused sali-
vation and sporadic emesis. A dose of 100.0 mg/kg bw induced persistent
emesis and death of all animals 8–10 days later (62). Pretreatment of ro-
dents with a single oral dose of berberine (4.0 mg/kg bw) induced pro-
longation of the pentobarbital (60 mg/kg bw, intraperitoneally)-induced
sleeping time as well as increased strychnine (0.3 mg/kg bw, intraperiton-

38
                                                             Cortex Berberidis


eally)-induced toxicity, suggestive of an inhibitory effect on microsomal
drug metabolizing enzymes, cytochrome P450 isozymes (63).
Uterine stimulant effects
A hot aqueous extract of the bark (alkaloid free) stimulated contractions in
isolated guinea-pig uteri at a concentration of 1:200 (1 ml extract in 200 ml
bath medium) (64, 65). A 70% ethanol extract of the crude drug inhibited
spontaneous, oxytocin- or serotonin-induced contractions in isolated rat
uteri, with a median inhibitory concentration range of 10.0–19.9 μg/ml (66).

Clinical pharmacology
Berberine has demonstrated efﬁcacy for the treatment of secretory diar-
rhoea (14–20). However, the quality of the trials was limited by a lack of
positive controls. Few studies have compared the efﬁcacy of berberine
with that of tetracycline for the treatment of ﬂuid loss caused by diarrhoea
in patients with cholera or in non-cholera diarrhoea (14, 15, 17, 62).
   In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial in-
volving 400 patients with acute watery diarrhoea, the antisecretory and
vibriostatic effects of berberine and tetracycline were evaluated (14). In
this study of 185 patients with cholera, oral administration of tetracycline
or tetracycline and berberine, at a dose of 100.0 mg orally four times daily,
reduced the stool volume and frequency, as well as the duration of diar-
rhoea. In the berberine-treated group, together with a reduction in stool
volume, a 77% reduction in the concentration of cyclic adenosine mono-
phosphate in the stool was observed. Neither berberine nor tetracycline
exhibited any beneﬁt over placebo in patients with non-cholera diarrhoea
of unspeciﬁed etiologies (14).
   A randomized comparison-controlled trial involving 165 patients as-
sessed the antisecretory activity of berberine sulfate for enterotoxigenic
Escherichia coli-induced diarrhoea. Patients received either 400.0 mg of
berberine as a single oral dose or 1200 mg of berberine sulfate (400.0 mg
every 8 hours) for the treatment of cholera (17). In patients with Escheri-
chia coli-induced diarrhoea who received a single oral dose of berberine,
the mean stool volumes were signiﬁcantly (p < 0.05) reduced over those
of controls during three consecutive 8-hour periods after treatment. At
24 hours after treatment, more of the patients who were treated with ber-
berine and had Escherichia coli-induced diarrhoea, had less diarrhoea than
controls (42% versus 20%, p < 0.05). Patients with diarrhoea due to Vi-
brio chlolerae who received 400.0 mg of berberine had a reduction in stool
volume, but those treated with 1200 mg of berberine plus tetracycline did
not. No adverse effects were observed in the patients receiving berberine.
The results of this study indicated that berberine was an effective and safe

                                                                           39
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


antisecretory drug for treatment of Escherichia coli-induced diarrhoea,
but had only a modest antisecretory effect in cholera patients, in whom
the activity of tetracycline alone was superior (17).
    A clinical study was conducted in primary-school children with ocular
trachoma. Ninety-six children with this disease were selected for a blind-
ed study. Patients were advised to instil the drops containing 0.2% ber-
berine into the eye three times daily and to apply an ointment containing
0.2% berberine at bedtime to both eyes for a period of 3 months. The
comparison drugs tested were berberine drops plus 0.5% neomycin oint-
ment at bedtime; 20% sodium sulfacetamide drops with 6% sodium sulf-
acetamide ointment at bedtime, or placebo (normal saline) drops. The
children treated with berberine had a response rate of 87.5%, whereas
those treated with berberine and neomycin had a response rate of 58.83%.
The study showed that 83.88% were clinically cured but only 50% be-
came microbiologically negative when treated with berberine alone (21).
    Berberine has been used therapeutically for the treatment of cutaneous
leishmaniasis, commonly referred to as “oriental sore”, by subcutaneous
injection of berberine near the site of the lesion (22–24). In patients with
cutaneous leishmaniasis caused by Leishmania tropica, injection of a
preparation containing 2% berberine into lesions was an effective treat-
ment (22, 23).

Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
In animal models, berberine has poor bioavailability because it is a qua-
ternary ammonium compound. It has been suggested that the poor bio-
availability of berberine may be due to the activation of P-glycoprotein
(67). In an investigation on enhancing its bioavailability, the effect of P-
glycoprotein inhibitors cyclosporin A, verapamil and the monoclonal
antibody C219 were investigated using in vivo and in vitro models of
intestinal absorption to determine the role of P-glycoprotein in berberine
absorption (51). In the rat re-circulating perfusion model, berberine ab-
sorption was improved sixfold by co-administration of P-glycoprotein
inhibitors. In the rat intestinal sac model, berberine serosal-to-mucosal
transport was signiﬁcantly decreased by cyclosporin. In Ussing-type
chambers, the rate of serosal-to-mucosal transport across rat ileum was
threefold higher than in the reverse direction and was signiﬁcantly de-
creased by cyclosporin. In Caco-2 cells, berberine absorption was signiﬁ-
cantly increased by P-glycoprotein inhibitors and by monoclonal anti-
body C219. P-glycoprotein appears to contribute to the poor intestinal
absorption of berberine, indicating that P-glycoprotein inhibitors could
be of therapeutic value by improving its bioavailability (51).

40
                                                            Cortex Berberidis


    The pharmacokinetics of berberine were assessed by high-performance
liquid chromatography coupled to microdialysis to determine the con-
centration of unbound berberine in rat blood, liver and bile (68). Micro-
dialysis probes were simultaneously inserted into the jugular vein towards
the right atrium, the median lobe of the liver and the bile duct of rats for
biological ﬂuid sampling after administration of berberine, at a dose of
10 mg/kg bw, through the femoral vein. A linear concentration–response
relationship was observed over the concentration range 0.05–50.0 μg/ml.
The results demonstrated that the disposition of berberine occurred in the
blood, liver and bile ﬂuid. These data indicate that berberine is metabo-
lized in the liver and undergoes hepatobiliary excretion (68).
    The structures of the unknown metabolites of berberine were deter-
mined after isolation of the compounds from the urine of ﬁve volunteers.
Each of the volunteers was given an oral dose of berberine chloride, 0.9 g
per day, for 3 days. Metabolites in urine samples were isolated and puri-
ﬁed by polyporous resin column chromatography and identiﬁed by elec-
trospray ionization mass spectroscopy and proton nuclear magnetic reso-
nance spectroscopy. The three major unknown metabolites (M1, M2 and
M3) were isolated and identiﬁed as jatrorrhizine-3-sulfate, demethylene-
berberine-2-sulfate and thalifendine-10-sulfate (50).

Toxicology and overdose
Following accidental ingestion by humans of more than 500 mg of ber-
berine, lethargy, nosebleeds, dyspnoea, and skin and eye irritation may
occur. In addition, kidney irritation, nephritis and lethal poisoning have
been reported. Disturbances of the gastrointestinal tract with nausea,
vomiting and diarrhoea have also been observed (69).

Adverse reactions
No information found.

Contraindications
Cortex Berberidis is contraindicated in patients with hypersensitivity or
allergy to the plant material.

Warnings
Exposure of patients to sunlight or artiﬁcial light sources emitting UVA
should be avoided when topical preparations derived from the crude drug
or berberine are applied (70).

                                                                          41
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Precautions
General
Use with caution in patients with high blood pressure, diabetes, glaucoma
or a history of cardiovascular disease.

Drug interactions
Berberine is reported to upregulate the expression of the human multi-
drug resistance gene coding for multidrug resistance transporter (PGP-
170); thus the treatment of tumours with berberine may result in reduced
retention of chemotherapeutic agents such as paclitaxel (71, 72). Berberine
has been reported to interact with cyclosporin in renal transplant patients
(73). Blood concentrations of cyclosporin were enhanced by 75% after
co-administration of berberine hydrochloride in renal transplant patients,
but this did not increase the toxicity of cyclosporin (73).

Drug and laboratory test interactions
None reported.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
The genotoxic effects of berberine in prokaryotic cells were assessed in
the SOS chromotest in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (74). No genotoxic activ-
ity with or without metabolic activation was observed, and no cytotoxic
or mutagenic effects were seen under nongrowth conditions. However, in
dividing cells, the alkaloid induced cytotoxic and cytostatic effects in pro-
ﬁcient and repair-deﬁcient Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In dividing cells, the
induction of frameshift and mitochondrial mutations, as well as crossing
over, showed that the compound is not a potent mutagen (74).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
No information was found.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Due to a lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug during pregnancy is
not recommended.

Nursing mothers
Due to a lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug during breastfeed-
ing is not recommended.

Paediatric use
Due to a lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug in children under
the age of 12 years is not recommended.

42
                                                                  Cortex Berberidis


Dosage forms
Crude drug and dried extracts, ﬂuidextracts, and tinctures (1, 75). Store in
a tightly sealed container away from heat and light.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dose: crude drug 0.5–1.0 g three times daily, or by decoction; liquid
extract 1:1 in 60% ethanol, 0.3–1.0 ml three times daily; tincture 1:10 60%
ethanol, 2–4 ml three times daily (1).

References
1. British herbal pharmacopoeia, Vol. 1. Exeter, British Herbal Medicine Asso-
    ciation, 1996.
2. Farmacopea homeopática de los estados unidos mexicanos. Mexico City, Sec-
    retaría de salud, Comisión permanente de la farmacopea de los Estados Uni-
    dos Mexicanos, 1998 [in Spanish].
3. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
4. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
5. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy. Philadelphia, Blakiston, 1950.
6. PDR for herbal medicine. Montvale, New Jersey, Medical Economics Com-
    pany, 1998.
7. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
8. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
9. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (unpublished document WHO/FSF/
    FOS/97.7).
10. The United States Pharmacopoeia, 29. Rockville, MD, United States Phar-
    macopeia Convention, 2005.
11. Drost-Karbowska K, Kowalewski Z, Szaufer M. Determination of protober-
    berine alkaloid complex in various organs of Berberis vulgaris. Acta Poloniae
    Pharmaceutica, 1974, 31:683–687.
12. Slavik J, Slavikova L. Quaternary isoquinoline alkaloids and some diterpe-
    noid alkaloids in plants of the Czech Republic. Collection Czechoslovakian
    Chemical Communication, 1995, 60:1034–1041 [in English].
13. Velluda CC et al. Effect of Berberis vulgaris extract, and of berberine, ber-
    bamine and oxyacanthine alkaloids on liver and bile function. Lucrarile
    prezentate. Conference Nationale Farmacia Bucharest, 1958:351–354.

                                                                                43
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


14. Khin-Maung U et al. Clinical trial of berberine in acute watery diarrhoea.
    British Medical Journal, 1986, 291:1601–1605.
15. Lahiri SC, Dutta NK. Berberine and chloramphenicol in the treatment of
    cholera and severe diarrhoea. Journal of the Indian Medical Association, 1967,
    48:1–11.
16. Chauhan RK, Jain AM, Bhandari B. Berberine in the treatment of childhood
    diarrhoea. Indian Journal of Pediatrics, 1970, 37:577–579.
17. Rabbani GH et al. Randomized controlled trial of berberine sulfate therapy
    for diarrhea due to enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli and Vibrio cholerae. Jour-
    nal of Infectious Diseases, 1987, 155:979–984.
18. Sharda DC. Berberine in the treatment of diarrhoea in infancy and child-
    hood. Journal of the Indian Medical Association, 1970, 54:22–24.
19. Sharma R, Joshi CK, Goyal RK. Berberine tannate in acute diarrhoea. Indian
    Journal of Pediatrics, 1970, 7:496–501.
20. Tang W, Eisenbrand G. Chinese drugs of plant origin. London, Springer-Ver-
    lag, 1992.
21. Mohan M et al. Berberine in trachoma. Indian Journal of Ophthalmology,
    1982, 30:69–75.
22. Das Gupta BM. The treatment of oriental sore with berberine acid sulfate.
    Indian Medical Gazette, 1930, 65:683–685.
23. Das Gupta BM, Dikshit BB. Berberine in the treatment of Oriental boil. In-
    dian Medical Gazette, 1929, 67:70.
24. Devi AL. Berberine sulfate in oriental sore. Indian Medical Gazette, 1929,
    64:139.
25. Peirce A. The APhA practical guide to natural medicines. New York, NY,
    Stonesong Press, Wm. Morrow & Co., 1999.
26. Kupeli E et al. A comparative study on the anti-inﬂammatory, antinocicep-
    tive and antipyretic effects of isoquinoline alkaloids from the roots of Turk-
    ish Berberis species. Life Sciences, 2002, 72:645–657.
27. Zolotnitskaya SY, ed. Pharmaceutical resources of Armenian Flora, Vol. 2.
    Yerevan, Armenia, SSR AN Publishers, 1965.
28. Hahn FE, Ciak J. Berberine. Antibiotics, 1975, 3:577–588.
29. Uebaba K et al. Adenylate cyclase inhibitory activity of berberine. Japanese
    Journal of Pharmacology, 1984, 36 (Suppl.1):352.
30. Hui KK et al. Interaction of berberine with human platelet alpha-2 adreno-
    ceptors. Life Sciences, 1989, 49:315–324.
31. Gaitonde BB, Marker PH, Rao NR. Effect of drugs on cholera toxin induced
    ﬂuid in adult rabbit ileal loop. Progress in Drug Research, 1975, 19:519–526.
32. Sabir M, Akhter MH, Bhide NK. Antagonism of cholera toxin by berberine
    in the gastrointestinal tract of adult rats. Indian Journal of Medical Research,
    1977, 65:305–313.
33. Sack RB, Froehlich JL. Berberine inhibits intestinal secretory response of
    Vibrio cholerae and Escherichia coli enterotoxins. Infection and Immunity,
    1982, 35:471–475.

44
                                                                  Cortex Berberidis


34. Swabb EA, Tai YH, Jordan L. Reversal of cholera toxin-induced secretion in
    rat ileum by luminal berberine. American Journal of Physiology, 1981,
    241:G248–G252.
35. Guandalini S et al. Berberine effects on ion transport in rabbit ileum. Pediat-
    ric Research, 1983, 17:423.
36. Tai YH et al. Antisecretory effects of berberine in rat ileum. American Jour-
    nal of Physiology, 1981, 241:G253–G258.
37. Taylor CT et al. Berberine inhibits ion transport in human colonic epithelia.
    European Journal of Pharmacology, 1999, 368:111–118.
38. Ivanovska N, Philipov S, Hristova M. Inﬂuence of berberine on T-cell medi-
    ated immunity. Immunopharmacology and Immunotoxicology, 1999, 21:771–
    786.
39. Zhou H, Mineshita S. The effect of berberine chloride on experimental colitis
    in rats in vivo and in vitro. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Ther-
    apeutics, 2000, 294:822–829.
40. Iizuka N et al. Inhibitory effect of Coptidis Rhizoma and berberine on the
    proliferation of human esophageal cancer cell lines. Cancer Letters, 2000,
    148:19–25.
41. Ivanovska N, Philipov S. Study on the anti-inﬂammatory action of Berberis
    vulgaris root extract, alkaloid fractions and pure alkaloids. International
    Journal of Immunopharmacology, 1996, 18:553–561.
42. Huang CG et al. Effect of berberine on arachidonic acid metabolism in rab-
    bit platelets and endothelial cells. Thrombosis Research, 2002, 106:223–227.
43. Mahady GB et al. In vitro susceptibility of Helicobacter pylori to isoquino-
    line alkaloids from Sanguinaria canadensis and Hydrastis canadensis. Phyto-
    therapy Research, 2003, 17:217–221.
44. Stermitz FR et al. Two ﬂavonols from Artemisia annua which potentiate the
    activity of berberine and norﬂoxacin against a resistant strain of Staphylococ-
    cus aureus. Planta Medica, 2002, 68:1140–1141.
45. Gentry EJ et al. Antitubercular natural products: berberine from the roots of
    commercial Hydrastis canadensis powder. Isolation of inactive 8-oxotetrahy-
    drothalifendine, canadine, B-hydrastine, and two new quinic acid esters, hy-
    candinic acid esters-1 and -2. Journal of Natural Products, 1998, 61:1187–
    1193.
46. Chi HJ, Woo YS, Lee YJ. Effect of berberine and some antibiotics on the
    growth of microorganisms. Korean Journal of Pharmacognosy, 1991,
    22:45–50.
47. Cernakova M, Kostalova D. Antimicrobial activity of berberine – a constitu-
    ent of Mahonia aquifolium. Folia Microbiologia (Praha), 2002, 47:375–378.
48. Iwasa K et al. Structure-activity relationships of protoberberines having an-
    timicrobial activity. Planta Medica, 1998, 64:748–751.
49. Kaneda Y et al. In vitro effects of berberine sulphate on the growth and
    structure of Entamoeba histolytica, Giardia lamblia, and Trichomonas vagi-
    nalis. Annals of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology, 1991, 85:417–425.

                                                                                45
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


50. Pan JF et al. Identiﬁcation of three sulfate-conjugated metabolites of ber-
    berine chloride in healthy volunteers’ urine after oral administration. Acta
    Pharmacologia Sinica, 2002, 23:77–82.
51. Pan GY et al. The involvement of P-glycoprotein in berberine absorption.
    Pharmacology and Toxicology, 2002, 91:193–197.
52. Zhou Z, Xu J, Lan T. [Protective effect of berberine on isolated perfused
    heart in heart failure.] Huaxi Yike Daxue Xuebao, 2001, 32:417–418.
53. Wong KK. Mechanism of the aorta relaxation induced by low concentrations
    of berberine. Planta Medica, 1998, 64:756–757.
54. Chiou WF, Yen MH, Chen CF. Mechanism of vasodilatory effect of ber-
    berine in rat mesenteric artery. European Journal of Pharmacology, 1991,
    204:35–40.
55. Ko WH et al. Vasorelaxant and antiproliferative effects of berberine. Euro-
    pean Journal of Pharmacology, 2000, 399:187–196.
56. Chiou WF, Chen J, Chen CF. Relaxation of corpus cavernosum and raised
    intracavernous pressure by berberine in rabbit. British Journal of Pharmacol-
    ogy, 1998, 125:1677–1684.
57. Baldazzi C et al. Effects of the major alkaloid of Hydrastis canadensis L.,
    berberine, on rabbit prostate strips. Phytotherapy Research, 1998, 12:589–
    591.
58. Cao JW et al. Effects of berberine on intracellular free calcium in smooth
    muscle cells of guinea pig colon. Digestion, 2001, 64:179–183.
59. Rehman J et al. Increased production of antigen-speciﬁc immunoglobulins G
    and M following in vivo treatment with the medicinal plants Echinacea an-
    gustifolia and Hydrastis canadensis. Immunology Letters, 1999, 68:391–395.
60. Marinova EK et al. Suppression of experimental autoimmune tubulointersti-
    tial nephritis in BALB/c mice by berberine. Immunopharmacology, 2000,
    48:9–16.
61. Xu X, Malave A. Protective effect of berberine on cyclophosphamide-in-
    duced haemorrhagic cystitis in rats. Pharmacological Toxicology, 2001,
    88:232–237.
62. Lampe KF. Berberine. In: De Smet PA, et al., eds. Adverse effects of herbal
    drugs, Vol. I. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1992:97–104.
63. Janbaz KH, Gilani AH. Studies on preventive and curative effects of ber-
    berine on chemical-induced hepatotoxicity in rodents. Fitoterapia, 2000,
    71:25–33.
64. Supek Z, Tomic D. Pharmacological and chemical investigations of barberry
    (Berberis vulgaris). Lijec vjesnic, 1946, 68:16.
65. Haginiwa J, Harada M. Pharmacological studies on crude drugs. V. Com-
    parison of the pharmacological actions of berberine type alkaloid containing
    plants and their components. Yakugaku Zasshi, 1962, 82:726.
66. Cometa MF, Abdel-Haq H, Palmery M. Spasmolytic activities of Hydrastis
    canadensis L. on rat uterus and guinea pig trachea. Phytotherapy Research,
    1998, 12(Suppl 1):S83–S85.

46
                                                                   Cortex Berberidis


67. Maeng HJ et al. P-glycoprotein-mediated transport of berberine across
    Caco-2 cell monolayers. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2002, 91:2614–
    2621.
68. Tsai PL, Tsai TH. Simultaneous determination of berberine in rat blood, liv-
    er and bile using microdialysis coupled to high-performance liquid chroma-
    tography. Journal of Chromatography A, 2002, 961:125–130.
69. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs.
    Austin, TX, American Botanical Council, 1998.
70. Inbaraj JJ et al. Photochemistry and photocytotoxicity of alkaloids from
    Goldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis L.) 1. Berberine. Chemical Research Toxi-
    cology, 2001, 14:1529–1534.
71. Lin HL et al. Up-regulation of multidrug resistance transporter expression
    by berberine in human and murine hepatoma cells. Cancer, 1999, 85:1937–
    1942.
72. Lin HL et al. Berberine modulates expression of mdr1 gene products and the
    responses of digestive tract cancer cells to Paclitaxel. British Journal of Can-
    cer, 1999, 81:416–422.
73. Li Q et al. Clinical study on coadministration of cyclosporin A and ber-
    berine hydrochloride in renal transplant recipients. China Journal of Clinical
    Pharmacology, 2001, 17:114–117.
74. Pasqual MS et al. Genotoxicity of the isoquinoline alkaloid berberine
    in prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. Mutation Research, 1993,
    286:243–252.
75. Bradley PR ed. British herbal compendium, Vol. 1. London, British Herbal
    Medicine Association, 1992.




                                                                                 47
                       Gummi Boswellii




Deﬁnition
Gummi Boswellii consists of the dried gum resin of Boswellia serrata
Roxb. ex Colebr. (Burseraceae) (1).

Synonyms
Boswellia glabra Roxb., B. thurifera (Colebr.) Roxb. (2, 3).

Selected vernacular names
Alberodell’incenso, anduga, arbore à encerns, boswellia, boswellie-dent-
elee, chilakdupa, dhupelio, dhup-gugali, dhupdo, fan hun hsiang, fan hun
shu, gajabhakshya, gandhabiroz, gobahr shalla, gugal, guggul, guggula,
husn-e-lubban, Indian frankincense tree, Indian olibanum, Indischer-
weihrauch, kapitthaprani, kondagugi tamu, kondor, koonkanadhoopam,
kundre, kundrikam, kundur, kundur luban, kunduru, kunthreekan, kun-
turukkam, labana, loban, loban zakar, lobhan, luban, luban-dacar-hindi,
luban dhakar, maddi, madi, madimar, pahadi, parangisambrani, parang-
isampirani, saladi, salai, Salaibaum, salai cha dink, salai gonad, salai gug-
gal, salakhi, saleda, saledhi, saledo, salgai, sallaki, sambrani, samprani,
sanlaki, shaledum, shallaki, susrava, tallaki, vishesha dhoop, visheshdhup,
zarw (1, 2, 4–7).

Geographical distribution
Native to India (3, 6, 7).

Description
A medium to large deciduous tree, up to 18 m in height and 2.4 m in girth.
Leaves imparipinnate, leaﬂets ovate or ovate-lanceolate, variable. Flowers
small, white, in axillary racemes or panicles. Drupes 12 mm long, trigo-
nous, scarlet when young, turn white at maturity. Bark thick and aro-
matic. When cut, a secretion exudes and becomes gum-like after exposure
to air (1, 2, 7).

48
                                                                 Gummi Boswellii


Plant material of interest: dried gum-resin
General appearance
The gum solidiﬁes slowly with time. It is reddish brown, greenish yellow, or
dull yellow to orange in colour. It occurs in small, ovoid, fragrant tears. Some-
times the tears form agglomerated masses up to 5 cm long and 2 cm thick.
Fracture is brittle, fractured surface is waxy and translucent. Burns readily
and emanates an agreeable characteristic balsamic resinous odour (1, 2).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: aromatic, characteristically balsamiferous; taste: agreeable (1, 2).

Microscopic characteristics
Debris of ﬁbres, rectangular cork cells, very few yellowish oil globules
and numerous, small or large, oval to round or rhomboidal crystalline
fragments present (2).

Powdered plant material
Not applicable.

General identity tests
Macroscopic examinations (1, 2), microchemical and ﬂuorescence tests
and thin-layer chromatography (1), high-performance liquid chromatog-
raphy (8, 9) and gas chromatography–mass spectrometry for the presence
of boswellic acids (10), as well as gas chromatography–mass spectrometry
analysis for volatile and semi-volatile terpenes (11).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (12).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 5% (1).

Total ash
Not more than 10% (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 8% (1).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 28% (1).

                                                                              49
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Alcohol-soluble extractive
Not less than 45% (1).

Loss on drying
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more
than 0.05 mg/kg (13). For other pesticides see the European Pharmaco-
poeia (13) and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (12) and pesticide
residues (14).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (12).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (12).

Chemical assays
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Major chemical constituents
Contains 5–9% essential oil with major constituents being A-thujene (50–
61%), sabinene (5%), A-pinene (8%) and A-phellandrene (2%). Major
triterpene constituents of biological interest are members of the boswellic
acids (more than 12) including 11-oxo-B-boswellic acid, 3-O-acetyl-11-
oxo-B-boswellic acid, A-boswellic acid, B-boswellic acid, 3-O-acetyl-A-
boswellic acid, and 3-O-acetyl B-boswellic acid (3, 15–17). The structures
of representative boswellic acids are presented below.

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Orally for the management of arthritis, bronchial asthma, Crohn’s disease
and ulcerative colitis (18–22).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Orally for the treatment of rheumatism and arthritis (1, 2, 23).

50
                                                                                    Gummi Boswellii


                                  H3C       CH3

                                                   -Boswellic acid
                              H
                                                         R=H

                    CH3     CH3              CH3

R
                H       H     CH3                  3-O-Acetyl--boswellic acid
    O
                                                         R = CO-CH3
        H
         H3 C   CO2H

                                          H CH3
                                                   -Boswellic acid
                                  H                      R=H   X = H2
                            H3C
                                                   3-O-Acetyl--boswellic acid
                    X
                                                         R = CO-CH3     X = H2
                    CH3     CH3       H      CH3
                                                   11-Oxo--boswellic acid
R                       H     CH3
                H                                        R=H   X=O
    O
        H                                          3-O-Acetyl-11-oxo--boswellic acid
         H3 C   CO2H
                                                         R = CO-CH3     X=O



Uses described in traditional medicine
Treatment of abdominal pain, asthma, coughs, dysentery, fever, jaundice,
kidney stones, pimples, sores and stomach disorders (5). Also used as an
antivenin and an emmenagogue (24, 25).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Analgesic activity
Intragastric administration of the gum at doses ranging from 100.0–
500.0 mg/kg body weight (bw) had no analgesic effects in dogs, rabbits or
rats (26–28). However, administration of a non-phenolic fraction of the
crude drug produced analgesia in 60% of rats treated with a dose of
60.0 mg/kg bw. A dose of 150.0 mg/kg bw induced analgesia in 70% of
rats (29). The degree of analgesia was comparable to a dose of 3–4.5 mg/
kg bw of morphine. A dose of 150.0 mg/kg bw also caused a 70% reduc-
tion in spontaneous motor activity that lasted for 2 hours (29).
Anticomplementary activity
Boswellic acids exhibited anticomplementary activity in vitro, as assessed
by the reduction of immune-induced haemolysis of antibody-coated
sheep erythrocytes by pooled guinea-pig serum (30). The decrease in im-
mune-induced haemolysis was due to inhibition of C3-convertase of the
classical complement pathway. The threshold concentration for inhibit-
ing C3-convertase was found to be 100.0 μg/ml (30).

                                                                                                51
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Anti-inﬂammatory activity
The anti-inﬂammatory activity of an aqueous extract of the crude drug
was assessed in vivo. The extract signiﬁcantly inhibited both the maximal
oedema response and the total oedema response during 6 hours of carra-
geenan-induced rat paw oedema (31). Intragastric administration of the
gum or an aqueous methanol extract of the gum (9:1) to rats, at a dose of
50.0–200.0 mg/kg bw reduced carrageenan- or adjuvant-induced pedal
oedema by 34–73% (26, 32). An ethanol extract of the crude drug, admin-
istered at a dose of 50.0–200.0 mg/kg bw, exhibited anti-inﬂammatory
activity in carrageenan-induced oedema in rats and mice and dextran-in-
duced oedema in rats (28). The extract also had considerable anti-arthritic
activity but no signiﬁcant effect was observed in the cotton pellet-induced
granuloma test. Treatment with the extract inhibited inﬂammation-in-
duced increase in serum transaminase levels and leukocyte counts, but
lacked any analgesic or antipyretic effects in rats (28).
    The anti-inﬂammatory effects of the crude drug and boswellic acids
were assessed in rats with adjuvant-induced arthritis. The animals were
treated with 100.0 mg/kg bw of the crude drug or 200.0 mg/kg bw of bos-
wellic acid administered by gastric lavage for 2 weeks (33). The activity of
B-glucuronidase was used to assess lysosomal stability, which is an im-
portant factor in the arthritic syndrome. Induction of arthritis reduced
lysosome stability, but treatment with either the extract or boswellic acid
increased stability and had a protective effect on lysosomal integrity (33).
Speciﬁc boswellic acids inhibit elastase in leukocytes, inhibit prolifera-
tion, induce apoptosis and inhibit topoisomerases of leukaemia and glio-
ma cell lines (23).
    A methanol extract of the crude drug, containing boswellic acids and
their structural derivatives, was applied topically to the backs of mice to
determine its anti-inﬂammatory effects (23). The treatment markedly in-
hibited 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced skin inﬂamma-
tion, epidermal proliferation, the number of epidermal cell layers and tu-
mour promotion in 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene-initiated mice.
Feeding 0.2% of crude drug in the diet to CF-1 mice for 10–24 weeks
reduced the accumulation of parametrial fat pad weight under the abdo-
men, and inhibited azoxymethane-induced formation of aberrant crypt
foci by 46% (22).
    Boswellic acids (15.0 μg/ml) inhibit the biosynthesis of the pro-inﬂam-
matory leukotrienes in neutrophilic granulocytes by a non-redox, non-
competitive inhibition of 5-lipoxygenase, an enzyme in the pro-inﬂamma-
tory arachidonic acid cascade (34–36). The extract and its derivatives
caused a concentration-dependent decrease in the formation of leukotriene

52
                                                             Gummi Boswellii


B4 from endogenous arachidonic acid in rat peritoneal neutrophils in vitro
(37). Acetyl-11-keto-B-boswellic acid induced the most pronounced inhi-
bition of 5-lipoxygenase product formation, with a mean inhibitory con-
centration (IC50) of 1.5 μM. However, boswellic acid in concentrations of
up to 400.0 μM did not inhibit cyclooxygenase or 12-lipoxygenase in iso-
lated human platelets, or peroxidation of arachidonic acid by Fe-ascorbate.
These data suggest that boswellic acids are speciﬁc, nonreducing-type in-
hibitors of the 5-lipoxygenase product formation either interacting direct-
ly with the 5-lipoxygenase or blocking its translocation (37). 3-O-acetyl-
11-keto-B-boswellic acid is the most potent inhibitor of 5-lipoxygenase.
In vitro, 3-oxo-tirucallic acid inhibited 5-lipoxygenase product synthesis
in cell-free assays, with an IC50 of 3 μM, but in intact cells enhanced 5-li-
poxygenase product formation in ionophore-challenged polymorphonu-
clear leukocytes and initiated calcium mobilization, MEK-1/2 phosphory-
lation and 5-lipoxygenase translocation at a concentration of 2.5 to 15 μM.
These data indicate that the pentacyclic triterpenes that inhibit 5-lipoxy-
genase in cell-free systems activate 5-lipoxygenase product formation in
intact cells (38).
    Extracts of the crude drug and its constituents, the boswellic acids,
activate the mitogen-activated protein kinases p42 and p38 in isolated hu-
man primed polymorphonuclear leukocytes in vitro (39). Activation of
mitogen-activated protein kinases was rapid and transient with maximal
activation after 1–2.5 min of exposure and occurred in a dose-dependent
manner. The keto-boswellic acids (11-keto-B-boswellic acid and 3-O-
acetyl-11-B-keto-boswellic acid) activated kinase at 30.0 μM, whereas
other boswellic acids lacking the 11-keto group were less effective. More-
over, 11-keto-boswellic acids induced rapid and prominent mobilization
of free Ca2+ in polymorphonuclear leukocytes. Inhibitor studies revealed
that phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase is involved in boswellic acid-induced
mitogen-activated protein kinase activation, whereas a minor role was ap-
parent for protein kinase C. Mitogen-activated protein kinase activation
by 3-O-acetyl-11-B-keto-boswellic acid was partially inhibited when
Ca2+ was removed by chelation (39).
    Mixed acetyl-boswellic acids signiﬁcantly inhibited ionophore-stimu-
lated release of the leukotrienes B4 and C4 from intact human polymor-
phonuclear leukocytes, with 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) values
of 8.48 μg/ml and 8.43 μg/ml, respectively. Puriﬁed acetyl-11-keto-B-
boswellic acid was about three times more potent as an inhibitor of the
formation of both leukotriene B4 (IC50, 2.53 μg/ml) and leukotriene
C4 (IC50, 2.26 μg/ml) from human polymorphonuclear leukocytes in the
same assay. Daily intraperitoneal administration of an extract of mixed

                                                                          53
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


acetyl-boswellic acids (20.0 mg/kg bw) signiﬁcantly reduced the clinical
symptoms in guinea-pigs with experimental autoimmune encephalomy-
elitis between days 11 and 21. However, the inﬂammatory inﬁltrates in
the brain and the spinal cord were not signiﬁcantly less extensive in the
treated animals than in the respective control group. The multiple intra-
peritoneal administrations of boswellic acids did not inhibit the ionophore-
challenged ex vivo release of leukotrienes B4 and C4 from polymorpho-
nuclear leukocytes separated from the blood of guinea-pigs with
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis or the biosynthesis of leu-
kotrienes in vitro (40). Suspensions of rat peritoneal polymorphonuclear
leukocytes elicited with glycogen, stimulated by calcium and ionophore
to produce leukotrienes and 5-15-hydroxyeicosateraenoic acid (HETE)
from endogenous arachidonic acid, were treated with various concentra-
tions of an ethanol extract of the crude drug. A concentration-dependent
inhibition of leukotriene B4 and 5-HETE production was observed. All
products of 5-lipoxygenase from endogenous arachidonic acid in poly-
morphonuclear leukocytes were reduced (41).
Miscellaneous activities
Intragastric administration of a 50% ethanol extract of the crude drug,
at a dose of 250.0 mg/kg bw, to rats reduced blood glucose levels (42).
Intravenous administration to dogs of a 50% ethanol extract, at a dose
of 50.0 mg/kg bw, reduced blood pressure (42). Intragastric adminis-
tration of the crude drug at a dose of 100.0 mg/kg bw to cockerels,
rabbits and rats fed a high cholesterol diet reduced serum cholesterol
by 25–45% (26). Intragastric administration of the crude drug, at a dose
of 100.0–500.0 mg/kg bw did not reduce fever in rats, rabbits or dogs
(26). Acetyl-11-keto-beta-boswellic acid, a constituent of a herbal
medicine from Boswellia serrata resin, attenuated experimental ileitis
in animals (43).
Toxicology
The gestation period or parturition time in pregnant rats and the onset
time of castor oil-induced diarrhoea were unaffected by the extract and
no signiﬁcant effect was seen on cardiovascular, respiratory and central
nervous system functions. Intragastric administration of the crude drug
to dogs, rabbits or rats, at a dose of 500.0 or 1000.0 mg/kg bw, did not
have ulcerogenic effects. The oral and intraperitoneal median lethal doses
were greater than 2.0 g/kg bw in mice and rats (28). Intragastric adminis-
tration of the crude drug to monkeys (500.0 mg/kg bw), mice (2.0 g/kg
bw) or rats (1.0 g/kg bw) for 6 months produced no observable behav-
ioural, biochemical or histological abnormalities (44).

54
                                                             Gummi Boswellii


Clinical pharmacology
A double-blind pilot study, involving 37 patients with rheumatoid arthri-
tis, assessed the effects of the crude drug on the symptoms of swelling and
pain, and amount of self-medication with nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory
drugs (41). Patients were treated with 3.6 g of the crude drug or placebo
for 12 weeks. Outcome measures included Ritchie’s index for swelling and
pain, and the dose of nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs patients felt
they needed. There were no subjective, clinical or laboratory parameters
showing signiﬁcant changes from baseline to 12 weeks of treatment (45).
    A randomized double-blind, placebo-controlled cross-over study was
conducted to assess the efﬁcacy, safety and tolerability of a crude
Boswellia serrata extract in 30 patients with osteoarthritis of the knee.
Fifteen subjects received the active Boswellia serrata extract or placebo
for 8 weeks. After the ﬁrst treatment, a washout period was permitted and
the groups were then crossed over to receive the opposite intervention for
8 weeks. All patients receiving Boswellia serrata extract reported a de-
crease in knee pain, increased knee ﬂexion and increased walking distance.
The frequency of swelling in the knee joint was decreased, but radiology
detected no change. The observed differences between drug treatment
and placebo were statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.05). Boswellia serrata ex-
tract was well tolerated by the subjects except for minor gastrointestinal
adverse events (22).
    A double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving 40 patients with
bronchial asthma assessed the effects of an extract of the crude drug for
treatment of symptoms. The patients were treated with a preparation of
gum resin of 300 mg three times daily for a period of 6 weeks. After treat-
ment, 70% of patients showed improvement as evident from the disap-
pearance of physical symptoms and signs such as dyspnoea, bronchial
asthma and decreased number of attacks, as well as a decrease in eosino-
phil count and electron spin resonance. In the control group (treated with
lactose, 300.0 mg three times daily, for 6 weeks), only 27% of patients in
the control group showed improvement. The data show a role for the
crude drug in the treatment of bronchial asthma (20).
    A randomized, double-blind, controlled, parallel group comparison
clinical trial involving 102 patients assessed the effects of the crude drug
for the treatment of Crohn’s disease (18). The positive control arm was
treated with mesalazine. The primary outcome measure was the change in
the Crohn’s Disease Activity Index between the time of enrolment and
the end of therapy. The Crohn’s Disease Activity Index was reduced by
90 after treatment with the crude drug and by 53 after treatment with
mesalazine; however, the difference between the two treatments was not

                                                                         55
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


statistically signiﬁcant. Thus, the study concluded that an extract of the
crude drug was as effective as mesalazine for the treatment of Crohn’s
disease.
    The effect of an extract of the crude drug was assessed in patients with
ulcerative colitis, grade II or III (19). Patients were treated with the gum
resin preparation (350 mg three times daily for 6 weeks), and the effects
on stool properties, histolopathology and scan microscopy of rectal biop-
sies, blood parameters including haemogloblin, serum iron, calcium,
phosphorus, proteins, total leukocytes and eosinophils were measured.
Patients receiving sulfasalazine (1 g three times daily) served as controls.
At the end of the treatment period, all parameters tested had improved
after treatment with Boswellia serrata gum resin and the results were sim-
ilar to those in the control group: 82% of treated patients went into re-
mission following treatment with the gum resin as did 75% of those treat-
ed with sulfasalazine (19).
    A controlled clinical trial assessed the efﬁcacy of the crude drug in
patients with chronic colitis characterized by vague lower abdominal
pain, bleeding per rectum with diarrhoea and palpable tender descend-
ing and sigmoid colon. Thirty patients with chronic colitis, 17 men and
13 women aged between 18 and 48 years, were included in the study.
Twenty of the patients were given a preparation of the gum resin of Bos-
wellia serrata (300 mg three times daily for 6 weeks) and 10 were given
sulfasalazine (1 g three times daily for 6 weeks) and served as controls.
Of 20 patients treated with Boswellia gum resin, 18 showed an improve-
ment in one or more of the parameters: stool properties; histopathology;
scanning electron microscopy; and measures of haemoglobin, serum
iron, calcium, phosphorus, proteins, total leukocytes and eosinophils.
Of 20 patients treated with Boswellia gum resin, 14 went into remission
whereas in the patients treated with sulfasalazine, the remission rate was
4 out of 10 (20).

Adverse reactions
Minor gastrointestinal side-effects have been reported in the clinical trials
(19–22).

Contraindications
Hypersensitivity or allergy to the crude drug.

Warnings
No information was found.

56
                                                            Gummi Boswellii


Precautions
General
No information was found.

Drug interactions
None reported.

Drug and laboratory test interactions
None reported.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
No information was found.

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
No information was found.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Due to a lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug during pregnancy is
not recommended.

Nursing mothers
Due to a lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug during breastfeed-
ing is not recommended.

Paediatric use
Due to a lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug in children under
the age of 12 years is not recommended.


Dosage forms
Crude drug, extracts.


Storage
Store in a cool dry place away from heat or light.


Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Crude drug: 1–3 g daily (frequency not speciﬁed) (1).
Extracts: 300–350 mg three times daily (19–21).

                                                                        57
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


References
1. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India, Part I, Vol. IV. New Delhi, Ministry
    of Health and Family Welfare, Department of Indian System of Medicine
    and Homeopathy, 1999.
2. Database on medicinal plants used in Ayurveda. New Delhi, Central Council
    for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, Department of ISM and H, Ministry
    of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, 2000.
3. Horhammer L, eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis, 4th ed.
    Berlin, Springer Verlag, 1975 [in German].
4. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
6. Nadkarni KM. Indian materia medica. Bombay, Popular Prakashan, 1954.
7. Kapoor LD. Handbook of Ayurvedic medicinal plants. Boca Raton, CRC
    Press, 1990.
8. Hahn-Deinstrop E, Koch A, Müller M. Guidelines for the assessment of the tradi-
    tional herbal medicine olibanum by application of HPTLC and DESAGA ProVi-
    Doc video documentation. Journal of Planar Chromatography, 1998, 11:404–410.
9. Ganzera M, Khan IA. A reversed phase high performance liquid chromatog-
    raphy method for the analysis of boswellic acids in Boswellia serrata. Planta
    Medica, 2001, 67:778–780.
10. Hairﬁeld EM, Hairﬁeld HH Jr. McNair HM. GC, GC/MS, and TLC of
    B-boswellic acid and O-acetyl-B-boswellic acid from B. serrata, B. carteii and
    B. papyrifera. Journal of Chromatographic Science, 1989, 27:127–133.
11. Hamm S et al. A chemical investigation by headspace SPME and GC-MS of
    volatile and semi-volatile terpenes in various olibanum samples. Phytochem-
    istry, 2005, 66:1499–1514.
12. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
13. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
14. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
15. Girgune JB, Garg BD. Chemical investigation of the essential oil from Bos-
    wellia serrata Roxb. Journal of Scientiﬁc Research, 1979, 1:119–122.
16. Verghese J et al. A fresh look at the constituents of Indian Olibanum oil.
    Flavor and Fragrance Journal, 1987, 2:99–102.
17. Wichtl M. Teedrogen und phytopharmaka. Stuttgart, Wissenschaftliche Ver-
    lagsgesellschaft, 2002 [in German].
18. Gerhardt H et al. [Therapy of active Crohn disease with Boswellia serrata
    extract H 15]. Zeitschrift für Gastroenterologie, 2001, 39:11–17 [in German].

58
                                                                     Gummi Boswellii


19. Gupta, I et al. Effects of Boswellia serrata gum resin in patients with ulcer-
    ative colitis. European Journal of Medical Research, 1997, 21:37–43.
20. Gupta I et al. Effects of Boswellia serrata gum resin in patients with bron-
    chial asthma: results of a double-blind, placebo-controlled, 6-week clinical
    study. European Journal of Medical Research, 1998, 3:511–514.
21. Gupta I et al. Effects of gum resin of Boswellia serrata in patients with chron-
    ic colitis. Planta Medica, 2001, 67:391–395.
22. Kimmatkar N et al. Efﬁcacy and tolerability of Boswellia serrata extract in
    treatment of osteoarthritis of knee – a randomized double blind placebo con-
    trolled trial. Phytomedicine, 2003, 10:3–7.
23. Ammon HP. [Boswellic acids (components of frankincense) as the active
    principle in treatment of chronic inﬂammatory diseases]. Wiener Medizinis-
    che Wochenschrift, 2002, 152:373–378 [in German].
24. Chopra RN, ed. Indigenous drugs of India. Their medical and economic as-
    pects. Calcutta, India, Art Press, 1933.
25. Saha JC, Savini EC, Kasinathan S. Ecbolic properties of Indian Medicinal
    Plants. Part 1. Indian Journal of Medical Research, 1961, 49:130–151.
26. Atal CK, Gupta OP, Singh GB. Salai guggal: A promising anti-arthritic and
    anti-hyperlipidemic agent. British Journal of Pharmacology, 1981, 74:203–204.
27. Menon MK, Kar A. Analgesic and psychopharmacological effects of the gum
    resin of Boswellia serrata. Planta Medica, 1971, 19:333–341.
28. Singh GB, Atal CK. Pharmacology of an extract of salai guggal ex-Boswellia serrata,
    a new nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory agent. Agents and Actions, 1986, 18:407–412.
29. Kar A, Menon MK. Analgesic effect of the gum resin of Boswellia serrata.
    Life Sciences, 1969, 8:1023–1028.
30. Kapil A, Moza N. Anticomplementary activity of boswellic acids, an inhibi-
    tor of C3-convertase of the classical complement pathway. International
    Journal of Immunopharmacology, 1992, 14:1139–1143.
31. Duwiejua M et al. Anti-inﬂammatory activity of resins from some species of
    the plant family Burseraceae. Planta Medica, 1993, 59:12–16.
32. Etzel R. Special extract of Boswellia serrata (H15)* in the treatment of rheu-
    matoid arthritis. Phytomedicine, 1996, 3:91–94.
33. Reddy GK, Dhar SC. Effect of a new nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory agent
    on lysosomal stability in adjuvant induced arthritis. Italian Journal of Bio-
    chemistry, 1987, 36:205–217.
34. Ammon HP et al. Mechanism of anti-inﬂammatory actions of curcurmine
    and boswellic acids. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1993, 38:113–119.
35. Safayhi H et al. Concentration-dependent potentiating and inhibitory effects
    of Boswellia extracts on 5-lipoxygenase product formation in stimulated
    PMNL. Planta Medica, 2000, 66:110–113.
36. Schweizer S et al. Workup-dependent formation of 5-lipoxygenase inhibitory
    boswellic acid analogues. Journal of Natural Products, 2000, 63:1058–1061.
37. Safayhi H et al. Boswellic acids: novel, speciﬁc, nonredox inhibitors of 5-li-
    poxygenase. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 1992,
    261:1143–1146.

                                                                                    59
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


38. Boden SE et al. Stimulation of leukotriene synthesis in intact polymorpho-
    nuclear cells by the 5-lipoxygenase inhibitor 3-oxo-tirucallic acid. Molecular
    Pharmacology, 2001, 60:267–273.
39. Altmann A et al. Boswellic acids activate p42MAPK and p38 MAPK and stimu-
    late Ca 2+ mobilization. Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communica-
    tions, 2002, 290:185–190.
40. Wildfeuer A et al. Effects of boswellic acids extracted from a herbal medicine
    on the biosynthesis of leukotrienes and the course of experimental autoim-
    mune encephalomyelitis. Arzneimittelforschung, 1998, 48:668–674.
41. Ammon HP et al. Inhibition of leukotriene B4 formation in rat peritoneal
    neutrophils by an ethanolic extract of the gum resin exudate of Boswellia ser-
    rata. Planta Medica, 1991, 57:203–207.
42. Dhar ML et al. Screening of Indian plants for biological activity: part I. In-
    dian Journal of Experimental Biology, 1968, 6:232–247.
43. Krieglstein CF et al. Acetyl-11-keto-beta-boswellic acid, a constituent of a
    herbal medicine from Boswellia serrata resin, attenuates experimental ileitis.
    International Journal of Colorectal Diseases, 2001, 16:88–95.
44. Singh GB, Bani S, Singh S. Toxicity and safety evaluation of Boswellic acids.
    Phytomedicine, 1996, 3:87–90.
45. Sander O, Herborn G, Rau R. Is H15 (resin extract of Boswellia serrata, “in-
    cense”) a useful supplement to establish drug therapy of chronic polyarthri-
    tis? Results of a double-blind pilot study. Zeitschrift für Rheumatologie,
    1998, 57:11–16.




60
                     Semen Cardamomi




Deﬁnition
Semen Cardamomi consists of the dried ripe seed of Elettaria cardamo-
mum (L.) Maton (Zingiberaceae) recently removed from the capsule (1–9).
Note: In a number of formularies and standards, the drug is ofﬁcial as
Fructus Cardamomi, but the part employed is the seed, with the fruit
capsule removed prior to use (5–10).

Synonyms
Amomum repens Sonn., A. cardamomum Lour. (11), Alpinia cardamo-
mum Roxb. (12).

Selected vernacular names
Alaicha, bach dau khau, bastard cardamom, cardamomier, Cardamom-
pﬂanze, cardamomo minore, cardamomo, cardamon, cardamone, carda-
mone petite, Cardamonen, chinne elakulu, chittelam, chhoti lachi, chota
elaich, chotaa leicaha, choti ilayachi, Echte Kardamon, elã, elachi, elakay,
elakkki, elam, elayachi, elchi, Elettarie, ensal, ga qolia, garidimong, guju-
rati, haal boa, habbahan, habbahal, hab el haal, heel khurd, hel, hhabb el
hal, hiliki, illlachi, kakilahekurd, kakula saghira, kapoelaga, kardoem,
Kleine Kardamomen, krako, küçük kakule, lahanveldoda, lesser carda-
mom, luuk en, malabar cardamon, Malabar Cardamonen, pelaga, qaqui-
lah saghirah, ronde kardemon, sa nhon, sanna elakulu, sanna yalakii, sa-
rooplaachi, shozuku, siruelam, so du gu, sodugo, syouzuku, truti, velchi,
velloda (2–6, 12, 13).

Geographical distribution
Native to India and introduced to Sri Lanka (14, 15).

Description
A perennial zingiberaceous herb attaining a height of 2–4 m, with lanceo-
late leaves borne on long sheathing stems. Flowers numerous, borne on

                                                                          61
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


horizontal racemes that arise from the rhizome and run horizontally along
the ground. The fruit is inferior, ovoid or oblong, nearly ellipsoidal, capsule
plump or slightly shrunken, the seeds of which are covered by an aril (14).

Plant material of interest: dried seed
(in dried or nearly dried fruit)
General appearance
Usually in agglutinated groups of 2–7 seeds. Each irregularly angular, 3-
to 4-sided, oblong, ovoid; 2–4 mm long, up to 3 mm broad; pale orange to
dark reddish-brown; usually enveloped by a thin colourless membranous
aril externally, transversely wrinkled but not minutely pitted; hilum de-
pressed; raphe indicated by a channel extending on one side from base to
apex; hard; internally, whitish, showing a thin dark testa, a whitish starchy
perisperm grooved on one side, and in the centre a small yellowish trans-
lucent endosperm, surrounding a paler minute embryo (1–3, 5–7).
Fruit: Inferior, ovoid or oblong, nearly ellipsoidal, capsule plump or
slightly shrunken; 8–20 mm, but most fruits are 10–15 mm long, 5–10 mm
in diameter; green to pale buff, sometimes yellowish-grey, mostly 3-sided;
externally, smooth or longitudinally striated; base, rounded and may bear
the remains of the stalk; apex, more or less blunt and sometimes crowned
by a short beak formed of the remains of the ﬂoral parts; interior longitu-
dinally divided into 3 loculi, each loculus is an adherent mass of two rows
of 3–7 small seeds attached to the axile placenta (2, 5–7). According to
Evans (15), four varieties of fruits are available: “Mysore”, “Malabar”,
“Mangalore” and “Alleppy”.

Organoleptic properties
Odour: aromatic; taste: aromatic, pungent and slightly bitter (1–3, 5–8).

Microscopic characteristics
Aril of several layers of elongated, more or less collapsed, ﬂattened, thin-
walled parenchyma cells containing small rounded or oval droplets of oil.
Testa with an outer epidermis of long, narrow fusiform cells, 20–30 μm
wide, having slightly thickened undulating walls, followed by a layer of
collapsed parenchymatous cells, with brownish contents, becoming
2–3 layers in the region of the raphe, composed of large thin-walled, rect-
angular cells containing volatile oil; a band of 2–3 layers of parenchyma-
tous cells and an inner epidermis of thin-walled ﬂattened cells. Inner in-
tegument consists of 2 layers of cells, an outer layer of yellowish to
reddish-brown, rectangular, strongly ligniﬁed sclereids, about 40 μm long
and 20 μm wide, nearly ﬁlled with a small warty nodule of silica and an in-

62
                                                            Semen Cardamomi


ner epidermis of ﬂattened cells. Perisperm of thin-walled cells, packed with
minute starch grains, 1–6 μm in diameter, and containing 1–7 small prisms
of calcium oxalate, about 10–20 μm long. Endosperm, of small thin-walled
parenchymatous cells, each ﬁlled with a hyaline or granular mass of protein
but no starch; embryo, of small thin-walled cells containing aleurone grains;
ﬁbrous sclerenchyma and large vessels present in pericarp (2, 3).

Powdered plant material
Reddish to greyish-brown, characterized by numerous fragments of
perisperm cells, each ﬁlled with starch granules and containing one or
more prisms of calcium oxalate, 10–25 μm long; polyhedral masses of ad-
herent starch granules from perisperm, individual granules, up to 4 μm in
diameter; numerous fragments of yellowish to reddish-brown sclereids;
occasional particles of epidermal cells, often crossed at right angles by the
cells of the collapsed layer (2).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1–3, 5–8, 14).

Purity tests
Microbiology
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (16).

Chemical
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 3% (2, 17).

Total ash
Not more than 6% (3, 6–8, 17).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 4% (1, 3, 5–8).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 10% (3).

Alcohol-soluble extractive
Not less than 2% (3).

                                                                          63
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Loss on drying
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more
than 0.05 mg/kg (18). For other pesticides, see the European Pharmaco-
poeia (18) and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (16) and pesticide
residues (19).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (16).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (16).

Chemical assay
Contains not less than 3.3% essential oil (v/w) (5–8).

Major chemical constituents
Contains 2–8% essential oil, the major constituents of which are 1,8-cin-
eole (20–40%), (+)-A-terpinyl acetate (30–42%), A-terpineol (4–45%),
limonene (6%), and smaller amounts of linalool and linalool acetate,
among others (13, 20–22). The structures of 1,8-cineole, (+)-A-terpinyl
acetate and A-terpineol are presented below.

  CH3
                                    CH3                                              CH3
     O                H                                                    H
                HO                        and enantiomer   H3 C      O
          CH3
         CH3    H3C       CH3                                     O H3 C       CH3

1,8-Cineole                     -Terpineol                (+)--Terpinyl acetate


Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well-established documents
Orally for the treatment of dyspepsia (23, 24).

64
                                                            Semen Cardamomi


Uses described in traditional medicine
Treatment of asthma, bronchitis, colic, coughs, fainting, fever, rheuma-
tism, stomach cramps and urinary stones. Also used as an aphrodisiac,
appetizer, diuretic and emmenagogue (13, 24).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Anti-inﬂammatory and analgesic activities
An in vivo study was performed to compare the anti-inﬂammatory activ-
ity of the essential oil of the seed, at doses of 175 and 280 μl/kg body
weight (bw) with that of indometacin at a dose of 30.0 mg/kg bw against
acute carrageenan-induced plantar oedema in rats. Intraperitoneal admin-
istration of 280 μl/kg bw of the essential oil to rats or 233 μl/kg bw to
mice suppressed carrageenan-induced pedal oedema (25).
    One study assessed the analgesic activity of the essential oil from the
seed using 1,4-benzoquinone as a chemical stimulus for pain in mice. In-
tragastric administration of a dose of 233 μl/kg bw of the essential oil
produced a 50% reduction in writhing (stretching syndrome) induced by
intraperitoneal administration of a 0.02% solution of 1,4-benzoquinone
(25). Butanol and ether extracts of the seeds had anti-inﬂammatory activ-
ity in vitro, as assessed in the albumin stabilizing assay (concentration not
stated). The aqueous extract of the seeds, however, was not active (26).
Antimicrobial effects
At a concentration of 500 ppm, the essential oil from the seed weakly in-
hibited the growth of the fungi Arthroderma simii, Chaetomium indicum,
Microsporum canis and Trichophyton mentagrophytes in vitro (27).
Antispasmodic activity
A 95% ethanol extract of the crude drug at a concentration of 200 μg/ml
reduced histamine-induced and barium chloride-induced contractions in
guinea-pig ileum in vitro (28). Administration of essential oil from the
seed to rabbits, at a dose of 0.4 ml/kg bw, inhibited acetylcholine-induced
intestinal spasms (25). However, an aqueous extract of the crude drug was
reported to stimulate the rectus abdominus muscle of the frog and rat je-
junum in vitro at a concentration of 10% of the bath media (29).
Smooth-muscle relaxant activity
The essential oil from the seed relaxed isolated guinea-pig ileum and tra-
chea in vitro with a median effective dose of 15 mg and 27 mg/l, respec-
tively. An aqueous ethanol seed extract (10 mg/ml in bath medium) re-
laxed guinea-pig ileum in vitro (30).

                                                                          65
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Antiulcer activity
Intragastric administration of dried aqueous or methanol extracts of the
seeds to mice, at a dose of 53.0–126.9 mg/kg bw, reduced the secretion of
gastric juice (31). A methanol extract of the dried seeds (5:1) at a concentra-
tion of 100 μg/ml inhibited the growth of Helicobacter pylori in vitro (32).

Choleretic activity
Intraduodenal administration of a dried acetone extract of the dried seed
to rats at a dose of 50.0–500.0 mg/kg bw, had signiﬁcant choleretic effects
(p < 0.01–0.05) (33).

Central nervous system depressant activity
Intraperitoneal administration of the essential oil from the seed, at a dose
of 1.6 ml/kg bw, induced drowsiness and a staggering gait in mice (25).

Dermatological effects
Application of the essential oil from the seed at a concentration of 1.0%
to rabbit skin enhanced the dermal penetration of piroxicam, indometacin
and diclofenac sodium (34). Application of the essential oil from the seed,
at a dose of 1.0 ml/per square inch enhanced the dermal penetration of
indometacin in rats, rabbits and humans (34, 35). External pre-application
of the essential oil from the seed, at a concentration of 5%, to rabbit skin
increased the bioavailability of piroxicam gel (34).

Toxicity
Intragastric or subcutaneous administration of an aqueous ethanol (1:1)
extract of the seed, at a dose of 10 g/kg bw had no observed toxicity in
mice (36).

Miscellaneous activities
An aqueous ethanol (1:1) extract of the seed, at a concentration of 10.0 mg/
ml had histaminergic activity in guinea-pig ileum in vitro (30). Aqueous
extracts (10% w/v) of the crude drug were used for an ex vivo study of
their effect on gastric secretion. The stomach of pentobarbitone-anaes-
thetized rats was perfused at 0.15 ml/min with aqueous extracts of carda-
mom or acetylcholine (1.0 μg/ml or 10.0 μg/ml solutions, in 40-minute
time periods, twice in each experiment) followed by saline perfusions.
The acid content in the samples was estimated by titration with 0.1 N so-
dium hydroxide with phenolphthalein as indicator. Acute gastric mucosal
injury was induced by leaving aspirin 125.0 mg/kg bw in the stomach for
2 h before perfusion. The aqueous extract signiﬁcantly increased gastric
secretion from 0.10 to 0.28 (p < 0.005) (37).

66
                                                         Semen Cardamomi


Adverse reactions
Contact dermatitis has been reported (38).

Contraindications
Hypersensitivity or allergy to the crude drug.

Warnings
No information was found.

Precautions
General
Patients with gallstones should consult their health care provider before
using preparations of Semen Cardamomi (23).

Drug interactions
None reported.

Drug and laboratory test interactions
None reported.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
A hot aqueous or methanol extract of the crude drug at concentrations of
50 mg/disc was not mutagenic in the Ames test in Salmonella typhimuri-
um strains TA98 and TA100 (39). The essential oil inhibited formation of
DNA adducts with aﬂatoxin B1 by inhibiting activation in rat liver mi-
crosomes, thus demonstrating antimutagenic activity. The median inhibi-
tory concentration was 10 μl/disc (40).

Drug interactions
No information was found.

Drug and laboratory test interactions
None reported.

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
No information was found.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
No information was found.

                                                                      67
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Nursing mothers
No information was found.

Paediatric use
No information was found.

Dosage forms and storage
Crude drug, extracts and tinctures (23).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Average daily dosage: 1.5 g of drug; equivalent preparations.
Tincture: daily dosage equivalent to 12 g (23).

References
1. The National Formulary 20th ed, 1st Suppl. Rockville, MD, The United
    States Pharmacopeia Convention, 2002.
2. African pharmacopoeia, Vol. 1. Lagos, Nigeria, Organization of African Uni-
    ty, Scientiﬁc Technical & Research Commission, 1985.
3. The API Pharmacopoeia of India, Part I. Vol. I, 1st ed. New Delhi, Govern-
    ment of India Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of Indian
    Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 1990 (reprinted 2001).
4. Nadkarni AK, ed. Dr. K.M. Nadkarni’s Indian materia medica, Vol. 1. Bom-
    bay, Popular Prakshan, 1976.
5. The Japanese pharmacopeia, 14th ed. (English ed.). Tokyo, Ministry of
    Health, Labour and Welfare, 2001 (http://jpdb.nihs.go.jp/jp14e/).
6. Pharmacopoeia of the Republic of Korea, 7th ed. (English ed.). Seoul, Korea
    Food and Drug Administration, and Korean Association of Ofﬁcial Com-
    pendium for Public Health, 1998.
7. Asian crude drugs, their preparations and speciﬁcations. Asian Pharmacopeia.
    Manila, Federation of Asian Pharmaceutical Associations, 1978.
8. The Japanese standards for herbal medicines. Tokyo, Yakuji Nippon, 1993.
9. British herbal pharmacopoeia. Exeter, British Herbal Medicine Association,
    1996.
10. Reynolds JEF, ed. Martindale, the extra pharmacopoeia. London, Pharma-
    ceutical Press, 1996.
11. Perry LM, Metzger J. Medicinal plants of east and southeast Asia, attributed
    properties and uses. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1980.
12. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
13. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University

68
                                                                 Semen Cardamomi


    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
14. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy. Philadelphia, Blakiston, 1950.
15. Evans WC. Trease and Evans pharmacognosy, 15th ed. Edinburgh, WB
    Saunders, 2002.
16. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
17. British pharmacopoeia. London, Her Majesty’s Stationery Ofﬁce, 1993.
18. European pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
19. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
20. Hänsel R, Sticher O, Steinegger E. Pharmakognosie-phytopharmazie. Berlin,
    Springer-Verlag, 1999 [in German].
21. Shaban MAE et al. The chemical composition of the volatile oil of Elettaria
    cardamomum seeds. Pharmazie, 1987, 42:207–208.
22. Marongiu B, Piras A, Porcedda S. Comparative analysis of the oil and super-
    critical CO2 extract of Elettaria cardomomum (L) Maton. Journal of Agricul-
    tural Chemistry, 2004, 52:6278–6282.
23. Blumenthal M et al. The complete German Commission E monographs:
    Therapeutic guide to herbal medicines. Austin, TX, American Botanical
    Council, 1998.
24. Govindarajan VS et al. Cardamom – production, technology, chemistry, and
    quality. Critical Reviews in Food Science Nutrition, 1982, 16:229–326.
25. Al-Zuhair H et al. Pharmacological studies of cardamon oil in animals. Phar-
    macological Research, 1996, 34:79–82.
26. Han BH et al. Screening of the anti-inﬂammatory activity of crude drugs.
    Korean Journal of Pharmacognosy, 1972, 4:205–209.
27. El-Kady IA, El-Maraghy SSM, Mostafa E. Antibacterial and antidermato-
    phyte activities of some essential oils from spices. Qatar University Science
    Journal, 1993, 13:63–69.
28. Itokawa H et al. Studies on the constituents of crude drugs having inhibitory
    activity against contraction of the ileum caused by histamine or barium chlo-
    ride. Shoyakugaku Zasshi, 1983, 37:223–228.
29. Haranath PSRK, Akther MH, Sharif SI. Acetylcholine and choline in com-
    mon spices. Phytotherapy Research, 1987, 1:91–92.
30. Mokkhasmit M, Swatdimongkol K, Satrawaha P. Study on toxicity of Thai
    medicinal plants. Bulletin of the Department of Medical Sciences, 1971,
    12:36–65.
31. Sakai K et al. Effect of extracts of Zingiberaceae herbs on gastric secretion in
    rabbits. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1989, 37:215–217.
32. Mahady GB et al. In vitro susceptibility of Helicobacter pylori to botanicals
    used traditionally for the treatment of gastrointestinal disorders. Phytother-
    apy Research, 2005, 19:988–991.

                                                                                 69
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


33. Yamahara J et al. Biologically active principles of crude drugs. Cholagogic
    substances in cardamon seeds and its properties. Yakugaku Zasshi, 1983,
    103:979–985.
34. Huang YB et al. Cardomom oil as a skin permeation enhancer for indo-
    methacin, piroxicam and diclofenac. International Journal of Pharmaceutics,
    1995, 126:111–117.
35. Huang YB et al. Crude drug (Zingiberaceae) enhancement of percutaneous
    absorption of indomethacin: in vitro and in vivo permeation. Gaoxiong Yi
    Xue Ke Xue Za Zhi, 1993, 9:392–400.
36. Mokkhasmit M et al. Pharmacological evaluation of Thai medicinal plants.
    Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand, 1971, 54:490–504.
37. Vasudevan K et al. Inﬂuence of intragastric perfusion of aqueous spice ex-
    tracts on acid secretion in anesthetized albino rats. Indian Journal of Gastro-
    enterology, 2000, 19:53–56.
38. Seetharam KA, Pasricha JS. Condiments and contact dermatitis of the ﬁnger
    tips. Indian Journal of Dermatology, Venerology, and Leprology, 1987,
    53:325–328.
39. Yamamoto H, Mizutani T, Nomura H. Studies on the mutagenicity of crude
    drug extracts. I. Yakugaku Zasshi, 1982, 102:596–601.
40. Hashim S et al. Modulatory effects of essential oils from spices on the forma-
    tion of DNA adducts by aﬂatoxin B1 in vitro. Nutrition in Cancer, 1994,
    21:169–175.




70
                        Fructus Chebulae




Deﬁnition
Fructus Chebulae consists of the dried fruits of Terminalia chebula Retz.
or T. chebula Retz. var. tomentella Kurt. (Combretaceae) (1–3).

Selected vernacular names
Abhaya, ahlilaj kâbuli, alalekai, alayla, amagola, arabi, aralu, areyra, ari-
dadi, badamier chebule, bal har, black myrobalan, bush kaduka, chebulic
myrobalan, Chebulische Myrobalane, divya, Ga ja, Habra, hacha, halela,
halela kabuli, halela zard, halileh, halileh kaboli, halilehsiyâh, halileh zard,
hallilaj, harad, harar, harda, hardo, harir, haritaki, harra, harro, harroh,
haser, helikha, hezi, himaja, hirda, hirdo, hireda, hlilej khel, hlijej sfer,
hokikha, ihlilaj kabuli, inknut tree, jivathi, kabuli-harda, hora, kadukka,
kadukkai, kale har, karaka, karakkaya, kashi, katukka, kãyasthã, kot-
pung-pla, kurka, medicine terminalia, mirobalan de caboul, mirobalano,
myrobalan, myrobalano nero, myrobalans, myrobaran, pathyã, pile har,
pilo-harde, post-e-haleela kabli, post-e-haleela siyah, post-e-haleela zard,
pulo-harda, rispiger Myrobalanenbaum, rong mao he zi, silikha, sa-mo-
thai, samo-thai, shajar shiir hindi, sirri hindi, silikha, sivã, sringitiga, sud-
dha, terminaalia, vayastha, vijayã, yellow myrobalan, yellow myrobalan
plum, zama, zangli har (2–11).

Geographical distribution
Native to Cambodia, China, India, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Thailand and Viet Nam and cultivated
elsewhere (4, 9, 10, 12).

Description
A tropical shade tree, usually 15–20 m high, but can be up to 30 m in
height, and up to 1.3 m in girth; bark rough, scaly; shoots and young leaves
usually rusty villous. Leaves simple, opposite, coriaceous, broadly ovate to
ovate-elliptic, 7–15 cm in width by 8–25 cm in length, glabrescent; veins
obscure above, slightly raised and usually brownish pubescent beneath;

                                                                              71
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


apex acute or abruptly acuminate; base cuneate, slightly cordate or round-
ed; petiole 1–3 cm long, glabrous or sparsely pubescent with a pair of nod-
ular glands near leaf base. Inﬂorescences axillary or terminal panicles, usu-
ally with 3–6 spikes (each 3–6 cm long); rachis pubescent; ﬂowers 2 mm
long, 3–4 mm in diameter; bracts nearly glabrous, 1.5–2.0 mm long; calyx
outside glabrous, inside densely villous, calyx-segments triangular; sta-
mens 3–4 mm long; ovary glabrous, ovoid, 1 mm long; style glabrous,
2.5–3.0 mm long; disc lobed, densely villous. Fruit a drupe, glabrous, sub-
globose to ellipsoid, 2.5–5.0 cm by 1.5–2.5 cm, usually smooth or fre-
quently 5-angulate, ridged, wrinkled, turning blackish when dry. Seed:
one, rough, ellipsoid, 1.0–2.0 cm by 0.2–0.7 cm, and without ridges (9).

Plant material of interest: dried fruits
General appearance
Oblong or ovoid, 2.5–5.0 cm in length, 1.5–2.5 cm in diameter. Externally
yellowish-brown or dark brown, somewhat lustrous, marked with 5 or
6 longitudinal ribs and irregular wrinkles, base with a rounded fruit stalk
scar. Texture compact. Sarcocarp 2–5 mm thick, yellowish-brown or dark
yellowish-brown; kernels 1.5–2.5 cm long, 1.0–1.5 cm in diameter, pale
yellow, rough and hard. One seed, narrowly fusiform, 1.0–2.0 cm by 0.2–
0.7 cm; testa yellowish-brown, cotyledons 2, white, overlapping and con-
volute (1, 2, 8).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: slight and characteristic (8); taste: bitter, sour, astringent, then
sweet (1, 8).

Microscopic characteristics
Transverse section of the fruit shows epicarp composed of a layer of epi-
dermal cells, the outer tangential wall and upper portion of the thick ra-
dial walls. Mesocarp, 2 or 3 layers of collenchyma followed by a broad
zone of parenchyma with ﬁbres and sclereids in groups, and vascular
bundles, scattered; ﬁbres, simple-pitted walls; porous parenchyma; scle-
reids, various shapes and sizes, mostly elongated; tannins and aggregate
crystals of calcium oxalate in parenchyma; starch grains simple rounded
or oval in shape, measuring 2–7 μm in diameter. Endocarp consists of
thick-walled sclereids of various shapes and sizes, mostly elongated. Fi-
bres, sclereids and vessels, ligniﬁed. Testa, one layer of large cubical cells,
followed by a zone of reticulate parenchyma and vessels; tegmen consists
of collapsed parenchyma. Cotyledon folded and containing aleurone
grains, oil globules and some rosette aggregate crystals (2).

72
                                                           Fructus Chebulae


Powdered plant material
Brownish in colour and shows the diagnostic characteristics of the un-
ground drug (2).

General identity tests
Macroscopic (1, 2, 8) and microscopic examinations (2), microchemical
test (8), and thin-layer chromatography (1) and high-performance capil-
lary electrophoresis for the presence of the marker tannins chebulinic and
chebulagic acids (13).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (14).
Foreign organic matter
Not more than 1% (2).
Total ash
Not more than 5% (1).
Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 1% (1).
Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 30% (1).
Alcohol-soluble extractive
Not less than 30–40% (2, 8).
Loss on drying
Not more than 14% (8).
Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (15). For other pesticides, see the European Pharmacopoeia
(15) and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (14) and pesticide residues (16).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (14).

                                                                        73
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (14).

Chemical assays
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Major chemical constituents
Major constituents of the fruit are hydrolysable tannins and components
thereof, including chebulagic acid, chebulinic acid, chebulanin, corilagin,
gallic acid, gallic acid methyl ester, punicalagin, terchebulin and termi-
nalic acid. Flavonols of interest include quercetin, isoquercitrin and rutin
(6). Structures of chebulagic acid, chebulinic acid, chebulanin and gallic
acid are presented below.




     Gallic acid                                Chebulanin     HO                        O
                                                                                                            OH
HO               CO2H                                                            O O
                                                                        OH
                                                                                                            OH
HO                                                         O        O
                                                    HO2C                                           OH
        OH                                                      HO               O
                                                                    H
                                                      HO
                                                         H
                                                         O     O                        OH
                                                                            OH


        OH       Chebulagic acid                                OH          Chebulinic acid
HO                                  OH                   HO                                        OH
                         HO                OH                                           HO                  OH
                     O                                                              O
HO                                                       HO
             O
                 O                                                      O
 HO                                                                         O
                                                    HO
                              O O      O                                                     O O        O
 HO                  O
                                                    HO                              O
        OH
        O        O                                           OH O               O
 HO2C                                                      HO2C
                 HO           O                                              HO              O
                  H                                                           H
      HO                                                       HO
       H                                                        H
       O     O                    OH                           O            O                    OH
                         OH                                                             OH



74
                                                             Fructus Chebulae


Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Used orally to treat cough with sore throat, as well as diarrhoea (1).

Uses described in traditional medicine
Used orally as an anthelminthic, astringent, cardiotonic, dentifrice, di-
uretic and laxative. Also used to treat bleeding gums, diabetes, gastroin-
testinal disorders, ulcers and urinary disorders (6).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antiallergic activity
An aqueous ethanol (1:1) extract of the fruit exhibited antihistamine and
antispasmodic activities at a concentration of 10 mg/ml in guinea-pig ile-
um (17). The effect of an aqueous soluble fraction of a fruit extract (AF)
was investigated in models of systemic and local anaphylaxis (18, 19).
Oral administration of AF 1 hour before injection of compound 48/80, in-
hibited compound 48/80-induced anaphylactic shock by 100% when AF
was administered at doses of 0.01–1.0 g/kg body weight (bw). When the
extract was administered 5 or 10 min after injection of compound 48/80,
the mortality also decreased in a dose-dependent manner. In addition,
passive cutaneous anaphylaxis was inhibited by 63.5 ± 7.8% after oral
administration of the aqueous extract at a dose of 1.0 g/kg bw. In vitro,
AF, in a concentration range of 0.01–1.0 mg/ml also signiﬁcantly sup-
pressed compound 48/80-induced histamine release from rat peritoneal
mast cells (p < 0.01), and signiﬁcantly increased production of tumour
necrosis factor-alpha induced by anti-dinitrophenyl IgE (19).
Antimicrobial activity
An aqueous extract of the fruit (concentration not stated) was active
against six dermatophytes, namely Trichophyton mentagrophytes, T. ru-
brum, T. soudanense, Candida albicans, Torulopsis glabrata and C. krusei
in vitro (20). The in vitro antibacterial activity of an extract of the crude
drug was assessed in the disc diffusion assay. The extract was active (con-
centration range 30–500 μg/disc) against human pathogenic Gram-posi-
tive and Gram-negative bacteria, including Shigella dysenteriae, S. ﬂex-
neri, S. boydii, Proteus mirabilis, P. vulgaris, Klebsiella pneumoniae,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Salmonella species (21). A 50% ethanol ex-

                                                                          75
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


tract of the fruit inhibited the growth of methicillin-resistant Staphylococ-
cus aureus (MRSA), with a minimum inhibitory concentration of 31.3 μg/
ml (22).
   The effect of ether, alcohol and aqueous extracts of the fruit on Helico-
bacter pylori was assessed using the agar diffusion method. An aqueous
extract of the fruit inhibited the growth of the bacterium with a minimum
inhibitory concentration of 125 mg/l and a minimum bactericidal concen-
tration of 150 mg/l. Aqueous extracts, at a concentration of 1–2.5 mg/ml,
also weakly inhibited urease activity of H. pylori (23).
   Treatment with the powdered fruit signiﬁcantly suppressed murine
cytomegalovirus load in the lungs of treated mice compared with mice
that received water treatment. Intragastric administration of 750 mg/kg
bw per day of the dried fruit increased the body weight of infected mice
and reduced the virus yield in the lungs (24).
   The fruit showed stronger anti-herpes simplex virus type 1 activity
when used in combination with acyclovir (25). When acyclovir and/or the
extract were administered to mice by gavage at doses corresponding to
those used in humans, the combinations signiﬁcantly limited the develop-
ment of skin lesions and/or prolonged the mean survival times of infected
animals as compared with that of animals that received either acyclovir or
the extract alone (p < 0.01 or 0.05). The combinations were not toxic to
mice. The extract reduced virus yields in the brain and skin more than
acyclovir alone and exhibited stronger anti-herpes simplex virus type
1 activity in the brain than in the skin, in contrast to treatment with acy-
clovir alone (25).
   A hot aqueous extract of the fruit was active against anti-herpes sim-
plex virus and was also examined for anti-cytomegalovirus activity in
vitro and in vivo. The extract inhibited the replication of human cyto-
megalovirus and murine cytomegalovirus in vitro and inhibited plaque
formation of human cytomegalovirus at a median effective concentration
of 2.3 μg/ml. The anti-cytomegalovirus activities of the extract were also
examined, in immunosuppressed mice. Mice were treated with various
doses of cyclosporin, and immunosuppression and murine cytomegalovi-
rus infection were monitored by measuring suppression of antibody pro-
duction and virus load in the lung. The extract (15 mg/day) was adminis-
tered intragastrically to mice which had been treated with 50 mg/kg bw of
cyclosporin from one day before intraperitoneal infection. Concomitant
administration of the extract reduced the viral load in the lung (26).
   The effect of a methanol extract of the fruit on HIV-1 reverse tran-
scriptase was assessed. The extracts showed signiﬁcant inhibitory activity
with a median inhibitory concentration (IC50) a 6 μg/ml (27).

76
                                                            Fructus Chebulae


   The inhibitory activity of a hot aqueous extract of the fruit against
HIV-1 protease was assessed in vitro (28). The extract inhibited the activ-
ity of HIV protease at a concentration of 25 μg/ml (28).
Antihyperlipidaemic activity
The effect of intragastric administration of an extract of the fruit
(500.0 mg/kg bw for 45 days) was investigated in a model of experimen-
tal atherosclerosis in rabbits fed a cholesterol-rich diet (29). Atheroscle-
rotic lesions of the aorta were examined histologically and hyperlipidae-
mia was assessed. Treatment of the rabbits with the extract signiﬁcantly
reduced cholesterol, phospholipids and triglyceride levels as compared
with those in control animals (p < 0.05), and reduced atherosclerotic
lesions.
    The effect of an extract of the fruit on cholesterol-induced hypercho-
lesterolaemia and atherosclerosis was investigated in rabbits (30). The
control group was fed a high-cholesterol diet alone whereas the treatment
group was fed both the extract and a high-cholesterol diet. Hypercholes-
terolaemia was signiﬁcantly less (p < 0.001) in the treated group (166 mg/
dl) than in the control group (630 mg/dl). Aortic sudanophilia was sig-
niﬁcantly less after treatment (6%), than in the control group (38%)
(p < 0.001). The cholesterol contents of the liver and aorta were signiﬁ-
cantly less in the treatment group (46 mg/100 g and 28 mg/100 g, respec-
tively), than in the control group (604 mg/100 g and 116 mg/100 g) (30).
Antioxidant activity
Various extracts (butanol, chloroform, ethyl acetate and methanol) and
the isolated pure compounds: casuarinin, chebulanin, chebulinic acid and
1,6-di-O-galloyl-B-D-glucose from the crude drug were investigated for
anti-lipid peroxidation, anti-superoxide radical formation and free radical
scavenging activities in vitro. The results showed that all tested extracts
and isolated pure compounds of the crude drug exhibited active to weak-
ly active antioxidant activity at different potencies. Median inhibitory
concentrations ranged from 0.005–5.39 mg/ml for the extracts and 0.031–
7.27 mg/ml for the pure compounds (31).
   The antioxidant activity of an aqueous extract of the crude drug, as
estimated by thiobarbituric acid reactive substances, was tested by study-
ing the inhibition of radiation-induced lipid peroxidation in rat liver mi-
crosomes at different doses in the range of 100–600 μg/ml. The IC50 in this
assay was 14.5 μg/ml. The extract was also found to restore the antioxi-
dant enzyme superoxide dismutase following radiation-induced damage.
The median inhibitory activity of the extract was 11.5 μg/ml in the 1,1-
diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl radical scavenging assay (32).

                                                                         77
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Cardiovascular effects
A 90% ethanol extract of the fruit increased cardiac output and had posi-
tive inotropic effects in isolated frog hearts, when added to the bath media
at concentrations of 0.3 to 3.0 mg/ml (33).
Gastrointestinal activity
The effect of the dried powdered fruits on gastrointestinal motility in rats
was assessed. The animals were divided into four groups as follows: group
1 (n = 15), normal animals; group 2 (n = 6), rats administered metoclopr-
amide (1.35 mg/kg bw); group 3 (n = 8), rats given atropine (0.45 mg/kg
bw). These agents were injected intramuscularly, 30 minutes before the
experiment. Rats in group 4 (n = 8) were administered the dried fruits by
gavage at a dose of 100 mg/kg/day for 15 days before the experiment. All
rats were then given a test meal of methyl cellulose (1.5%) mixed with
phenol red (50 mg/100 ml) orally, and gastric emptying was measured
20 minutes later. Gastric emptying of normal rats (group 1) was found to
be 51.6 ± 7.79%. Treatment with metoclopramide (group 2) signiﬁcantly
increased the gastric emptying (76.33 ± 12.37%; p < 0.01) and treatment
with atropine (group 3) inhibited the motility (gastric emptying 7.26 ±
19.76%; p < 0.01). Administration of the powdered crude drug (group 4)
increased the gastric emptying (86.57 ± 6.65%; p < 0.01) (34).
   Intragastric administration of the crude drug to rats, at a dose of 1.5 g/l
for 15 days, reduced the number of gastric ulcerations induced by penta-
gastrin and carbachol (35).
Immunosuppressive effects
Gallic acid and chebulagic acid were isolated from a fruit extract as active
chemical constituents that block cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL)-mediat-
ed cytotoxicity. Gallic acid and chebulagic acid weakly inhibited the kill-
ing activity of a CD8+ CTL clone with an IC50 of 30 μM and 50 μM, re-
spectively. Granule exocytosis in response to anti-CD3 stimulation was
also blocked by gallic acid and chebulagic acid at equivalent concentra-
tions (36).
Toxicology
Dietary administration of the fruit to rats, as 25% of the diet, produced
hepatic lesions which included centrilobular vein abnormalities and centri-
lobular sinusoidal congestion. Marked renal lesions were also observed,
and included marked tubular degeneration, tubular casts and intertubular
congestion. A brown pigmentation of the tail and limbs was also observed
after 10 days (37). The median lethal dose of a 50% ethanol extract of the
fruit was 175.0 mg/kg bw after intraperitoneal administration (38).

78
                                                           Fructus Chebulae


Clinical pharmacology
No information was found.

Adverse reactions
No information was found.

Contraindications
Hypersensitivity or allergy to the plant material.

Warnings
No information was found.

Precautions
General
No information was found.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
Extracts of the fruit are not mutagenic, but have antimutagenic activities
in various experimental systems. Aqueous, chloroform and acetone ex-
tracts were tested in the Ames histidine reversion assay using TA98 and
TA100 tester strains of Salmonella typhimurium against the direct-acting
mutagens, 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine and sodium azide, and the in-
direct-acting promutagen, 2-aminoﬂuorene, in the presence of phenobarb-
itone-induced rat hepatic S9 enzymes. The chloroform and acetone ex-
tracts inhibited mutagenicity induced by both direct-acting mutagens and
by S9-dependent mutagens. A signiﬁcant inhibition of 98.7% was ob-
served with the acetone extract against the revertants induced by the S9-
dependent mutagen, 2-aminoﬂuorene, in a co-incubation mode of treat-
ment (39).
   The antimutagenic activity of a tannin fraction (TC-E) from the dried
fruit pulp of the crude drug was evaluated against two direct-acting mu-
tagens, 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine and 4-nitroquinoline-N-oxide, and
S9-dependent mutagen, 2-aminoﬂuorene, in TA98 and TA100 strains of
Salmonella typhimurium. The results showed that the extract (TC-E) and
its fractions were antimutagenic against the S9-dependent mutagen,
2-aminoﬂuorene. The effective concentrations ranged from 8.9–320 μg/
ml (40).
   The antimutagenicity of aqueous and chloroform extracts of the fruit
were determined against two direct-acting mutagens: sodium azide in
strains TA100 and TA1535, and 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine in TA97a

                                                                        79
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


and TA98 strains of Salmonella typhimurium, and the S9-dependent mu-
tagen 2-aminoﬂuorene in the TA97a, TA98 and TA100 strains. The aque-
ous extract reduced 4-nitro-o-phenylenediamine- as well as 2-aminoﬂuo-
rene-induced his+ revertants, but had no perceptible effect against sodium
azide-induced his+ revertants in TA100 and TA1535 strains of S. typhimu-
rium (41).

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Due to a lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug during pregnancy is
not recommended.

Nursing mothers
Due to a lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug during breastfeed-
ing is not recommended.

Paediatric use
Due to a lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug in children under
the age of 12 years is not recommended.

Dosage forms
Crude drug and extracts.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage: 3–9 g of crude drug for decoction in divided doses (1). Store
in an airtight container in a dry place (1).

References
1. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Beijing, Chemical Indus-
   try Press, 2005.
2. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India, Part I, Vol. I, 1st ed. New Delhi,
   Government of India Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of
   Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 1990 (reprinted 2001).
3. Unani pharmacopoeia of India, Part I, Vol. I. New Delhi, Ministry of Health
   and Family Welfare, Department of Indian System of Medicine and Hom-
   eopathy, 1999.
4. Bensky D, Gamble A. Chinese herbal medicine. Materia medica, revised ed.
   Seattle, Washington, Eastland Press, 1993.
5. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
   bouly Library, 1994.
6. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
   at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University

80
                                                                   Fructus Chebulae


    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
7. Hooper D, Field H. Useful plants and drugs of Iran and Iraq. Field Museum
    of Natural History, Botanical Series, 1937, 9:177.
8. The Japanese standards for herbal medicines. Tokyo, Yakuji Nippo, 1993.
9. Medicinal plants in China. Manila, World Health Organization Regional Of-
    ﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc, 1989 (WHO Regional Publications, Western Pa-
    ciﬁc Series, No. 2).
10. Nadkarni AK, ed. Dr. K.M. Nadkarni’s Indian materia medica. Vol. 1. Bom-
    bay, Popular Prakshan, 1976.
11. Schlimmer JL. Terminologie medico-pharmaceutic et Francaise – Persane.
    Tehran, University of Tehran, 1970 [in French].
12. Perry LM, Metzger J. Medicinal plants of east and southeast Asia: Attributed
    properties and uses. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1980.
13. Ding G, et al. Analysis of tannins in Fructus Chebulae and its confusion va-
    rieties by HPCE. Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica, 2001, 36:292–295.
14. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
15. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
16. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
17. Mokkhasmit M et al. Pharmacological evaluation of Thai medicinal plants.
    Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand, 1971, 54:490–504.
18. Aeom YD et al. Anaphylactic reaction inhibitory effect of Fructus Chebula.
    Korean Journal of Herbology, 2000, 15:123–128.
19. Shin TY et al. Inhibitory action of water soluble fraction of Terminalia cheb-
    ula on systemic and local anaphylaxis. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2001,
    74:133–140.
20. Vonshak A et al. Screening South Indian medicinal plants for antifungal activ-
    ity against cutaneous pathogens. Phytotherapy Research, 2003, 17:1123–1125.
21. Phadke SA, Kulkarni SD. Screening of in vitro antibacterial activity of Ter-
    minalia chebula, Eclapta alba and Ocimum sanctum. Indian Journal of Med-
    ical Science, 1989, 43:113–117.
22. Sato Y et al. Extraction and puriﬁcation of effective antimicrobial constitu-
    ents of Terminalia chebula Rets. against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
    aureus. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1997, 20:401–404.
23. Malekzadeh F et al. Antibacterial activity of black myrobalan (Terminalia
    chebula Retz) against Helicobacter pylori. International Journal of Antimi-
    crobial Agents, 2001, 18:85–88.
24. Shiraki K et al. [Cytomegalovirus infection and its possible treatment with
    herbal medicines]. Nippon Rinsho, 1998, 56:156–160 [in Japanese].
25. Kurokawa M et al. Efﬁcacy of traditional herbal medicines in combination
    with acyclovir against herpes simplex virus type 1 infection in vitro and in
    vivo. Antiviral Research, 1995, 27:19–37.

                                                                                 81
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


26. Yukawa TA et al. Prophylactic treatment of cytomegalovirus infection with
    traditional herbs. Antiviral Research, 1996, 32:63–70.
27. El-Mekkawy S et al. Inhibitory effects of Egyptian folk medicines on human
    immunodeﬁciency virus (HIV) reverse transcriptase. Chemical and Pharma-
    ceutical Bulletin, 1995, 43:641–648.
28. Xu HX et al. Screening of traditional medicines for their inhibitory activity
    against HIV-1 protease. Phytotherapy Research, 1996, 10:207–210.
29. Shaila HP, Udupa SL, Udupa AL. Hypolipidemic activity of three indi-
    genous drugs in experimentally induced atherosclerosis. International
    Journal of Cardiology, 1998, 67:119–124.
30. Thakur CP et al. The Ayurvedic medicines Haritaki, Amla and Bahira reduce
    cholesterol-induced atherosclerosis in rabbits. International Journal of Car-
    diology, 1988, 21:167–175.
31. Cheng HY et al. Antioxidant and free radical scavenging activities of Termi-
    nalia chebula. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 2003, 26:1331–1335.
32. Naik GH et al. Comparative antioxidant activity of individual herbal com-
    ponents used in Ayurvedic medicine. Phytochemistry, 2003, 63:97–104.
33. Reddy VRC et al. Cardiotonic activity of the fruits of Terminalia chebula.
    Fitoterapia, 1990, 61:517–525.
34. Tamhane MD et al. Effect of oral administration of Terminalia chebula on
    gastric emptying: an experimental study. Journal of Postgraduate Medicine,
    1997, 43:12–13.
35. Dahanukar SA, Date SG, Karandikar SM. Cytoprotective effect of Termina-
    lia chebula and Asparagus racemosus on gastric mucosa. Indian Drugs, 1983,
    20:442–445.
36. Hamada S et al. Immunosuppressive effects of gallic acid and chebulagic acid
    on CTL-mediated cytotoxicity. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1997,
    20:1017–1019.
37. Arseculeratne SN, Gunatilaka AAL, Panabokke RG. Studies on medicinal
    plants of Sri Lanka. Part 14: Toxicity of some traditional medicinal herbs.
    Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1985, 13:323–335.
38. Abraham Z et al. Screening of Indian plants for biological activity. Part XII.
    Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 1986, 24:48–68.
39. Kaur S et al. The in vitro antimutagenic activity of Triphala – an Indian herb-
    al drug. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 2002, 40:527–534.
40. Kaur S et al. Antimutagenicity of hydrolyzable tannins from Terminalia
    chebula in Salmonella typhimurium. Mutation Research, 1998, 419:169–179.
41. Grover IS, Bala S. Antimutagenic activity of Terminalia chebula (myroblan)
    in Salmonella typhimurium. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 1992,
    30:339–341.




82
                      Semen Cucurbitae




Deﬁnition
Semen Cucurbitae consists of the dried seeds of Cucurbita pepo L. (Cu-
curbitaceae) or its cultivars (1–3).

Synonyms
Cucurbita aurantia Willd., C. courgero Ser., C. esculenta Gray, C. fastuo-
sa Salisb., C. melopepo L., C. ovifera L., C subverrucosus Willd., C. ver-
rucosus L., Pepo melopepo Moench., P. verrucosus Moench., P. vulgaris
Moench. (4, 5).

Selected vernacular names
Abobora, bitter bottle gourd, bucka, calabaza, cubini, duraffere, dubba,
dynia, étkezési tök, Garten-Kürbis, geonwomu, ghia kaddu, giramonte,
giraumon, gourd, græskar, guicoy, harilik kõrvits, herkules-keule, jeri-
mum, kadu, kadu I maghrebi, kadu I rumikao montini, kaula, kurlaru,
kumra, lob-abyad, lob-kar-e-asal, malange, mandelgræskar, marrow, na-
vadna buca, ntite, ntsuudya, pepokabocha, pompion, pompoen, pottai-
gummadi, pumpkin, qar, qar maghrebi, qar rumi, qara’a, safed kaddu,
Schmuckkürbis, shada kumra, summer pumpkin, uritök, zapallo, zapayo,
zerri at l-ger-a, zucca indi, zucchette, zucchini (6–8).

Geographical distribution
Native to North America and cultivated worldwide (4, 9, 10).

Description
Annual, running, monoecious herbs with dark green, non-glossy, 3–5 lobed
leaves; prostrate or climbing; branched, prickly stems, up to 10 m long.
The solitary ﬂowers are large and yellow being arranged singly in the axils
of leaves; the male ﬂowers have a peduncle of 10–17 cm, a calyx with very
small sepals, a campanulate deep yellow corolla (7–10 cm in diameter)
gradually widening towards the top. Calyx lobes are narrow. Female ﬂow-
ers are similar to the male ones, but with a shorter peduncle, small stamin-

                                                                         83
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


odes, and inferior ovary of various shapes. The gourd-fruit varies in size
(15–40 cm in diameter) and shape in the many cultivated varieties, and the
toughened, furrowed peduncle does not enlarge near it (4, 10).

Plant material of interest: dried seeds
General appearance
The seeds are ovate, constricted at one end forming a short, blunt exten-
sion; ﬂat or weakly biconvex; up to 25 mm long and 8–14 mm wide,
3–4 mm thick; on both faces, close to the edge, is an encircling ridge and
groove, 1–2 mm wide, absent from projection; testa creamy-white to pale
beige with a satiny sheen, smooth or with irregular wrinkles; texture brit-
tle, somewhat papery; inner surface of seed coat fawnish-white, dull,
rough or scurfy. The seed is non-endospermic. Embryo easily separated
from testa, more or less entirely covered in a dark olive-green pellicle,
with metallic lustre; light patches of inner seed coat may be adherent.
Embryo pale greenish-yellow, oily; large, almost ﬂat cotyledons, small
conical radical at constricted end of seed; inner surfaces of cotyledons
with three or ﬁve rudimentary veins, palmately arranged (11).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: indistinct; taste: bland, oily and slightly nut-like (2, 10).

Microscopic characteristics
Epidermal cells of testa erect, prismatic, up to 200 μm long; walls thin,
bearing slender vertical strips of thickening, usually sinuous in upper por-
tion; in surface view polygonal, large with conspicuous beads; starch
grains abundant, up to 5 μm, simple but frequently clumped; a band,
about six cells deep, of small, thin-walled, isodiametric or small, elongated
parenchymatous cells, ﬁnely reticulately thickened and strongly ligniﬁed;
a few larger, irregular simple pits; a single layer of large, sub-rectangular
sclereids, lumen narrow, ovoid, walls very thick and conspicuously lay-
ered, pits few and not well-deﬁned, only middle lamella and primary wall
strongly ligniﬁed; in surface view the sclereids are somewhat elongated
and the anticlinal walls deeply sinuous. Internal to the sclereid band sev-
eral layers of progressively larger ligniﬁed parenchymatous cells with
very ﬁne reticulate thickening; the cells, having short arm-like projec-
tions, form a spongy, lacunose tissue; areas of contact between branches
of cells have quite large simple perforations. Innermost layers less well-
deﬁned, parenchymatous, largest cells internally; greenish chromoplasts
present. Cotyledon cells variable, very thin-walled, containing oily glob-
ules and aleurone grains up to 4 μm in diameter (2).

84
                                                           Semen Cucurbitae


Powdered plant material
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (2, 4, 10), and thin-layer
chromatography (2).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (11).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 1% (1).

Total ash
Not more than 7% (2).

Acid-insoluble ash
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Water-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Loss on drying
Not more than 12.0% (1).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (12). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (12)
and the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (11) and pesticide residues (13).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (11).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (11).

                                                                        85
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Chemical assays
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Major chemical constituents
Major constituents of the seed include a ﬁxed oil (30–53%), phytosterols
(1%) and terpenes. The main fatty acids found in the ﬁxed oil are linoleic
acid (35–68%) and oleic acid (15–48%). Squalene is a characteristic con-
stituent and accumulates in the non-saponiﬁable fraction of the oil to a
concentration of 39–46%. The primary phytosterols are $7-sterols includ-
ing spinasterol, A-spinasterol, $7-avenasterol, $7-ergostenol and $7-stig-
mastenol, together with smaller amounts of $5-sterols (e.g. campesterol,
stigmasterol, clerosterol and isofucosterol). Rare amino acids, including
G-aminobutyric acid, ethylasparagine, citrulline and cucurbitine (3-amin-
ocarboxypyrrolidine) are also found (4, 6, 14). Structures of the potential
markers, squalene and cucurbitine are presented below.


Cucurbitine                                   Squalene
      NH                CH3    CH3       CH3
                                                                       CH3
                 H3 C
H2N    CO2H
                                                         CH3   CH3   CH3




Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
For symptomatic treatment of difﬁculties with micturition associated
with stage I–II prostatic adenoma and irritable bladder (15–17).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
No information was found.

Uses described in traditional medicine
Used for the treatment of asthma, burns, constipation, eczema, fever,
tapeworms and toothache (4, 6).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Anti-androgenic activity
A supercritical carbon dioxide extract of the seeds (dose not stated) an-
tagonized the development of the prostate gland when administered with

86
                                                            Semen Cucurbitae


testosterone in castrated rats (4). A sterol mixture isolated from the seeds
dose-dependently inhibited the binding of labelled dihydroxytestoster-
one to cultured human prostate ﬁbroblasts. Following preincubation of
one sample of the ﬁbroblasts with 120 ng of sterol mixture and another
with 240 ng of the mixture, dihydroxytestosterone binding was reduced
from 68.3% to approximately 47% in the ﬁrst sample and from 68.3% to
38% in the second (4).
Anthelminthic activity
A dried methanol extract of the seeds administered orally to mice, at a
dose of 20.0 mg/kg body weight (bw), for 3–4 days had weak activity
against Hymenolepis diminuta, inducing a 37% clearance of worms in
6 days (18). Cucurbitine (3-aminocarboxypyrrolidine) is reported to be
one of the most actively anthelminthic constituents of the crude drug (4).
Anti-inﬂammatory activity
The anti-inﬂammatory effects of intragastric administration of the seed
oil to rats with arthritis induced by Freund’s complete adjuvant, at a dose
of 100 mg/kg bw (19), were compared with the effects of indometacin, a
classical anti-inﬂammatory agent. Two models of inﬂammation were in-
vestigated. In the acute inﬂammatory phase model only seed oil was used,
and in the chronic inﬂammatory phase model both seed oil and indo-
metacin were used. Treatment with the seed oil normalized blood gluta-
thione and serum N-acetyl-B-D-glucosaminidase levels, which were ele-
vated in the acute phase of inﬂammation. Plasma total proteins and
albumin, which were reduced during the chronic phase of inﬂammation,
were increased after treatment. Liver glucose-6-phosphate dehydroge-
nase activity, which was markedly increased during the induction of in-
ﬂammation, was also reduced after treatment. Also, a remarkable inhibi-
tion of paw oedema was observed. A similar pattern was noted following
treatment with indometacin (19).
    Intragastric administration of a supercritical carbon dioxide extract of
the crude drug (dose not stated) reduced carrageenan- or dextran-induced
oedema in castrated rats (4).
Antischistosomal activity
Oral administration of 3.0 g of the seeds daily to mice for 28 days reduced
the number of Schistosoma japonicum parasites (20).
Inhibition of 5A-reductase
The effect of an extract of the seeds on the activity of 5A-reductase, the
enzyme responsible for the conversion of testosterone to dihydrotestos-
terone, was assessed in vitro in cultured human prostate ﬁbroblasts (4).

                                                                         87
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


The extract inhibited the activity of the enzyme with a median inhibitory
concentration of 128 μg/ml. The afﬁnity of the extract for the dihydrotes-
tosterone receptors was very weak.

Clinical pharmacology
A 12-month randomized, placebo-controlled, multicentre study assessed
the efﬁcacy of a 92% ethanol extract of the seeds (15–25:1) in 476 men
with benign prostatic hyperplasia stages I and II (mean age 63 years) (15).
The men were treated with two capsules (500 mg extract per capsule) of
the extract (n = 233) or placebo (n = 243) for 12 months. One capsule of
the active treatment contained 500 mg pumpkin seed extract (15–25:1,
92% ethanol w/w). The outcome measured was a change in the Interna-
tional Prostate Symptom Score (IPSS). The median baseline IPSS for the
placebo group was 17.7 and that for the treatment group was 17.6. A mean
reduction of the IPSS of 6.8 in the treatment group and 5.6 in the placebo
group (p = 0.014) was reported. A decrease in the IPSS by > 5 points was
reported in more patients in the treatment group than in the placebo
group, 65% versus 54% (p = 0.021). Urological ﬂow parameters, quality
of life, residual urine, prostate volume and prostate-speciﬁc antigen re-
mained unchanged in both groups (15).
   In a 3-month open multicentre study involving 2245 patients with be-
nign prostatic hyperplasia stages I and II according to Alken, the effects
of a seed extract (15–25:1, 92% ethanol w/w) were assessed (22). Patients
were treated with 1–2 capsules of the extract (500 mg per capsule). The
results of this study demonstrated an improvement in the IPSS by 41.4%
and in quality of life by 46.1%. Micturition (average number of times
patients urinated) decreased during the day from 6.7 to 4.8, and at night
(nocturia) from 2.7 to 1.1.
   In an open study involving 79 male patients with benign prostatic hy-
perplasia, treatment with the seed ﬁxed oil (dose not speciﬁed) reduced
the amount of residual urine and led to better bladder emptying and
greater volume of emptying after 12 weeks of treatment (22).
   In a 3-month multicentre open study involving 39 women and 19 men
with irritable bladder, patients were treated with 6 g of the crude drug
three times daily for 8 weeks. Subjective symptoms such as polyuria and
nocturia improved in more than 80% of patients (17).
   In a study in men, a mixture of $7-sterols, isolated from the crude drug,
was administered to patients with benign prostatic hyperplasia. Patients
received 90 mg of the mixture by the oral route on days 3 to 4 prior to
prostatectomy. A signiﬁcant decrease in the level of dihydrotestosterone
in the prostate tissue was observed (p < 0.05), as well as a signiﬁcant de-
crease in serum acid phosphatase (23). Oral administration of 30.0 g of the

88
                                                         Semen Cucurbitae


seed to a single human volunteer decreased urine output, but increased
urea and uric acid output over a 3-day period (24).

Toxicology
Intraperitoneal administration of an aqueous or aqueous alcoholic extract
of the seeds to mice had a median lethal dose of > 5000 mg/kg bw (25).

Adverse reactions
Gastrointestinal disorders (heartburn, nausea, stomach ache and diar-
rhoea), allergic skin reactions and tinnitus.

Contraindications
Hypersensitivity or allergy to the crude drug.
Pregnancy: in traditional medicine, the crude drug has been used as an
emmenagogue (6), thus extracts of the crude drug should not be ingested
during pregnancy.

Warnings
No information was found.

Precautions
No information was found.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic
See contraindications.

Nursing mothers
Due to the lack of safety data, extracts of the crude drug should not be
used during breastfeeding.

Paediatric use
Due to the lack of safety data, extracts of the crude drug should not be
used in children aged under 12 years.

Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug and extracts.

                                                                      89
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Oral daily dose: 10 g of seed; equivalent preparations (16).


References
1. Deutsches Arzneibuch. Stuttgart, Deutscher Apotheker Verlag, 1999.
2. British herbal pharmacopoeia. Exeter, British Herbal Medicine Association,
    1996.
3. PharmaMed: Aufbereitungsmonographien (Komm. E) [CD-ROM]. Stutt-
    gart, Deutscher Apotheker Verlag, 2002 [in German].
4. Bombardelli E, Morazzoni P. Cucurbita pepo L. Fitoterapia, 1997, 68:291–
    302.
5. Hagers Handbuch der Drogen [CD ROM]. Heidelberg, Springer Verlag,
    2003 [in German].
6. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
7. Nadkarni AK. Dr. K.M. Nadkarni’s Indian materia medica. Bombay, Popu-
    lar Prakashan, 1976.
8. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
9. Wichtl M. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals, English ed. [Bisset NG,
    translated and edited]. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
10. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blak-
    iston Company, 1950.
11. WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
12. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
13. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
14. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisi-
    er Publishing, 1995.
15. Bach D. Placebokontrollierte Langzeittherapiestudie mit Kürbissamen-ex-
    trakt bei BPH-bedingten Miktionsbeschwerden [Placebo-controlled long-
    term study with pumpkin seeds in BPH-induced problems with micturition].
    Urologe [B], 2000, 5:437–443.
16. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs:
    Therapeutic guide to herbal medicines. Austin, TX, American Botanical
    Council, 1998.
17. Nitsch-Fitz R et al. Ergebnisse einer Praxisstudie über das Kürbiskern-
    Diätetikum “Kürbis-Granuﬁnk” bei Patienten mit Miktionsbeschwerden

90
                                                                 Semen Cucurbitae


    verschiedener Genese. Zeitschrift für die Ärztliche Praxis, 1979, 3:38–40 [in
    German].
18. Sharma LD, Bahga HS, Srivastava PS. In vitro anthelmintic screening of in-
    digenous medicinal plants against haemonchus contortus (Rudolphi, 1803)
    Cobbold, 1898 of sheep and goats. Indian Journal of Animal Research, 1971,
    5:33–38.
19. Fahim AT et al. Effect of pumpkin-seed oil on the level of free radical scav-
    engers induced during adjuvant-arthritis in rats. Pharmacological Research,
    1995, 31:73–79.
20. Chou HJ, Hu HK, Ch’iu TW. Prophylactic and therapeutic effect of pump-
    kin seed on Schistosoma japonicum. Chinese Medical Journal, 1958, 77:565.
21. Friederich M et al. Forte capsules in the treatment of benign prostatic hyper-
    plasia. Forschende Komplementarmedizin Klassische Naturheilkunde, 2000,
    7:200–204.
22. Sabo E et al. Pharmacodynamic effect of pumpkin seed oil (Oleum cucurbi-
    tae pepo) in patients with adenoma prostate. Fundamentals in Clinical Phar-
    macology, 1999, 13(Suppl 1):360.
23. Koch E. Pharmakologie und Wirkmechanismen von Extrakten aus Sa-
    balfrüchten (Sabal fructus), Brennesselwurzeln (Urticae radix) und Kürbis-
    samen (Cucurbitae peponis semen) bei der Behandlung der benignen Prosta-
    tahyperplasie. In: Loew D, Rietbrock N, eds. Phytopharmaka in Forschung
    und klinischer Anwendung. Steinkopff Verlag, Darmstadt, 1995.
24. Masurovsky B. Study of the effects of Cucurbita pepo seeds on kidney excre-
    tion. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 1922, 8:39–43.
25. Desta B. Ethiopian traditional herbal drugs. Part I: Studies on the toxicity
    and therapeutic activity of local taenicidal medications. Journal of Ethno-
    pharmacology, 1995, 45:27–33.




                                                                               91
                       Folium Cynarae




Deﬁnition
Folium Cynarae consists of the dried basal leaves of Cynara cardunculus
L. (Asteraceae) (1–4).
Note: The fresh lower part of the ﬂower head is ofﬁcial in the African
pharmacopoeia (5).

Synonyms
Cynara scolymus L. was the name of the plant cited in the above-men-
tioned pharmacopoeias and monographs. However, the correct name of
the plant is Cynara cardunculus L. (Asteraceae) according to the current-
ly accepted nomenclature (6).

Selected vernacular names
Alcachofa, alcachofra, alcaucil, alcaucoe, artichaut, artichaut commun,
artichiocco, artichoke, artichoke thistle, Artischocke, artiskok, carcioffa,
carciofo, carciuffolo, cardo alcachofero, cardo de comer, cardo sen-
zaspine, cardoon, doﬁtal ‘roza, edible thistle, enginar, garden artichoke,
Gemüseartischocke, globe artichoke, hathi choka, hatichuk, kangar, kan-
gar I dahri, kharshoul, kharsuf, kunjor, Scotch thistle, som-eonggeongqui
(2, 3, 5, 7–13).

Geographical distribution
Native to the Mediterranean, northern Africa and southern Europe, and
the Canary Islands; cultivated in subtropical regions (8, 14, 15).

Description
A large herbaceous perennial, thorny plant, approximately 1.5 m in
height. The leaves are large, alternate, deeply dentate. The tall purple
ﬂowers are grouped in large capitulums, 10–15 cm in diameter borne
by hardy ramiﬁed grooved stems, with sessile and almost entire leaves
(5, 14, 16).

92
                                                                  Folium Cynarae


Plant material of interest: dried leaves
General appearance
Leaves are very large, up to approximately 50 cm long by 25 cm wide with
a long petiole approximately 1 cm thick; lamina deeply pinnatiﬁd, forming
ﬂat, lanceolate segments with coarsely-toothed margins; upper surface
brownish-green, lower surface greyish-white and densely covered with
trichomes; segments with pinnate venation, the side veins terminating in a
short point on each marginal tooth; midrib and petiole deeply grooved on
the upper surface, the lower surface prominently raised, with several lon-
gitudinal ridges and covered with long, whitish trichomes (1, 2, 17).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: faint, slightly sour; taste: salty at ﬁrst, then bitter (1, 2, 17).

Microscopic characteristics
Lamina: The dorsiventral view reveals a fairly large and loosely packed
palisade layer of cells. Cells of the upper epidermis have straight to slightly
sinuous anticlinal walls, whereas the cells of the lower epidermis are more
wavy-walled. Anomocytic stomata on both surfaces, more numerous on
the lower surface, with covering trichomes scattered on the upper epider-
mis, especially over the veins, very abundant on the lower epidermis; indi-
vidual trichomes mostly of the whiplash type with several small cells form-
ing the uniseriate bases and very long, narrow and sinuous terminal cells
intertwining to form a felted mass covering the surface; other less numer-
ous, uniseriate covering trichomes composed of 4–6 cells, tapering to a
blunt apex with the cells sometimes more or less globular to ovoid; fairly
large glandular trichomes also abundant on both surfaces, with short, 1- or
2-celled stalk and a spherical head ﬁlled with a brownish secretion.
Midrib and petiole: Epidermal cells rectangular and longitudinally elon-
gated, with scattered glandular and covering trichomes similar to those in
the lamina. Transverse section shows bands of collenchyma below both
the upper and lower epidermises; a large vascular bundle in each ridge on
the lower surface, and a number of smaller bundles arranged in an arc sur-
rounding the groove on the upper surface; vascular bundles composed of
a dense group of pericyclic ﬁbres with thick, ligniﬁed walls, a wide area of
thin-walled sieve tissue and a ligniﬁed xylem containing small vessels, tra-
cheids and xylem parenchyma; below each xylem group a mass of ligni-
ﬁed ﬁbres, which, in the larger bundles, extends as a narrow layer on
either side of the vascular tissue to join with the ﬁbres of the pericycle;
ground tissue composed of large-celled, rounded parenchyma, some with
ligniﬁed walls (1, 2).

                                                                             93
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Powdered plant material
Greyish-green to brown powder with faint odour; fragments of the lam-
ina with more or less sinuous walls and anomocytic stomata; covering
trichomes, scattered or in felted masses and large, glandular trichomes
with brown contents; groups of ligniﬁed ﬁbres and vessels from the mid-
rib and petiole, the larger vessels with reticulate thickening (1, 2).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1, 2, 17), and thin-layer
chromatography (1, 2).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (18).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2.0% (1, 2).

Total ash
Not more than 15.0% (1, 2).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 4% (2).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 25.0% (2).

Loss on drying
Not more than 8% (1).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (19). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (19)
and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (18) and pesticide residues (20).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (18).

94
                                                                                                Folium Cynarae


Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (18).

Other purity tests
Chemical tests to be established in accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Major chemical constituents
Contains up to 6% phenolic acids, including 1-O-caffeoylquinic acid, 3-O-
caffeoylquinic acid (chlorogenic acid), caffeic acid, 4-O-caffeoylquinic acid,
5-O-caffeoylquinic acid, 1,5-di-O-caffeoylquinic acid (cynarin); up to 5% ses-
quiterpene lactones, with cynaropicrin being the primary component, followed
by dehydrocynaropicrin, grosheimin and their derivatives; and ﬂavonoids
(0.35–0.75%) including scolymoside, cynaroside and cynarotrioside (7, 16, 17,
21). The structures of chlorogenic acid, caffeic acid, cynarin, cynaropicrin, sco-
lymoside, cynaroside A-L-rhamnopyranosyl and caffeoyl are presented below.

HO                                             H O R3
                                          HO
                           CO2H                                     Chlorogenic acid     R1 = R3 = H   R2 = Caf
                                          H
HO
                                     R2                   CO2H              Cynarin      R1 = R3 = Caf R2 = H
                                          O
       Caffeic acid                            H         O R1
                 O                                                                  OH
                           CH2                       O                                     OH
             O                     CH2         R
 H2C     H             HO                                     O O
                                          OH                               O
                 H                                       OH
H                          H                                                           Cynaroside      R=H
                               O
HO                                                 HO
             H                                                                      Scolymoside        R = Rha
                 CH2       Cynaropicrin                       OH      OH   O


             HO            O
                                                              HO               O
    Rha =            CH3
                                               Caf        =                     C
                                                              HO
                     OH OH

-L-rhamnopyranosyl                                           Caffeoyl


Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Treatment of digestive complaints (e.g. dyspepsia, feeling of fullness, ﬂat-
ulence, nausea, stomach ache and vomiting) (15, 22, 23). Adjunct treat-
ment of mild to moderate hypercholesterolaemia (22, 24–27).

                                                                                                                  95
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Orally for the treatment of atherosclerosis and kidney dysfunctions (di-
uretic) (5).
   One study has indicated that the crude drug may be of beneﬁt for the
treatment of irritable bowel syndrome (28), but further randomized con-
trolled clinical trials are needed before any therapeutic recommendations
can be made.

Uses described in traditional medicine
Oral treatment of anaemia, diabetes, fever, gout, rheumatism and urinary
stones (7, 9, 29).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antiatherosclerotic and antihypercholesterolaemic activities
A dried aqueous extract of the leaves (4.5:1) inhibited cholesterol biosyn-
thesis from 14C-acetate in primary cultured rat hepatocytes in a concentra-
tion-dependent biphasic manner with moderate inhibition (approximately
20%) being noted between 0.007 and 0.1 mg/ml and stronger inhibition at
1 mg/ml (80%). Replacement of 14C-acetate by 14C-mevalonate largely
prevented the inhibitory effects of the extracts, indicating inhibition of the
activity of hydroxyl-methyl-glutaryl-CoA-reductase. Stimulation of hy-
droxyl-methyl-glutaryl-CoA-reductase activity by insulin was efﬁciently
blocked by the extract. Cynaroside and its aglycone luteolin, constituents
of the extract, were mainly responsible for enzyme inhibition (30). The
effect of an extract of the leaves in vivo was investigated in four groups of
10 rats each fed an atherosclerogenic diet. Group one was administered
110 mg/kg body weight (bw) powdered leaves; group two, 80.0 mg/kg bw
powdered Cynara cardunculus; group three, 10.0 mg/kg bw heparaxal;
and group four served as the control. Examination of tissue after 120 days
showed that the leaf extract prevented formation of atherosclerotic chang-
es, prevented serum cholesterol increase, caused a decrease in lipid phos-
phate, slightly increased the level of glycoproteins in the blood, prevented
an increase in serum G-globulin, decreased albumin, glycoproteins and
liver cholesterol, and increased G-globulin and G-globulin fractions. Cy-
nara cardunculus showed a similar but weaker activity (31). A methanol
extract of the leaves was shown to reduce serum triglyceride levels in olive
oil-loaded mice. Oral administration of the extract, at doses between 125
and 500.0 mg/kg bw, signiﬁcantly suppressed serum triglyceride elevation
2 h after administration of olive oil. In contrast, 6 h after administration of
olive oil, increases in triglyceride level were observed in the groups that

96
                                                             Folium Cynarae


received the extract at doses of 125.0 and 250.0 mg/kg bw. Orlistat, a li-
pase inhibitor, completely suppressed the serum triglyceride elevation at
250.0 mg/kg bw. Cloﬁbrate, a hypolipidaemic medicine, also suppressed
the triglyceride level at doses of 250.0 and 500.0 mg/kg bw. Three sesqui-
terpenes (cynaropicrin, aguerin B and grosheimin) from the extract were
isolated as the active components (32).
Antihepatotoxic activity
The effects of an aqueous extract of the leaves on taurolithocholate-in-
duced cholestatic bile canalicular membrane distortions were studied in
primary cultured rat hepatocytes using electron microscopy. Artichoke
extracts at concentrations between 0.08 and 0.5 mg/ml were able to pre-
vent the formation of canalicular membrane transformations in a dose-
dependent manner when added simultaneously with the bile acid. How-
ever, prevention also occurred when the hepatocytes were preincubated
with the extracts, indicating that absorption of the bile acid to compo-
nents of the extracts was not involved (33).
    The hepatoprotective activity of cynarin against carbon tetrachloride
(CCl4)-induced toxicity in isolated rat hepatocytes was compared with
other phenolic compounds. Only cynarin and, to a lesser extent, caffeic
acid showed a cytoprotective effect (34). Treatment of rats with three con-
secutive doses of 500.0 mg/kg bw of an extract of the crude drug, admin-
istered by gavage 48, 24 and 1 h before CCl4 intoxication, produced a
signiﬁcant decrease in glutamic-oxaloacetic transaminase, glutamic-pyru-
vic transaminase (also known as alanine aminotransferase or ALT), direct
bilirubin and glutathione levels, thus indicating a reduction in the poten-
tial for hepatotoxicity (35).
    Primary cultures of rat hepatocytes exposed to tert-butyl hydroperox-
ide were used for characterizing the antioxidative and hepatoprotective
potential of an aqueous extract of the crude drug and some selected con-
stituents. Addition of tert-butyl hydroperoxide to the culture media re-
sulted in enhanced lipid peroxidation as measured by the production of
malondialdehyde and enhanced cytotoxicity detected by leakage of lac-
tate dehydrogenase. The extract added prior to or simultaneously with
tert-butyl hydroperoxide reduced both phenomena with a median effec-
tive concentration (EC50) of 95.0 and 12.0 μg leaf powder/ml, respectively.
Furthermore, the aqueous extract prevented the loss of intracellular glu-
tathione caused by tert-butyl hydroperoxide. Several polyphenolic and
ﬂavonoid constituents of the extract were found to reduce malondialde-
hyde production. The median effective concentration values were 8.1,
12.5, 15.2 and 28 μg/ml for caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid, cynarin and
cynaroside, respectively (36).

                                                                        97
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


   Primary rat hepatocyte cultures exposed to tert-butyl hydroperoxide
or cumene hydroperoxide were used to assess the antioxidative and pro-
tective potential of aqueous extracts of the leaves. Both hydroperoxides
stimulated the production of malondialdehyde, particularly when the
cells were pretreated with diethylmaleate in order to diminish the level of
cellular glutathione. Addition of the extract did not affect basal malondi-
aldehyde production, but prevented the hydroperoxide-induced increase
of malondialdehyde formation in a concentration-dependent manner
when presented simultaneously with or prior to the peroxides. The effec-
tive concentrations were as low as 0.001 mg/ml (37).
Antioxidant activity
A study measured the effects of aqueous and ethanol extracts of the leaves
on intracellular oxidative stress stimulated by inﬂammatory mediators, tu-
mour necrosis factor alpha and oxidized low-density lipoprotein (ox-LDL)
in endothelial cells and monocytes. Both extracts inhibited basal and stim-
ulated reactive oxygen species production in endothelial cells and mono-
cytes, in a dose-dependent manner. In endothelial cells, the ethanol extract
(50.0 μg/ml) signiﬁcantly reduced ox-LDL-induced intracellular reactive
oxygen species production by 60% (p < 0.001) and the aqueous extract
(50 μg/ml) reduced ox-LDL-induced intracellular reactive oxygen species
production by 43% (p < 0.01). The ethanol extract (50 μg/ml) reduced ox-
LDL-induced intracellular reactive oxygen species production in mono-
cytes by 76% (p < 0.01). Effective concentrations of 25–100 μg/ml were
well below the cytotoxic levels of the extracts which started at 1.0 mg/ml as
assessed by lactate dehydrogenase leakage and trypan blue exclusion (38).
    An aqueous dried extract (9:2) of the leaves was studied in human
leukocytes to assess activity against oxidative stress. The extract (medi-
an effective concentration 0.23 μg/ml) produced a concentration-
dependent inhibition of oxidative stress when cells were stimulated with
agents that generate reactive oxygen species: hydrogen peroxide, phor-
bol-12-myristate-13-acetate and N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenyl-
alanine. Cynarin, caffeic acid, chlorogenic acid and luteolin, constituents
of artichoke leaf extracts, also showed a concentration-dependent in-
hibitory activity in the above models, contributing to the antioxidant
activity of the extract in human neutrophils (39).
Choleretic effects
Two aqueous alcoholic extracts of the fresh leaves (total extract contain-
ing 19% caffeoylquinic acids, at a dose of 200.0 mg/kg bw and a semi-
puriﬁed extract containing 46% caffeoylquinic acids, at a dose of 25.0 mg/
kg bw) were assessed in rats. Intraperitoneal administration stimulated

98
                                                               Folium Cynarae


choleresis, and signiﬁcantly increased bile dry residue and total cholate
secretion (p < 0.05). Intragastric administration of the same extracts
(400.0 mg/kg bw, total extract and 200.0 mg/kg bw of the semipuriﬁed
extract) also increased gastrointestinal motility by 11% and 14%, respec-
tively (p < 0.05) (40).
    The effects of an extract of the crude drug on bile ﬂow and the forma-
tion of bile compounds in anaesthetized rats after acute administration
and repeated oral administration (twice a day for 7 consecutive days) were
studied. A signiﬁcant increase in bile ﬂow was observed after acute treat-
ment with the extract as well as after repeated administration. The choler-
etic effects of the extract were similar to those of the reference compound
dehydrocholic acid. Total bile acids, cholesterol and phospholipid were
determined by enzymatic assays. At the highest dose (400.0 mg/kg bw), a
signiﬁcant increase was observed after single and repeated administration
(p < 0.01) (41).
    The choleretic effects of four extracts of the leaves (not described) were
assessed in vivo in a study in rats. Extracts 1, 2 and 4 did not show sig-
niﬁcant choleretic activity at a dose of 1.0 and 2.0 g/kg bw. Extract 3,
however, was found to induce an increase of bile ﬂow, which was gradual
and sustained. Cynarin and chlorogenic acid, administered as pure com-
pounds, did not show choleretic activity at any of the doses tested and
neither of them decreased the malondialdehyde content in liver (42).
Toxicology
The oral and intraperitoneal median lethal doses of a hydroalcoholic ex-
tract of the leaves in rats were 2.0 g/kg and 1.0 g/kg bw, respectively (40).
The oral median lethal dose of cynarin in mice was 1.9 g/kg bw. Intraperi-
toneal administration of cynarin to rats for 15 days, at doses between 50.0
and 400.0 mg/kg bw per day produced no macroscopic, haematological
or histological abnormalities. Intraperitoneal administration of cynarin to
rats for 40 days at a dose between 100.0 and 400.0 mg/kg bw per day in-
creased body and kidney weight, as well as producing some degenerative
changes in the liver (43). External application of a leaf extract to the skin
of white rats, at doses of 1.0–3.0 g/kg bw for 21 days, did not produce any
toxic effects or have any cumulative effects on haematological parameters
or the biochemistry of rats. No skin-irritating or eye-irritating effects
were observed in guinea-pigs (44).

Clinical pharmacology
Antidyspeptic effects
A multicentre open study assessed the effects of a dried aqueous leaf ex-
tract (3.8–5.5:1, 320 mg per capsule) in 553 patients with dyspeptic com-

                                                                           99
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


plaints. The daily dose was 4–6 capsules (containing 320.0 mg of extract
per capsule) per day, for an average of 43.5 days. Digestive complaints
declined signiﬁcantly, by 71%, over the treatment period (p < 0.001).
Compared with the baseline data on subjective symptoms, a reduction in
abdominal pain (76%), emesis (88%), meteorism (66%) and nausea (82%)
was observed. In a subgroup of 302 patients, total cholesterol decreased
by 11.5% and triglycerides by 12.5% (25). In a similar study, the same
extract was assessed in a 6-month open trial involving 203 patients with
dyspepsia. The daily dose administered was 3–6 capsules (each capsule
containing 320.0 mg of the extract). After 21 weeks of treatment, symp-
toms such as vomiting, abdominal pain, nausea and ﬂatulence decreased
by 84%, 78%, 77% and 70%, respectively. Total blood cholesterol and
triglycerides were reduced by 10.9% and 11%, respectively. Data from
159 patients indicated that low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol decreased
by 15.8% and high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol increased by 6.3%.
Global efﬁcacy as assessed by physicians was good to excellent in 85.7%
of patients. No adverse reactions were reported (26).
    In a double-blind, randomized controlled trial, 247 patients with func-
tional dyspepsia were treated with either a commercial extract of the crude
drug (2 × 320.0 mg of plant extract three times daily) or a placebo. The
primary outcome measured was the sum score of the patient’s weekly rat-
ing of the overall change in dyspeptic symptoms (four-point scale). Sec-
ondary variables were the scores for each dyspeptic symptom and the
quality of life as assessed by the Nepean Dyspepsia Index. Of the 247 pa-
tients enrolled, data from 244 patients (129 given active treatment, 115 giv-
en placebo) were suitable for inclusion in the statistical analysis (intention-
to-treat). The overall improvement in symptoms over the 6 weeks of
treatment was signiﬁcantly greater in patients treated with the commercial
extract than in those treated with the placebo (8.3 ± 4.6 versus 6.7 ± 4.8,
p < 0.01). Similarly, patients treated with the commercial extract showed
signiﬁcantly greater improvement in the global quality of life scores (Ne-
pean Dyspepsia Index) than the placebo-treated patients (-41.1 ± 47.6 ver-
sus -24.8 ± 35.6, p < 0.01). The preparation tested was signiﬁcantly better
than the placebo at alleviating symptoms and improving the disease-
speciﬁc quality of life in patients with functional dyspepsia (45).
Antihypercholesterolaemic and lipid-lowering effects
Two randomized controlled clinical trials assessed the effects of a dried
aqueous extract of the leaves on cholesterol levels in 187 patients (24, 27).
The ﬁrst, a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study in-
volving 44 healthy volunteers, assessed the effect of an extract of the crude
drug on cholesterol levels. Patients were randomly assigned to receive

100
                                                              Folium Cynarae


either 640.0 mg of the extract or a placebo three times daily for 12 weeks.
No signiﬁcant effects on serum cholesterol were found. However in sub-
group analysis, signiﬁcant cholesterol-lowering effects were observed in
subjects with a total cholesterol level of > 210 mg/dl (p < 0.022) (27).
   The second placebo-controlled study assessed the safety and efﬁcacy
of a dried aqueous extract of fresh artichoke (25–35:1). Patients received
either 1800 mg of artichoke extract as coated tablets, each containing
450.0 mg extract, or a placebo. Patients (n = 143) with hyperlipoprotein-
aemia – initial total cholesterol of > 7.3 mmol/l (> 280 mg/dl) received
1.8 g of a dried leaf extract per day or the placebo for 6 weeks. Changes in
total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol from baseline to
the end of treatment showed a statistically signiﬁcant superiority of the
dry artichoke extract over the placebo (p = 0.0001). Observed reductions
in total cholesterol levels were 18.5% in those who received the extract
and 8.6% in those who received the placebo after 6 weeks of treatment
(24). The decrease in low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol in the group
treated with the extract was 22.9% and was 63% in those treated with the
placebo. The ratio of low-density lipoprotein to high-density lipoprotein
showed a decrease of 20.2% in the group that received the extract and
7.2% in the group that received the placebo. No drug-related adverse
events were reported (24).
   In a randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trial, two groups of 30 pa-
tients presenting various dislipidaemic proﬁles were treated for 50 days
with either cynarin, 2 × 250 mg tablets per day, or a placebo. Cynarin was
able to induce a signiﬁcant reduction of hypercholesterolaemia (p < 0.001),
the level of pre-B-lipoproteins (p < 0.01), the B/A-lipoprotein ratio
(p < 0.01) and patient’s body weight (46).
   Several uncontrolled studies have found that cynarin reduced total se-
rum cholesterol in patients after treatment with oral doses of 750–1500 mg
per day. Oral administration of cynarin to 17 patients, at a dose of 1000 mg/
day, for 4 weeks resulted in a signiﬁcant decrease in total cholesterol (15%,
p < 0.005) (9).
Choleretic effect
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed the chol-
eretic effects of a dry aqueous extract of the leaves (4.5–5:1) in 20 male
volunteers with acute or chronic metabolic disorders. The treatment
group (n = 10) received a single intraduodenal dose of the extract at a dose
of 1.92 g/day in 50 ml of water on an empty stomach, while the control
group received a placebo of similar appearance. Crossover to the alterna-
tive treatment followed an 8-day washout period. The outcomes included
intraduodenal bile secretion measured using multi-channel probes. Com-

                                                                         101
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


pared with baseline values, 60 minutes after administration there was a
signiﬁcant increase in bile secretion in the treatment group (151%) as
compared with the placebo group (p < 0.01) (23).
Irritable bowel syndrome
Irritable bowel syndrome, characterized by abdominal pain and altered
bowel habit, has symptoms that overlap with those of dyspepsia. Since
the crude drug is used for the treatment of dyspepsia, a postmarketing
surveillance study was performed to assess its effects on irritable bowel
syndrome. A subgroup of patients (n = 279) with symptoms of irritable
bowel syndrome was identiﬁed from a sample of individuals (n = 553)
with dyspeptic syndrome who were being monitored in a postmarketing
surveillance study of the extract for 6 weeks. Analysis of the data from the
subgroup with irritable bowel syndrome revealed signiﬁcant reductions
in the severity of symptoms including abdominal pain, bloating, ﬂatu-
lence and constipation, and favourable evaluations of overall effectiveness
by both physicians and patients (28).
Pharmacokinetics
A study to investigate the absorption, metabolism and disposition of arti-
choke leaf extract was performed using two different extracts (47). The
extracts were administered to 14 healthy volunteers in a crossover study.
Each subject received doses of both extracts. The administered dose of
extract A contained caffeoylquinic acids equivalent to 107.0 mg caffeic
acid and luteolin glycosides equivalent to 14.4 mg luteolin. The adminis-
tered dose of extract B contained caffeoylquinic acids equivalent to
153.8 mg caffeic acid and luteolin glycosides equivalent to 35.2 mg luteo-
lin. Urine and plasma analysis were performed by a validated high-per-
formance liquid chromatography method using 12-channel coulometric
array detection. None of the genuine target extract constituents could be
detected in the plasma or urine of the subjects. However, caffeic acid, its
methylated derivates ferulic acid and isoferulic acid and the hydrogena-
tion products dihydrocaffeic acid and dihydroferulic acid were identiﬁed
as metabolites derived from caffeoylquinic acids. Except for dihydrofer-
ulic acid, all of these compounds were present as sulfates or glucuronides.
Peak plasma concentrations of total caffeic acid, ferulic acid and isoferulic
acid were reached within 1 h and declined over 24 h showing almost bi-
phasic proﬁles. By contrast, maximum concentrations for total dihydro-
caffeic acid and dihydroferulic acid were observed only after 6–7 h, indi-
cating two different metabolic pathways for caffeoylquinic acids. Luteolin
administered as glucoside was recovered from plasma and urine only as
sulfate or glucuronide, but neither in the form of genuine glucosides nor

102
                                                                                 Folium Cynarae


as free luteolin. Peak plasma concentrations were reached rapidly within
0.5 h. The elimination showed a biphasic proﬁle (47).

Adverse reactions
Gastrointestinal complaints included mild diarrhoea, accompanied by ab-
dominal cramps, upper abdominal pain, nausea and heartburn. Allergic
reactions may occur in sensitized patients (22, 25).
No signiﬁcant adverse events other than gastrointestinal discomfort have
been reported from open or controlled clinical trials (24–27, 48).

Contraindications
Hypersensitivity or allergies to artichokes and other plants from the
Compositae/Asteraceae, and obstruction of the bile ducts (15).

Warnings
Possible interaction with coumarin-type anticoagulants.

Precautions
General
Patients with gallstones should seek the advice of a health care provider
prior to use.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
The genotoxic effects of ﬂavonoid constituents present in the crude drug
(quercetin and luteolin) were assessed in two short-term bacterial assays
(49). In Salmonella typhimurium (strains TA1538 uvrB- and TA1978
uvrB+) the ﬂavonoids did not induce damage in the DNA as recognized
by UvrABC nuclease. Results of the SOS-chromotest in Escherichia coli
K-12 strains PQ37 and PQ243 indicated that the ﬂavonoids only weakly
induced the SOS system (49).

Drug interactions
No information was found.1

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
Due to the lack of safety and efﬁcacy studies, the use of the crude drug
during pregnancy is not recommended.

1
    A report of a potential drug interaction with Folium Cynarae or its preparations and with couma-
    rin-type anticoagulants such as phenprocoumone and warfarin has been recorded by a national
    regulatory authority.


                                                                                               103
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Due to the lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug during pregnancy
is not recommended.

Nursing mothers
Due to the lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug during breastfeed-
ing is not recommended.

Paediatric use
Due to the lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug for the treatment
of children under the age of 12 years is not recommended.

Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug, extracts and other Galenical preparations for internal use.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Average oral daily dose: for hypercholesterolaemia and dyspepsia, 1–2 g
of a dried aqueous extract (24, 27, 45). Adult daily dose: 5–10 g of crude
drug; or equivalent preparations (15, 17).

References
1. Pharmacopée Francaise [French pharmacopoeia]. Paris, Adrapharm, 1987.
2. British herbal pharmacopoeia. Exeter, British Herbal Medicine Association,
   1996.
3. Reynolds JEF, ed. Martindale: The extra pharmacopoeia, 13th ed. London,
   Pharmaceutical Press, 1993.
4. PharmaMed: Aufbereitungsmonographien (Kommission E CD-ROM). Stut-
   tgart, Deutscher Apotheker Verlag, 2004.
5. African pharmacopoeia, Vol. 1, 1st ed. Lagos, Nigeria, Organization of Afri-
   can Unity, Scientiﬁc Technical & Research Commission, 1985.
6. National Genetic Resources Program. Germplasm Resources Information
   Network (GRIN) [Online Database]. Beltsville, Maryland, National Germ-
   plasm Resources Laboratory (available at: http://www.ars-grin.gov2/cgi-
   bin/npgs/html/tax_search.pl?cynara+scolymus).
7. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
   at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
   of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
   of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.

104
                                                                    Folium Cynarae


8. Nadkarni KM, Nadkarni AK, eds. Indian materia medica, reprint of 3rd re-
    vised and enlarged ed. Bombay, Popular Prakashan, 1976.
9. Mills S, Bone K. Principles and practice of phytotherapy. Edinburgh, Churchill
    Livingstone, 2000.
10. Farmacopea homeopática de los estados unidos mexicanos [Homeopathic
    Pharmacopoeia of the United States of Mexico.] Mexico City, Secretaría de
    Salud, Comisión Permanente de la Farmacopea de los Estados Unidos Mexi-
    canos, 1998 [in Spanish].
11. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
12. Hooper D, Field H. Useful plants and drugs of Iran and Iraq. Field Museum
    of Natural History, Botanical series, 1937, 9:111.
13. Han DR, et al. Modern pharmacognosy. Seoul, Hakchang, 1989 [in Korean].
14. Iwu MM. Handbook of African medicinal plants. Boca Raton, FL, CRC
    Press, 1993.
15. Blumenthal M, Goldberg A, Brinckmann J, eds. Herbal medicine: expanded
    Commission E monographs. Austin, TX, American Botanical Council, 2000.
16. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisi-
    er, 1996.
17. Hagers Handbuch der Drogen (CD ROM). Heidelberg, Springer Verlag,
    2003 [in German].
18. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
19. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
20. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
21. Brand N. Monographie Cynara. In Hänsel R et al eds. Hager's Handbuch
    der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Band 4 Drogen A-D. Berlin, Springer Verlag,
    1992.
22. Kraft K. Artichoke leaf extract – Recent ﬁndings reﬂecting effects on lipid
    metabolism, liver and gastrointestinal effects. Phytomedicine, 1997, 4:369–378.
23. Kirchhoff R et al. Increase in choleresis by means of artichoke extract. Phy-
    tomedicine, 1994, 1:107–115.
24. Englisch W et al. Efﬁcacy of artichoke dry extract in patients with hyperlipo-
    proteinemia. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 2000, 50:260–265.
25. Fintelmann V. Antidyspeptische und lipidsenkende Wirkungen von Ar-
    tischockenblätterextrakt. Ergebnisse klinischer Untersuchungen zur Wirk-
    samkeit und Verträglichkeit von Hepar-SL® forte an 553 Patienten. Zeitschrift
    für Allgemeinmedizin, 1996, 72(Suppl 2):3–19 [in German].
26. Fintelmann V, Petrowicz O. Langzeitanwendung eines Artischocken-Ex-
    tracktes bei dyspeptischem Symptomkomplex. Naturamed, 1998, 13:17–26
    [in German].
27. Petrowicz O et al. Effects of artichoke leaf extract (ALE) on lipoprotein me-
    tabolism in vitro and in vivo. Atherosclerosis, 1997, 129:147.

                                                                               105
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


28. Walker AF, Middleton RW, Petrowicz O. Artichoke leaf extract reduces
    symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome in a post-marketing surveillance
    study. Phytotherapy Research, 2001, 15:58–61.
29. Wegener T, Fintelmann V. Pharmakologische Eigenschaften und therapeu-
    tisches Proﬁl der Artischocke (Cynara scolymus L.). Wiener medizinische
    Wochenschrift, 1999, 149:241–247 [in German].
30. Gebhardt R. Inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis by artichoke extracts is
    mainly due to luteolin. Cell Biology and Toxicology, 1997, 13:58.
31. Samochowiec L. Cz XV. Działanie karczochów (Cynara scolymus L.)
    i kardów (Cynara cardunculus L.) na rozwój mia’d’ycy do’wiadczalnej u
    białych szczurów. [Experimental atherosclerosis. XV. The effect of Cynara
    scolymus and Cynara cardunculus on the development of experimental ath-
    erosclerosis in white rats.] Polish Dissertationes Pharmaceuticae, 1959, 11:99–
    113 [in Polish].
32. Shimoda H et al. Anti-hyperlipidemic sesquiterpenes and new sesquiterpene
    glycosides from the leaves of artichoke (Cynara scolymus L.): structure re-
    quirement and mode of action. Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry Letters,
    2003, 13:223–228.
33. Gebhardt R. Prevention of taurolithocholate-induced hepatic bile canalicu-
    lar distortions by HPLC-characterized extracts of artichoke (Cynara scoly-
    mus) leaves. Planta Medica, 2002, 68:776–779.
34. Adzet T et al. Action of an artichoke extract against carbon CCl4-induced
    hepatotoxicity in rats. Acta Pharmaceutica Jugoslavica, 1987, 37:183–187.
35. Adzet T et al. Hepatoprotective activity of polyphenolic compounds from
    Cynara scolymus against carbon tetrachloride toxicity in isolated rat hepato-
    cytes. Journal of Natural Products, 1987, 50:612–617.
36. Gebhardt R, Fausel M. Antioxidant and hepatoprotective effects of artichoke
    extracts and constituents in cultured rat hepatocytes. Toxicology in Vitro,
    1997, 11:669–672.
37. Gebhardt R. Antioxidative and protective properties of extracts from leaves
    of the artichoke (Cynara scolymus L.) against hydroperoxide-induced oxida-
    tive stress in cultured rat hepatocytes. Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology,
    1997, 144:279–286.
38. Zapolska-Downar D et al. Protective properties of artichoke (Cynara scoly-
    mus) against oxidative stress induced in cultured endothelial cells and mono-
    cytes. Life Sciences, 2002, 71:2897–2908.
39. Pérez-García F, Adzet T, Cañigueral S. Activity of artichoke leaf extract on
    reactive oxygen species in human leukocytes. Free Radical Research, 2000,
    33:661–665.
40. Lietti A. Choleretic and cholesterol lowering properties of two artichoke
    extracts. Fitoterapia, 1977, 48:153–158.
41. Saénz Rodriguez T, García Giménez D, de la Puerta Vázquez R. Choleretic
    activity and biliary elimination of lipids and bile acids induced by an arti-
    choke leaf extract in rats. Phytomedicine, 2002, 9:687–693.

106
                                                                  Folium Cynarae


42. Speroni E et al. Efﬁcacy of different Cynara scolymus preparations on liver
    complaints. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2003, 86:203–211.
43. Preziosi P, Loscalzo B. Pharmacological properties of 1,4 dicaffeylquinic
    acid, the active principle of Cynara scolymus. Archives of International Phar-
    macodynamics, 1958, 117:63–75.
44. Halkova J. An experimental study of skin and eye-irritating effects of the
    preparate “Artishok”. Problemi na Khigienata, 1996, 21:74–80.
45. Holtmann G et al. Efﬁcacy of artichoke leaf extract in the treatment of pa-
    tients with functional dyspepsia: a six-week placebo-controlled, double-
    blind, multicentre trial. Alimentary Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 2003,
    18:1099–1105.
46. Montini M et al. Kontrollierte Anwendung von Cynarin in der Behandlung
    hyperlipämischer Syndrome [Controlled application of cynarin in the treat-
    ment of hyperlipemic syndrome. Observations in 60 cases]. Arzneimittel-
    Forschung, 1975, 25:1311–1314 [in German].
47. Wittemer SM et al. Bioavailability and pharmacokinetics of caffeoylquinic
    acids and ﬂavonoids after oral administration of artichoke leaf extracts in
    humans. Phytomedicine, 2005, 12:28–38.
48. Pittler MH, Ernst E. Artichoke leaf extract for serum cholesterol reduction.
    Perfusion, 1998, 11:338–340.
49. Czeczot H, Kusztelak J. A study of the genotoxic potential of ﬂavonoids us-
    ing short-term bacterial assays. Acta Biochimica Polonica, 1993, 40:549–554.




                                                                              107
                       Cortex Granati




Deﬁnition
Cortex Granati consists of the dried root or trunk bark of Punica grana-
tum L. (Lythraceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Punica nana L. (Punicaceae) (4).
Note: According to current botanical authorities, Punica granatum be-
longs to the Lythraceae family (5).

Selected vernacular names
Anar, anara, anar-ke-per, Carthaginian apple, dadam, dadima-phalam,
dalima, dalimb, dalimbay, dalimbuhannu, dalimo, darakte-naiar, darimba,
darinko bokra, daru, delima, delum, delun, dhalima, dila dae lok, dlima,
ende limau, gangsalan, glima glineu mekah, granada, granade, granado,
Granatbaum, granatum, grenadier, grenadillo, gul armini, gulnar, jaman,
jeliman, kupchaphala, lelo kase, madalai, madalam, madalangkai, mata-
lam, mathalanarkom, melograno, mkoma manga, nar, pomegranate, pos-
nar, qsur roman, qsur rommam, quishr-al-romman, quishr-romman,
ranato, romã, roman, romeira, rommam, roman amruj, romanzeira, rou-
mammam-goulnar, ruman, rumau, sekiryuu-karpi, seog-ryu, seokryupi,
shajratur-rummam, sham-al-rumman, shih liu pi, shiliupi, shukadana,
talima, thab thim, thap thim, zakuro-juhi (1, 3, 4, 6–12).

Geographical distribution
Native to the Middle East (eastern Mediterranean to northern India), and
now widely cultivated in warm regions throughout the world (6, 8, 9).

Description
A deciduous shrub or small tree, erect, up to 7 m high, much branched
from the base; branches slender; branchlets often ending in spines, the
young ones quadrangular or almost tetrapterous. Leaves: simple, oppo-

108
                                                                Cortex Granati


site, verticillate, oblong-lanceolate, glabrous, 1–9 cm long and 0.5–2.5 cm
wide; apex acute, obtuse or emarginate; base cuneate. Flowers: 1–5 at the
highest leaf axil of branchlets, 1 terminal, sessile or subsessile. Calyx:
2–3 cm long, red or pale yellow; lobes erectopatent to recurved; petals
round or obtuse, red or white. Fruit, a berry, globose, 5–13 cm in diam-
eter, with a leathery rib enclosing numerous seeds, variously coloured,
yellowish-green, white, reddish brown or rarely blackish-purple. Seeds:
numerous, red, pink or yellowish white (6, 7, 9).

Plant material of interest: root and stem bark
General appearance
Stem bark: curved pieces or quills; up to 15 cm long, 0.5–3.0 mm thick:
outer surface, yellowish to blackish-brown, with occasional greyish
patches of lichens, longitudinally wrinkled and marked; small, broadly
elliptical lenticels; inner surface, light yellow to light brown, ﬁnely stri-
ated; fracture, very short and granular.
Root bark: ﬂat, irregular, curved, or recurved small pieces; outer surface,
brownish yellow, rough, with darker patches and conchoidal depressions
due to exfoliation of the outer portion, but no lenticels; inner surface, yel-
low, smooth, with irregular darker brown patches. Other characteristics
similar to those of stem bark (1–3).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: slight; taste: astringent and slightly bitter (1, 2).

Microscopic characteristics
Cork, formed of several alternating layers of suberized thin-walled cells
and of ligniﬁed cells with greatly thickened inner tangential walls. Cortex,
consisting of parenchyma containing small starch granules; crystals of
calcium oxalate from scattered prisms to rosette clusters; and large sc1e-
reids, which are isolated, rarely in small groups, with very thick and
strongly stratiﬁed walls, up to 400 μm long and 200 μm broad. Phloem
shows numerous cells containing cluster crystals of calcium oxalate in
more or less tangential rows, and parenchyma cells with numerous small
starch granules or amorphous tannin masses. Medullary rays, 1–2 cell
rows with occasional cells containing numerous small prisms (1–3).

Powdered plant material
Yellowish brown to dark brown, characterized by fragments of paren-
chyma containing numerous starch granules and crystals of calcium ox-
alate; sclereids with very thick and pitted walls; fragments of cork with

                                                                          109
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


prominent, thickened and ligniﬁed walls; numerous calcium oxalate crys-
tals, prisms, 6–10 μm long and rosette cluster crystals up to 15 μm in di-
ameter; starch granules, abundant, simple, 2–10 μm in diameter, or rarely
compound; occasional long wood ﬁbres, 15–20 μm in diameter, associated
with pitted vessels; bast ﬁbres absent (1, 3).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, microchemical tests (1–3,
13) and thin-layer chromatography (3, 13).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (14).
Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2% (1, 2).
Total ash
Not more than 15% (2).
Acid-insoluble ash
To be established in accordance with national requirements.
Water-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.
Alcohol-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.
Loss on drying
To be established in accordance with national requirements.
Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (15). For other pesticides, see the European Pharmacopoeia
(15) and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (14) and pesticide residues (16).
Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (14).

110
                                                                                                     Cortex Granati


Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (14).

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 0.4% of total alkaloids.

Major chemical constituents
The major biologically active constituents are alkaloids and tannins.
Isopelletierine, methylpelletierine, methylisopelletierine, pseudopelle-
tierine, norpseudopelletierine and related alkaloids totalling 0.5–0.9%.
The tannins present at up to 22% in the bark include punicalin, its 2-O-
galloyl derivative and punicalagin (12, 17, 18). The structures of pelle-
tierine, N-methylisopelletierine, pseudopelletierine, and the tannins pu-
nicalin and punicalagin are presented below.

                                           CH3
      NH       O                       N      O
                                                           and enantiomer             H3C   N                 O
                    CH3                             CH3
      H                                H

 Pelletierine                         N-Methylisopelletierine                     Pseudopelletierine


                       OH                  Punicalagin                                 OH                     Punicalin
               HO                                                                HO


               HO                                                                HO
               O                           O                                     O                            O
                             OH                                                                 OH
          O                           O                                     O                             O
HO                                                                 HO
                             OH                                                                 OH
                                            O                                                                     O
                       O                                                               O
HO                          O                       OH             HO                       O                              OH
                   O                                                              O
                                 O                                                              O
                                                O                                                    HO               OH
                                  O
 HO                                    O                            HO
                                           O

 HO                    HO                                 OH        HO
          OH                HO        OH                                    OH
                                           HO       OH



Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
No information was found.

                                                                                                                           111
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Used orally for the treatment of diarrhoea and intestinal parasites (7, 19).

Uses described in traditional medicine
Used orally to treat dyspepsia, sore throat, menorrhagia, leukorrhoea and
ulcers (12).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antimicrobial activity
An aqueous and a 95% ethanol extract of the bark had weak activity in
vitro against Bacillus cereus, Enterococcus faecalis, Escherichia coli, Kleb-
siella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus aureus at
a concentration of 25.0 mg/well (20). A decoction of the crude drug in-
hibited the growth of Trichophyton tonsurans, T. rubrum, T. simii, Tricho-
sporon beigelii, Microsporum fulvum, M. gypseum and Candida albicans
when added to the nutrient medium at a concentration of 5% (21).
Anthelminthic and molluscicidal activities
Pelletierine, an alkaloid constituent of the bark, was active against tape-
worms (Taenia solium), but was not active against other intestinal para-
sites (4). At a concentration of 1:10 000, pelletierine hydrochloride kills
tapeworms within 5–10 minutes (22). This alkaloid acts by causing the
tapeworm to relax its grip on the intestinal walls and thereby making it
possible to be expelled by cathartics. The molluscicidal activity of the
crude drug against the snail Lymnaea acuminata was found to be both
time- and dose-dependent. An ethanol extract of the bark was effective in
killing the test animals, with a 24 h median lethal concentration of
22.42 mg/l (23). The extract was not toxic to the ﬁsh, Colisa fasciatus,
which shares the same habitat with the snail (23).
Antiuraemic activity
Administration of a decoction of the bark in the drinking-water, at a dose
of approximately 150.0 mg/kg body weight (bw), prevented casein/ade-
nine-induced kidney failure in rats (24).
Pharmacokinetics
The metabolism of punicalagin, a water-soluble ellagitannin isolated from
the crude drug, was assessed in rats (25). The animals were treated with
repeated oral administration of a 6% punicalagin-containing diet for
37 days. Punicalagin and related metabolites were identiﬁed by high per-
formance liquid chromatography–diode array detector–mass spectrome-

112
                                                              Cortex Granati


try–mass spectrometry (HPLC-DAD-MS-MS) in plasma, liver and kid-
neys. Five punicalagin-related metabolites were detected in liver and
kidney, that is, two ellagic acid derivatives, gallagic acid, 3,8-dihydroxy-
6H-dibenzo[b,d]pyran-6-one glucuronide, and 3,8,10-trihydroxy-6H-
dibenzo[b,d]pyran-6-one (25).

Toxicology
In animal experiments, intragastric administration of very large doses
(not stated) of the alkaloids isolated from the bark caused respiratory
arrest and death (26). Punicalagin has been reported to be toxic to cattle
and rats (25). The chronic toxicity of punicalagin was assessed in rats.
Treatment consisted of repeated oral administration of a 6% punicalagin-
containing diet for 37 days. Feedstuff intake, food utility index and
growth rate were lower in treated rats during the ﬁrst 15 days, but no
signiﬁcant adverse effects were observed. No signiﬁcant differences were
found in treated rats in any blood parameter analysed (including the
antioxidant enzymes glutathione peroxidase and superoxide dismutase)
with the exception of urea and triglycerides, which remained low
throughout the experiment (25).

Clinical pharmacology
Toxicology
Ingestion by humans of more than 80.0 g of drug may cause severe vomit-
ing with blood, dizziness, fever, tremor and collapse. After 10 hours to
3 days temporary blindness may occur, which usually resolves after sev-
eral weeks. Ingestion of pelletierine may cause visual disturbances with
mydriasis (dilated pupils), dizziness and headache, as well as long-lasting
anaesthesia or somnolence. Further symptoms of overdose include colic,
cold sweat, dizziness, headache, muscle cramps, weakness or paralysis of
the lower extremities, nausea, cardiac and respiratory collapse (27).

Adverse reactions
Common adverse events observed in humans include dizziness, visual
disturbances, weakness, calf spasms and tremors. Large overdoses
(> 80.0 g) of the crude drug may lead to dizziness, mydriasis, severe head-
ache, vertigo, vomiting, lethargy, collapse and possible death due to the
alkaloid content (26).

Contraindications
Hypersensitivity or allergy to the bark.

                                                                        113
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Warnings
For diarrhoea lasting for longer than 3 days, contact a health care provider.
For diarrhoea associated with fever, nausea and vomiting, or bloody stools,
contact a health care provider. Do not exceed recommended dosage.

Precautions
General
No information was found.

Drug interactions
No information was found.

Drug and laboratory test interactions
No information was found.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
The genotoxic effects of the crude drug were examined in established hu-
man cell lines, Raji and P3HR-1. Cells were treated with a decoction of
the bark at various concentrations for 24 and 48 hours in vitro. Cell
growth and viability were dose-dependently reduced. No apparent chro-
mosomal aberrations were induced by the treatment. Administration of a
bark extract induced apoptotic DNA fragmentation (28).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
No information was found.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Due to the lack of safety data, the use of Cortex Granati during preg-
nancy is not recommended.

Nursing mothers
Due to the lack of safety data, the use of Cortex Granati during breast-
feeding is not recommended.

Paediatric use
Due to the lack of safety data, the use of Cortex Granati in children under
the age of 12 years is not recommended.

Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug, extracts and tablets. Store in a cool dry place (19).

114
                                                                     Cortex Granati


Posology
Oral daily dose: 3–9 g for decoction (19).
Daily dose: 20 g root bark ﬂuidextract (1:1) in 59% ethanol for the treat-
ment of Taenia infestation (27).

References
1. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India, Part I, Vol. II, 1st ed. New Delhi,
    Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Department of Indian System of Med-
    icine and Homoeopathy, 1999.
2. Asian crude drugs, their preparations and speciﬁcations. Asian Pharmacopoe-
    ia, 1st ed. Manila, Federation of Asian Pharmaceutical Associations, 1978.
3. Materia medika Indonesia, Jilid V. Jakarta, Departemen Kesehatan, Republik
    Indonesia, 1989 [in Indonesian].
4. Iwu MM. Handbook of African medicinal plants. Boca Raton, FL, CRC
    Press, 1993.
5. National Genetic Resources Program. Germplasm Resources Information
    Network (GRIN) [Online Database]. National Germplasm Resources Labo-
    ratory, Beltsville, MD (available at http://www.ars-grin.gov2/cgi-bin/npgs/
    html/tax_search.pl?punica+granatum).
6. Standard of ASEAN herbal medicine, Vol. I. Jakarta, ASEAN Countries,
    1993.
7. Medicinal plants in China. Manila, World Health Organization Regional Of-
    ﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc, 1989 (WHO Regional Publications, Western Pa-
    ciﬁc Series, No. 2).
8. Medicinal plants in the South Paciﬁc. Manila, World Health Organization
    Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc, 1998 (WHO Regional Publications,
    Western Paciﬁc Series, No. 19).
9. Medicinal plants of India, Vol. II. New Delhi, Indian Council of Medical
    Research, 1987.
10. Nadkarni AK. Dr. K.M. Nadkarni’s Indian materia medica. Bombay, Popu-
    lar Prakashan, 1976.
11. Ross IA. Medicinal plants of the world. Totowa, New Jersey, Humana Press,
    1999.
12. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
13. Deutsches Arzneibuch, 6th ed. Stuttgart, Deutscher Apotheker Verlag, 1951.
14. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
15. European Pharmacopoeia, 4th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
16. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).

                                                                               115
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


17. Evans WC. Trease and Evans pharmacognosy, 15th ed. Edinburgh, WB
    Saunders, 2002.
18. Tanaka T, Nonaka G-I, Nishioka I. Tannins and related compounds. XL.
    Revision of the structures of punicalin and punicalagin, and isolation and
    characterization of 2-O-galloylpunicalin from the bark of Punica granatum
    L. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1986, 34:650–655.
19. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Vol. I (English ed.). Bei-
    jing, Chemical Industry Press, 2005.
20. Nimri LF, Meqdam MM, Alkofahi A. Antibacterial activity of Jordanian me-
    dicinal plants. Pharmaceutical Biology, 1999, 37:196–201.
21. Dutta BK, Rahman I, Das TK. Antifungal activity of Indian plant extracts.
    Mycoses, 1998, 41:535–536.
22. Kee CH. The pharmacology of Chinese herbs. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press,
    1993.
23. Tripathi SM, Singh DK. Molluscicidal activity of Punica granatum bark and
    Canna indica root. Brazilian Journal of Medical Biology Research, 2000,
    33:1351–1355.
24. Yokozawa T et al. Conﬁrmation that tannin-containing crude drugs have a
    uraemic toxin-decreasing action. Phytotherapy Research, 1995, 9:1–5.
25. Cerdá B et al. Repeated oral administration of high doses of the pomegranate
    ellagitannin punicalagin to rats for 37 days is not toxic. Journal of Agriculture
    and Food Chemistry, 2003, 51:3493–3501.
26. Bensky D, Gamble A. Chinese herbal medicine. Materia medica, revised ed.
    Seattle, Washington, Eastland Press, 1993.
27. Hager ROM 2003, Granati cortex (Granatrinde). Heidelberg, Springer-Ver-
    lag.
28. Settheetham W, Ishida T. Study of genotoxic effects of antidiarrheal medici-
    nal herbs on human cells in vitro. Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical Medi-
    cine and Public Health, 1995, 26 (Suppl 1):306–310.




116
                   Pericarpium Granati




Deﬁnition
Pericarpium Granati consists of the dried pericarp of Punica granatum
L. (Lythraceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Punica nana L. (Punicaceae) (4).
Note: According to current botanical authorities, Punica granatum be-
longs to the Lythraceae family (5).

Selected vernacular names
Anar, anara, anar-ke-per, Carthaginian apple, dadam, dadima-phalam,
dalima, dalimb, dalimbay, dalimbuhannu, dalimo, darakte-naiar, darimba,
darinko bokra, daru, delima, delum, delun, dhalima, dila dae lok, dlima,
ende limau, gangsalan, glima glineu mekah, granada, granade, granado,
Granatbaum, granatum, grenadier, grenadillo, gul armini, gulnar, jaman,
jeliman, kupchaphala, lelo kase, madalai, madalam, madalangkai, mata-
lam, mathalanarkom, melograno, mkoma manga, nar, pomegranate, pos-
nar, qsur roman, qsur rommam, quishr-al-romman, quishr-romman,
ranato, romã, roman, romeira, rommam, roman amruj, romanzeira, rou-
mammam-goulnar, ruman, rumau, sekiryuu-karpi, seog-ryu, seokryupi,
sham-al-rumman, shajratur-rummam, shih liu pi, shiliupi, shukadana,
talima, thab thim, thap thim, zakuro-hi (2–4, 6–12).

Geographical distribution
Native to the Middle East (eastern Mediterranean to northern India), and
now widely cultivated in warm regions throughout the world (6, 8, 9).

Description
A deciduous shrub or small tree, erect, up to 7 m high, much branched
from the base; branches slender; branchlets often ending in spines, the
young ones quadrangular or almost tetrapterous. Leaves: simple, oppo-

                                                                    117
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


site, verticillate, oblong-lanceolate, glabrous, 1–9 cm long and 0.5–2.5 cm
wide; apex acute, obtuse or emarginate; base cuneate. Flowers: 1–5 at the
highest leaf axil of branchlets, 1 terminal, sessile or subsessile. Calyx
2–3 cm long, red or pale yellow; lobes erectopatent to recurved; petals
round or obtuse, red or white. Fruit, a berry, globose, 5–13 cm in diame-
ter, with a leathery rind enclosing numerous seeds, variously coloured,
yellowish green, white, reddish brown or rarely blackish purple. Seeds:
numerous, red, pink or yellowish white (6, 7, 9).

Plant material of interest: pericarp
General appearance
Irregular slices or gourd-shaped, brittle, varying in size, 1.5–3.0 mm thick.
The outer surface reddish brown, brownish yellow or dark brown; some-
what lustrous, rough, with numerous warty protuberances. Some with a
raised tubular persistent calyx and a stout and short peduncle or its scar. Inner
surface yellow or reddish brown, with raised reticulated remains of the pe-
duncle. Texture hard and fragile, fracture yellow, somewhat granular (1, 6).

Organoleptic properties
Odourless; taste: bitter and astringent (1, 6).

Microscopic characteristics
Transverse section of the pericarp shows the following: exocarp consists
of irregular polygonal cells with slightly thickened but not ligniﬁed outer
wall and a thick smooth cuticle. Mesocarp generally consists of thin-
walled parenchyma cells containing starch granules, clusters or prisms of
calcium oxalate. Scattered among the parenchyma cells are sclereids oc-
curring singly or in small groups with strongly thickened ligniﬁed walls
and rather small lumen or with slightly thickened somewhat ligniﬁed
walls and wider lumen. Small bicollateral vascular bundles course through
the parenchyma; rather thick-walled, non-ligniﬁed ﬁbres occasionally ac-
companying the bundles. Larger bicollateral vascular bundles course
through the central part of the mesocarp: phloem ﬁbres are few and pos-
sess clear non-ligniﬁed walls and a narrow lumen; some phloem paren-
chyma contains prisms of calcium oxalate. Endocarp cells relatively small,
containing starch granules and crystals of calcium oxalate, and stone cells
also relatively small (1, 6).

Powdered plant material
Reddish brown. Stone cells sub-rounded, rectangular or irregular, rarely
branched, 27–102 Mm in diameter, with relatively thick walls and a large
lumen, some containing brown matter. Epidermal cells sub-square or sub-

118
                                                          Pericarpium Granati


rectangular, with slightly thickened walls. Clusters of calcium oxalate 10–
25 Mm in diameter, prisms infrequent. Spiral and reticulate vessels 12–18 Mm
in diameter. Starch granules sub-rounded, 2–10 Mm in diameter (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1, 2, 6), microchemical tests
(1, 6), and thin-layer chromatography (2, 6).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (13).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 6% (1).

Total ash
Not more than 4% (2, 6).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 1% (6).

Water-soluble extractive
Pericarp: not less than 30% (6).

Alcohol-soluble extractive
Pericarp: not less than 15% (6).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10% (6).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (14). For other pesticides see the European pharmacopoeia (14)
and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (13) and pesticide residues (15).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (13).

                                                                         119
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (13).

Chemical assays
Total tannins not less than 10% (1).

Major chemical constituents
The major constituents are hydrolysable ellagitannins (up to 28%) and
other polyphenols (3, 12, 16, 17). Structures of ellagic acid and punicalin
are presented below.


      Ellagic acid                                OH                     Punicalin
                                          HO
           O
                       OH                 HO
       O
HO                                        O                              O
                       OH
                                                           OH
                   O                 O                               O
HO
                               HO
               O                                           OH
                                                                          O
                                                  O
                               HO                      O                           OH
                                              O
                                                           O
                                                                HO            OH
                                HO


                                HO
                                     OH




Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Orally for the treatment of chronic diarrhoea, dysentery, gingivitis and
intestinal parasites (1, 7, 18).

Uses described in traditional medicine
Treatment of bronchitis, fever, gastrointestinal ailments, menorrhagia,
respiratory tract infections, skin rashes, vaginal infections and worms
(12, 19).

120
                                                          Pericarpium Granati


Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antidiarrhoeal activity
Intragastric administration of a decoction or a 95% ethanol extract of the
crude drug at a dose of 200.0 mg/kg or 50.0 mg/kg body weight (bw),
respectively, reduced faecal output in rats with castor-oil induced diar-
rhoea (21). The same extracts, at a dose of 500.0 mg/kg bw, exhibited in-
testinal antisecretory activity in rats with magnesium sulfate-induced en-
teropooling (20).

Antimicrobial, antiparasitic and antiviral activity
An aqueous, butanol, or 95% ethanol extract of the crude drug had in
vitro activity against Proteus mirabilis, Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, Kleb-
siella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Streptococcus aureus, Staph-
ylococcus aureus and Candida albicans at a concentration of 60.0 μg/ml
(21, 22). An aqueous extract and a 95% ethanol extract of the fruit rind
had weak in vitro activity against Bacillus cereus, Enterococcus faecalis,
Escherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and
Staphylococcus aureus at a concentration of 25 mg/well (23, 24).
    A decoction of the crude drug weakly inhibited the growth of
Trichophyton tonsurans, T. rubrum, T. simii, Trichosporon beigelii, Mi-
crosporum fulvum, M. gypseum and Candida albicans when added to the
nutrient medium at a concentration of 5% (25).
    Tannins separated from the crude drug were effective against genital
herpes virus (herpes simplex virus type 2). The tannin not only inhibited
replication of the virus, but also blocked herpes type 2 viral adsorption in
cultured cells (26).
    An aqueous extract of the crude drug had antiviral activity against
hepatitis B virus in PLC/PRF/5 cells in vitro (27). An aqueous extract
inhibited hepatitis C virus in vitro at a concentration of 100 μg/ml. An
acetone extract of the crude drug had larvicidal activity against Chry-
somya albiceps at a concentration of 25 μg/ml (28). At a concentration of
10.0 ml/plate, an aqueous extract of the crude drug weakly inhibited the
growth of Ascaris galli, Pheritima posthuma and Taenia solium (29), as
well as Ascaris lumbricoides (30).

Antioxidant activity
Aqueous, alcohol and ethyl acetate extracts of the crude drug have shown
signiﬁcant antioxidant activity in various in vitro and in vivo models. A
methanol extract of the crude drug had antioxidant activity in vitro, in the
B-carotene-linoleate and 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl radical model

                                                                         121
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


systems. The methanol extract exhibited 83% and 81% antioxidant activ-
ity at a concentration of 50.0 μg/ml using the B-carotene-linoleate and
1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl radical model systems, respectively (31).
A dried methanol extract fed to rats (50.0 mg/kg bw) following treatment
with carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) (2.0 g/kg bw) decreased the levels of
catalase, superoxide dismutase and peroxidase by 81, 49 and 89%, respec-
tively. Pretreatment of the rats with the methanol extract maintained the
levels of catalase, peroxidase and superoxide dismutase at values compa-
rable with control values, whereas lipid peroxidation was reduced by 54%
compared to the control group (32).
Antiulcer activity
Intragastric administration of an aqueous extract (5 ml/kg bw) or an un-
speciﬁed protein-containing fraction (50 mg/kg bw) of the crude drug to
rats prevented hydrochloric acid and ethanol-induced gastric ulceration
(33). The gastroprotective effects of tannic acid and the aqueous extract of
the crude drug against ethanol-induced damage were investigated in rats.
Oral administration of the extract or tannic acid induced a signiﬁcant de-
crease in gastric lesions (48–76%). The protection observed was more
pronounced when the test solution was given at the same time as the eth-
anol. The acid content of the stomach was increased by 368% after ad-
ministration of the ethanol extract (34).
Immune effects
Oral administration of a powder made from the fruit rind, at a dose of
100.0 mg/kg bw, as an aqueous suspension, stimulated cell-mediated and
humoral components of the immune system in rabbits. The suspension
elicited an increase in antibody titre to typhoid-H antigen. It also en-
hanced the inhibition of leukocyte migration in the leukocyte migration
inhibition test and induration of skin in the delayed hypersensitivity test
with puriﬁed protein derivative, conﬁrming its stimulatory effect on the
cell-mediated immune response (35).
Toxicology
An aqueous extract of the crude drug was reported to stimulate uterine
contractions in non-pregnant rats but the dose and the route of adminis-
tration were not stated (36).

Clinical pharmacology
A water-soluble component derived from an ethanol extract of the crude
drug possessing antimicrobial activity was used in an antibacterial mouth-
wash at a concentration of 0.8% w/w (18). The mouthwash was com-
posed of a combination of the water-soluble component (0.8 g/100 ml),

122
                                                          Pericarpium Granati


menthol (0.03 g/100 ml), and absolute alcohol (5 g/100 ml). Eighty volun-
teers (30 healthy and 50 with dental caries) were required to rinse their
mouths with 20 ml of the mouthwash for 30 seconds, they then closed
their mouths for 90 seconds and then spat out their saliva for analysis. The
salivary microbes were cultured and identiﬁed. Oral pathogens such as
Staphylococcus aureus, S. mutans and Lactobacillus spp. were killed
whereas Candida albicans was not (18).

Adverse reactions
No information was found.

Contraindications
Hypersensitivity or allergy to the plant material.

Warnings
In cases of diarrhoea lasting for longer than 3 days, or associated with
fever, nausea and vomiting, or bloody stools, contact a health care pro-
vider. Do not exceed recommended dose.

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
The genotoxic effects of the crude drug were examined in established hu-
man cell lines, Raji and P3HR-1. Cells were treated with a decoction of
the crude drug at various concentrations for 24 and 48 hours in vitro. Cell
growth and viability were dose-dependently reduced. No apparent chro-
mosomal aberrations were induced by the treatment. Administration of
the extract induced apoptotic DNA fragmentation (37).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
No information was found.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Due to the lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug during pregnancy
is not recommended.

Nursing mothers
Due to the lack of safety and efﬁcacy studies, the use of the crude drug by
breastfeeding mothers is not recommended.

Paediatric use
Due to the lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug for the treatment
of children under the age of 12 years is not recommended.

                                                                         123
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug, extracts and tablets. Store in a cool dry place (1).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Oral daily dose: 2.5–4.5 g (1, 7).

References
1. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Beijing, Chemical Indus-
    try Press, 2005.
2. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India, Part I, Vol. II, 1st ed. New Delhi,
    Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Department of Indian System of Med-
    icine and Homoeopathy, 1999.
3. Materia medika Indonesia, Jilid V. Jakarta, Departemen Kesehatan, Republik
    Indonesia, 1989 [in Indonesian].
4. Iwu MM. Handbook of African medicinal plants. Boca Raton, FL, CRC
    Press, 1993.
5. National Genetic Resources Program. Germplasm Resources Information
    Network (GRIN) [Online Database]. National Germplasm Resources Labo-
    ratory, Beltsville, MD (available at: http://www.ars-grin.gov2/cgi-bin/npgs/
    html/tax_search.pl?punica+granatum).
6. Standard of ASEAN herbal medicine. Vol. I. Jakarta, ASEAN Countries,
    1993.
7. Medicinal plants in China. Manila, World Health Organization Regional Of-
    ﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc, 1989 (WHO Regional Publications, Western Pa-
    ciﬁc Series, No. 2).
8. Medicinal plants in the South Paciﬁc. Manila, World Health Organization
    Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc, 1998 (WHO Regional Publications,
    Western Paciﬁc Series, No. 19).
9. Medicinal plants of India, Vol. II. New Delhi, Indian Council of Medical
    Research, 1987.
10. Nadkarni AK. Dr. K.M. Nadkarni’s Indian materia medica. Bombay, Popu-
    lar Prakashan, 1976.
11. Ross IA. Medicinal plants of the world. Totowa, NJ, Humana Press, 1999.
12. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
13. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.

124
                                                                Pericarpium Granati


14. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
15. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
16. Evans WC. Trease and Evans pharmacognosy, 15th ed. London, WB Saun-
    ders, 2002.
17. Tanaka T, Nonaka G-I, Nishioka I. Tannins and related compounds. XL.
    Revision of the structures of punicalin and punicalagin, and isolation and
    characterization of 2-O-galloylpunicalin from the bark of Punica granatum
    L. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1986, 34:650–655.
18. Chulasiri M et al. A water-soluble component with antimicrobial activity
    from pomegranate rind: an ingredient in an antiseptic mouthrinse. Mahidol
    Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1995, 22:150–159.
19. De Feo V, Senatore F. Medicinal plants and phytotherapy in the Amalﬁtan
    coast, Salerno Province, Campania, Southern Italy. Journal of Ethnopharma-
    cology, 1993, 39:39–51.
20. Pillai NR. Anti-diarrhoeal activity of Punica granatum in experimental ani-
    mals. International Journal of Pharmacognosy, 1992, 30:201–204.
21. Alkofahi A, Masaadeh H, Al-Khalil S. Antimicrobial evaluation of some
    plant extracts of traditional medicine of Jordan. Alexandria Journal of Phar-
    maceutical Sciences, 1996, 10:123–126.
22. Prashanth D, Asha MK, Amit A. Antibacterial activity of Punica granatum.
    Fitoterapia, 2001, 72:171–173.
23. Chulasiri M, Thakerngpol K, Temsiririrkkul R. A water-soluble component
    with antimicrobial activity from pomegranate rind: electron microscopic and
    preliminary chemical studies. Mahidol Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
    1995, 22:107–112.
24. Chulasiri M et al. A water-soluble component with antimicrobial activity
    from pomegranate rind: antimicrobial potency and stability study. Mahidol
    Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1995, 22:1–7.
25. Dutta BK, Rahman I, Das TK. Antifungal activity of Indian plant extracts.
    Mycoses, 1998, 41:535–536.
26. Zhang J et al. [Antiviral activity of tannin from pericarp of Punica granatum
    L. against genital herpes virus in vitro] [in Chinese]. Zhongguo Zhongyao
    Zazhi, 1995, 20:556–558.
27. Goto W et al. Suppression of hepatitis B virus surface antigen secretion by
    traditional plant medicines. Phytotherapy Research, 1996, 10:504–507.
28. Morsy TA, Mazyad SAM, El-Sharkawy IM. The larvicidal activity of solvent
    extracts of three medicinal plants against third instar larvae of Chrysomyia
    albiceps. Journal of the Egyptian Society of Parasitology, 1998, 28:699–709.
29. Hukkeri VI et al. In vitro anthelmintic activity of aqueous extract of fruit
    rind of Punica granatum. Fitoterapia, 1993, 64:69–70.
30. Raj RK. Screening of indigenous plants for anthelmintic action against hu-
    man Ascaris lumbricoides: Part II. Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharma-
    cology, 1975, 19:47–49.

                                                                               125
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


31. Singh RP, Chidambara Murthy KN, Jayaprakasha GK. Studies on the anti-
    oxidant activity of pomegranate (Punica granatum) peel and seed extracts
    using in vitro models. Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry, 2002,
    50:81–86.
32. Chidambara Murthy KN, Jayaprakasha GK, Singh RP. Studies on antioxi-
    dant activity of pomegranate (Punica granatum) peel extract using in vivo
    models. Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry, 2002, 50:4791–4795.
33. Khennouf S et al. Effects of Quercus ilex L. and Punica granatum L. poly-
    phenols against ethanol-induced gastric damage in rats. Pharmazie, 1999,
    54:75–76.
34. Gharzouli K et al. Effects of aqueous extracts from Quercus ilex L. root bark,
    Punica granatum L. fruit peel and Artemisia herba-alba Asso leaves on eth-
    anol-induced gastric damage in rats. Phytotherapy Research, 1999, 13:42–45.
35. Gracious Ross R, Selvasubramanian S, Jayasundar S. Immunomodulatory
    activity of Punica granatum in rabbits – a preliminary study. Journal of Eth-
    nopharmacology, 2001, 78:85–87.
36. Dhawan BN, Saxena PN. Evaluation of some indigenous drugs for stimulant
    effect on the rat uterus: A preliminary report. Indian Journal of Medical Re-
    search, 1958, 46:808–811.
37. Settheetham W, Ishida T. Study of genotoxic effects of antidiarrheal medici-
    nal herbs on human cells in vitro. Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical Medi-
    cine and Public Health, 1995, 26 (Suppl 1):306–310.




126
                         Folium Guavae




Deﬁnition
Folium Guavae consists of the dried and/or young leaves of Psidium gua-
java L. (Myrtaceae) (1).

Synonyms
Psidium aromaticum L. P. cujavillus Burm. f, P. pomiferum L., P. pyrifer-
um L., P. pumilum Vahl (2).

Selected vernacular names
Abas, aduoba, aguoba, amba, amrood, amrud, amrut, amruta-phalam,
araca-goiba, arasa, banjiro, banziro, bidji, bihi, bilauti, borimak, bugoyab,
buyaki, dijamboé, coloc, djambu bidji, djambu klutuk, eguabe, fa-rang,
goavy, goejaba, goiaba, goiabeira, goiabeira-vermelha, goiabeiro, gouyav,
gouyavier, goyav, goyavier, goyya, grosse gelbe, gua, guafa, guajave, gua-
va, guava tree, Guave, guayaba, guayaba cak, guayaba colorada, guayaba
cotorrera, guayaba de gusano, guayaba de venado, guayaba del Peru,
guayaba peruana, guayabe, guayabero, guayabo, guayabo agrio, guayabo
blanco, guayava, Guayave, guega, guyaba, gwaabaa, gwawa, hind armudu,
ipera, jaama, jamba, jambu biji, kautonga, Kiswahili, koyya, krue, ku’ava,
kuabas, kuava, kuawa, kuiaba, kuliabas, mabera, maduriam, manssla,
motiram, mpera, mugwavha, ngoaba, nulu, oguawa, pat’a, perala, pero
delle Indie, peyara, posh, psidio, psidium, punjo, quwawa, sari guafa, sig-
ra, sikra, tuava, warakel-guafa, wariafa, woba, xalxoctl (1, 3–10).

Geographical distribution
Native to tropical America, but now pantropical (7, 8, 11).

Description
A large shrub or small tree up to 10 m high. Stem slender, usually not
exceeding 30 cm in width; bark brownish, thin, smooth, and often ﬂaking
off in scaly patches. Leaves opposite, oblong, slightly oval shaped, 5–15 cm
in length, light green on the upper surface, and downy and pale green on

                                                                         127
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


the underside. They display prominent veins on the underside of the leaf.
Flowers white, occur either singly or a few in a cluster in axils of the
leaves. About 2.5 cm in diameter, with numerous stamens arranged in
groups. Fruits are globose or pyriform, yellow, usually 2.5–10 cm long
and 2.5–5 cm in diameter, horticulture varieties with larger fruits with an
edible pink mesocarp are common. They contain many seeds, and the
calyx persists in fruit (7, 8).

Plant material of interest: dried or young leaves
General appearance
Oblong, slightly oval, apex acute, round or acuminate; base symmetrical,
cordate; margin smooth or dentate; venation reticulate; green (1).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: slight; taste: astringent (1).

Microscopic characteristics
The surface view shows nearly straight anticlinal epidermal cell walls on
both surfaces, those on upper surface thickened; abundant stomata and cov-
ering trichomes on lower surface; oil glands on both surfaces, but more
frequent on lower surface. Transverse section shows small epidermal cells
with straight anticlinal walls, upper epidermal layer 2–3 cells thick with a
few oil glands (schizogeneous); palisade tissue multi-layered; numerous oil
glands in the mesophyll region; midrib region shows collenchymatous cells;
bicollateral vascular bundle is distinctly horse-shoe shaped and surrounded
by ligniﬁed pericyclic ﬁbres; xylem elements are generally ligniﬁed; uniseri-
ate trichomes smooth-walled and abundant on lower epidermis (1).

Powdered plant material
Light green; taste astringent; lamina fragments show abundant stomata,
punctate, numerous covering trichomes; rosette crystals; ligniﬁed vascu-
lar elements (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (12).

128
                                                              Folium Guavae


Foreign organic matter
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Total ash
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Acid-insoluble ash
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Water-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Loss on drying
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (13). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (13)
and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (12) and pesticide residues (14).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (12).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (12).

Chemical assays
Not less than 14% (w/w) tannins and not less than 0.6% (v/w) essential
oil (1).

Major chemical constituents
Contains hydrolysable tannins, essential oils, ﬂavonoids, and terpenes (1,
6, 15). New leaves contain the ﬂavonols quercetin, guajaverin (= quer-
cetin-3-O-arabinoside) and other quercetin glycosides; gallocatechin and
the tannins ellagic acid and guavins A, C and D. Several triterpene acids
are present, including ursolic and oleanolic acids and their 20-hydroxy-
derivatives, crataegoic and guaijavolic acids. The leaf oil contains several
mono- and sesquiterpenes, among which 1,8-cineol and A-pinene are the

                                                                        129
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


principal monoterpenes, and caryophyllene and G-bisbolene are represen-
tative of the sesquiterpenes (16–24).
    Structures of quercetin, guajaverin (= quercetin-3-O-arabinoside), ur-
solic oleanolic acids, ellagic acid, A-pinene and caryophyllene are present-
ed below.

                               OH
                                                                                                HO             O
                                         OH
                                               Quercetin X = H                  Arap       =             OH
HO                O
                                                                                                               OH
                                              Guajaverin X = Arap
                           O                                                    -L-arabinopyranosyl
           OH     O        X


                               H3C CH3                                                               H    CH3
                                                                                                H
                                                                                         H3C


                CH3   CH3       H        CO2H                                  CH3       CH3        H         CO2H

 H                H           CH3                                H                   H         CH3

HO                                                              HO
             H                                                                  H
     H3C    CH3           Oleanolic acid                             H3C       CH3             Ursolic acid

                 O                                CH3
                                    OH                                               CH3
            O
                                                     H
 HO                                                                        H
                                    OH                                                         and enantiomer
                                              H                CH2    H3C
                          O
 HO                                           H3 C                     H3C
                                                         CH3                     H
                      O
Ellagic acid                              Caryophyllene                              -Pinene


Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Oral treatment of acute diarrhoea, gingivitis and rotaviral enteritis
(25–28).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
No information was found.

Uses described in traditional medicine
Treatment of abdominal pain, bleeding gums, cough, gastritis, headache,
ringworm, vaginitis, wounds and worms. Also used as an astringent, an
antiemetic and an emmenagogue (4, 15).

130
                                                               Folium Guavae


Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Analgesic activity
Intragastric administration of 100.0, 200.0 or 400.0 mg/kg body weight
(bw) of the essential oil of the leaves produced an antinociceptive effect in
mice as assessed in the formalin test (29). A dose of 200.0 mg/kg bw of the
essential oil to mice reduced pain as measured in the acetic acid-induced
writhing test. One of the major constituents, A-pinene, also showed an
antinociceptive effect in the formalin test, and when administered intra-
gastrically at doses of 100 mg/kg and 200 mg/kg, a reduction of paw lick-
ing of 72% and 76%, respectively was observed. At a dose of 400.0 mg/kg
bw, paw licking was reduced by 37% in the ﬁrst (acute) phase and 81% in
the second (chronic) phase (29).
Antidiarrhoeal activity
A decoction of the leaves inhibited Microlax-induced diarrhoea when ad-
ministered by gastric lavage to rats at a dose of 10.0 ml/kg bw (30). Intra-
gastric administration of a methanol extract of the leaves to mice at a dose
of 200.0 mg/kg bw prevented castor oil-induced diarrhoea (31). Intragastric
administration of an aqueous or methanol extract of the leaves to rats at a
dose of 400.0 mg/kg bw prevented castor oil-induced diarrhoea, reduced
gastric motility and prostaglandin E2-induced enteropooling (32). A dried
70% methanol extract of the leaves inhibited the electrically-induced peri-
staltic reﬂex of isolated guinea-pig ileum at a concentration of 100 Mg/ml
(22). The main active constituent of the extract was quercetin 1.4 × 10-5
(72.1%), with isoquercetin and hyperin being weakly active (22).
Antihyperglycaemic activity
Intragastric administration of a 50% ethanol extract of the leaves to rats,
at a dose of 200.0 mg/kg bw, prevented alloxan-induced hyperglycae-
mia. A butanol fraction of the 50% ethanol extract reduced alloxan-in-
duced hyperglycaemia in rats when administered at a dose of 25.0 mg/
kg bw by gastric lavage (33). Intragastric administration of a 50% etha-
nol extract to rats at a dose of 200.0 mg/kg bw did not stimulate insulin
biosynthesis (33).
Antiinﬂammatory and antipyretic activity
Intragastric administration of 0.8 ml/kg bw of the leaf essential oil to rats
reduced inﬂammation in the carrageenan-induced oedema of the hind
paw test and the cotton pellet granuloma test (34). Intragastric adminis-
tration of a dried methanol extract of the leaves to mice at a dose of
200.0 mg/kg bw reduced carrageenan-induced pedal oedema (31). Intra-

                                                                         131
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


gastric administration of a dried methanol extract of the leaves to mice at
a dose of 200.0 mg/kg bw reduced yeast-induced pyrexia (31).

Antimalarial activity
The following extracts of the crude drug had activity against Plasmodium
falciparum in vitro with a median inhibitory concentration as follows:
ethyl acetate,10.0 μg/ml; 95% ethanol, 36.0 μg/ml; aqueous, 80.0 μg/ml;
and petroleum ether, 13.0 μg/ml (35, 36).

Antimicrobial activity
A decoction of the crude drug inhibited the growth of Carnobacterium
gallirarum, Escherichia coli, Salmonella enteritidis and Staphylococcus au-
reus with a median inhibitory concentration of 31.25 μg/ml and Klebsiella
pneumoniae, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Shigella ﬂexneri at a concen-
tration of 62.5 μg/ml (37). A tannin fraction separated from an extract of
the crude drug had antibacterial activity against Escherichia coli, Cit-
robacter diversus, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Shigella ﬂexneri, Salmonella
enteritidis and Staphylococcus aureus at concentrations of 60.0–95.0 μg/ml
in vitro (38). An aqueous extract of the leaves had anti-adhesion activity
in Streptomyces mitis (70%); these bacteria are involved in the develop-
ment of dental plaque (39).

Antioxidant activity
The antioxidant activity of an aqueous and a 50% ethanol extract of the
leaves was assessed using 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl radical colorim-
etry. Compared to ascorbic acid, the extracts of the crude drug had a sig-
niﬁcantly lower antioxidant effect (40).

Antispasmodic activity
A dried methanol extract of the leaves reduced spontaneous contractions
of isolated rat and guinea-pig ileum when added to the bath media at con-
centrations of 20.0 ml/l and 80.0 μg/ml, respectively (30, 37, 41). An aque-
ous, methanol, or hexane extract of the leaves had smooth muscle relaxant
activity in guinea-pig ileum in vitro, at a concentration of 250.0–1000.0 μg/
ml (41, 42). A butanol extract of the leaves at a concentration of 0.2 mg/
ml reduced acetylcholine-induced contractions in guinea-pig ileum by
95–100% (43).

Antitussive activity
Intragastric administration of an aqueous extract of the leaves to rats
and guinea-pigs at a dose of 5.0 g/kg bw reduced capsaicin-induced
coughing (44).

132
                                                               Folium Guavae


Effects on the central nervous system
Intragastric administration of a dried methanol extract of the leaves to
mice at a dose of 200 mg/kg bw reduced acetic acid-induced writhing,
thereby demonstrating analgesic activity (31). Intragastric administration
of a dried methanol extract of the leaves to mice at a dose of 200 mg/kg
bw also potentiated phenobarbitone-induced sleeping time (31). Intra-
peritoneal administration of a dried hexane extract of the leaves to mice at
a dose of 100 mg/kg bw potentiated sodium pentobarbital-induced hyp-
nosis and increased the latency of leptazol-induced convulsions (42). In-
tragastric or intraperitoneal administration of a dried methanol extract of
the leaves at a dose of 3.3 mg/kg bw reduced spontaneous motor activity
in mice (45). Intragastric administration of dried hexane, ethyl acetate or
methanol extracts of the crude drug, at doses of 100.0–1250.0 mg/kg bw
produced dose-dependent antinociceptive effects in mice, and prolonged
pentobarbitone-induced sleep (46).

Haemostatic effects
The effects of an aqueous leaf extract on the bleeding time and the three
main mechanisms of haemostasis: vasoconstriction, platelet aggregation
and blood coagulation, were investigated. Topical application of the aque-
ous extract at a concentration of 0.05 μg/ml did not reduce bleeding times
in wounded rats. However, the extract (2–6 μg/ml) potentiated the vascu-
lar muscle contraction induced by phenylephrine (4.0 μg/ml) in isolated
aortic strips from rabbits. The extract also signiﬁcantly prolonged blood
coagulation time in normal plasma treated with 6.0 mg/ml extract in the
activated partial thromboplastin time test (p < 0.05) (47).

Inotropic effects
In guinea-pig atria, an ethanol extract of the leaves reduced atrial contrac-
tions by depressing the myocardial force in a concentration-dependent
manner (median effective concentration (EC50) = 1.4 g/l). Concentrations
higher than 2.5 g/l completely abolished the myocardial contractility.
Furthermore, an acetic acid fraction (EC50 = 0.07 g/l) of the extract in-
creased the relaxation time measured at 20 and 50% of the force curve by
30 and 15%, respectively, but did not change the contraction time. The
negative inotropic effect of the extract was abolished by atropine sulfate,
suggesting that either the active substance acts as a cholinergic agonist or
that it could release acetylcholine from parasympathetic synapses (48).

Toxicity
Intragastric administration of an aqueous extract of the leaves to rats ex-
hibited a median lethal dose of 50.0 g/kg bw (47). In chronic toxicity tests,

                                                                         133
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


an aqueous extract of the leaves was administered by gavage to 128 rats of
both sexes at doses of 0.2, 2.0 and 20.0 g/day (1, 10 and 100 times the nor-
mal therapeutic dose for the treatment of diarrhoea) for 6 months.
    The results showed that the body weight gains in male rats were lower
in all treated animals. Signiﬁcant increases in white blood cell count, alka-
line phosphatase, serum glutamate pyruvate transaminase and serum
blood urea nitrogen levels were observed (p < 0.05). Serum sodium and
cholesterol levels were signiﬁcantly reduced (p < 0.05) indicating signs of
hepatotoxicity. In female rats, serum sodium, potassium and albumin lev-
els increased signiﬁcantly (p < 0.05), while levels of platelets and serum
globulin were signiﬁcantly decreased (p < 0.05). Histopathological assess-
ment showed a mild degree of fatty change and hydronephrosis in male
rats and nephrocalcinosis and pyelonephritis in female rats (49).

Clinical pharmacology
Seventy subjects with gingivitis were enrolled in a 3-week placebo-con-
trolled, double-blind clinical trial to assess the efﬁcacy of a mouthwash
containing a decoction of the dried leaves (3 kg in 30 l water boiled for
20 minutes). The placebo mouthwash contained the same ingredients with
the exception of the decoction of the leaves. The subjects were stratiﬁed
into two balanced groups according to their baseline pre-prophylaxis gin-
givitis scores calculated using the Loe-Silness Gingival Scoring Index. The
subjects rinsed their mouth three times daily for 1 minute with 15 ml of
their assigned mouthwash. Patients who used the mouthwash containing
the leaf extract had less inﬂammation of the gingiva (19.8%) and fewer
sites of severe gingival disease (40.5%) than those using the placebo
mouthwash (26).
    A randomized, controlled clinical trial assessed the efﬁcacy of a decoc-
tion of the crude drug for the treatment of infantile rotaviral enteritis.
Sixty-two patients with rotaviral enteritis were randomly assigned either
to the group treated with the decoction or to the control group. The time
until cessation of diarrhoea, the content of sodium in blood, the content of
sodium and glucose in stools, and the rate of negative conversion of hu-
man rotavirus antigen were recorded. After 3 days, 87% of the subjects in
the treated group had recovered, signiﬁcantly more than the number in
the control group (58.1%, p < 0.05). The time elapsed until cessation of
diarrhoea in the treated group (25.1 ± 9.5 h) was signiﬁcantly shorter than
that for the control group (38.7 ± 15.2 h, p < 0.01). The content of sodium
and glucose in stools was reduced in the treated group (p < 0.05), while the
reduction in the control group was insigniﬁcant. The rate of negative con-
version of human rotavirus in the faeces of the treated group was 87.1%,
signiﬁcantly better than that of the control group (58.1%, p < 0.05) (28).

134
                                                             Folium Guavae


    An aqueous extract of the crude drug was tested in a clinical study in-
volving small groups of patients aged 5 years and younger or 20–40 years.
Patients with acute diarrhoea received the extract, while a comparison
group received a kaolin or pectin suspension. The results were similar in
all three groups with an efﬁcacy of treatment above 70% (25).
    A randomized, double-blind, clinical study was performed to evaluate
the safety and efﬁcacy of an extract of the crude drug with a standardized
content of quercetin. The extract was administered orally to a group of
adult patients with acute diarrhoeic disease. Adult patients of both sexes
between 20 and 59 years of age suffering from non-complicated acute di-
arrhoea were included. Acute diarrhoeic disease was deﬁned as a clinical
condition characterized by the passing of at least three liquid stools dur-
ing the previous 24 h and abdominal pain or cramps. Pregnant women
and patients with systemic diseases concomitant to acute diarrhoeic dis-
ease (such as immunodeﬁciency and intestinal syndrome), were excluded.
The capsules containing 500 mg of the extract were administered every
8 h for 3 days to the treatment group (n = 50), while the control group
(n = 50) received capsules of the same size, taste and colour, containing
500 mg of placebo every 8 h for 3 days. Oral rehydration therapy was
administered to all patients according to conventional procedures fol-
lowed in the medical institution for treatment of acute diarrhoeic disease.
The results showed that the guava product decreased the duration of ab-
dominal pain in these patients (27).
    A randomized, double-blind, clinical trial involving 122 patients
(64 men and 58 women) was conducted to compare the efﬁcacy of the
powdered crude drug with that of tetracycline for the treatment of acute
diarrhoea (50). The patients were treated with 500 mg of the powdered
crude drug (2 capsules of 250 mg each) or matching tetracycline capsules
(2 capsules of 250 mg each) every 6 hours for 3 days. The results of the
study demonstrated that the powdered drug decreased the stool output,
ﬂuid intake and the duration of diarrhoea. The differences between the
results from the group treated with tetracycline and the group that re-
ceived the powdered crude drug were not statistically signiﬁcant (50).

Adverse reactions
One report of allergic dermatitis has been recorded after external applica-
tion of a tea prepared from the crude drug (51).

Contraindications
Hypersensitivity or allergy to the plant material.

                                                                       135
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Warnings
Do not exceed the recommended dose or duration of treatment (49).

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
No information was found.

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
No information was found.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Due to the lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug during pregnancy
is not recommended.

Nursing mothers
Due to the lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug during breastfeed-
ing is not recommended.

Paediatric use
Due to the lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug in children aged
under 12 years is not recommended.

Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug, decoctions, extracts and teas.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
As a mouthwash: 15 ml of aqueous extract three times daily for at least
1 minute per session (26).
For diarrhoea: 500 mg of the powdered leaf three or four times daily (50).

References
1. Ghana herbal pharmacopoeia. Accra, Policy Research and Strategic Planning
   Institute, 1992.
2. National Genetic Resources Program. Germplasm Resources Information
   Network (GRIN) [Online Database]. National Germplasm Resources Labo-
   ratory, Beltsville, MD (available at: http://www.ars-grin.gov/cgi-bin/npgs/
   html/tax_search.pl?psidium+guajava).

136
                                                                     Folium Guavae


3. Ross IA. Medicinal plants of the world. Totowa, NJ, Humana Press, 1999.
4. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
5. Nadkarni KM, Nadkarni AK, eds. Indian materia medica, reprint of 3rd re-
    vised and enlarged ed. Bombay, Popular Prakashan, 1976.
6. Medicinal plants of India. Vol. 2. New Delhi, Indian Council of Medical Re-
    search, 1987.
7. Medicinal plants in the South Paciﬁc. Manila, World Health Organization
    Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc, 1998 (WHO Regional Publications,
    Western Paciﬁc Series, No. 19).
8. Iwu MM. Handbook of African medicinal plants. Boca Raton, FL, CRC
    Press, 1993.
9. Matos FJA. Plantas medicinais Brasileiras, 2nd ed. Lima, Universidade Fed-
    eral do Ceará Edições, 2004.
10. Mejía K, Rengifo E. Plantas Medicinales de Uso Popular en la Amazonia
    Peruana. Lima, Agencia Española de Cooperación Internacional, 2000 [in
    Spanish].
11. Perry LM, Metzger J. Medicinal plants of east and southeast Asia: attributed
    properties and uses. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1980.
12. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
13. European pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
14. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
15. Farnsworth NR, Bunyapraphatsara N, eds. Psidium guajava. Thai medicinal
    plants: recommended for primary health care system. Bangkok, Mahidol Uni-
    versity, 1992:202–207.
16. Okuda T et al. Guavin B, an ellagitannin of novel type. Chemical and Phar-
    maceutical Bulletin, 1984, 32:3787–3788.
17. Okuda T et al. Guavin A, C and D, complex tannins from Psidium guajava.
    Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1987, 35:443–446.
18. Soliman G, Farid MK. Constituents of the leaves of Psidium guajava L. Part
    I. Psidiolic acid. Journal of the Chemical Society, 1952, 1952:134–136.
19. Osman AM, Younes ME, Sheta AE. Triterpenoids of the leaves of Psidium
    guajava. Phytochemistry, 1974, 13:2015–2016.
20. Arthur HR, Hui WH. Triterpene acids from the leaves of Psidium guajava
    L. Journal of the Chemical Society, 1954, 1954:1403–1406.
21. Begum S et al. Triterpenoids from the leaves of Psidium guajava. Phytochem-
    istry, 2002, 61:399–403.
22. Lozoya X et al. Quercetine glycosides in Psidium guajava L. leaves and de-
    termination of a spasmolytic principle. Archives of Medical Research, 1994,
    25:11–15.

                                                                               137
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


23. Matsuo T et al. Identiﬁcation of (+)-gallocatechin as a bio-antimutagenic
    compound in Psidium guajava leaves. Phytochemistry, 1994, 36:1027–1029.
24. Xiao DJ et al. The essential oil of the leaves of Psidium guajava L. Journal of
    Essential Oil Research, 1991, 3:187–189.
25. Caceres A. Plantas de uso medicinal en Guatemala. Guatemala City, Edito-
    rial Universitaria, Universidad San Carlos de Guatemala, 1996:194–197.
26. Kraivaphan V et al. The effect of a mouthrinse containing Psidium guajava
    leaves extract on gingivitis. Journal of the Dental Association of Thailand,
    1991, 41:323–328.
27. Lozoya X et al. Intestinal anti-spasmodic effect of a phytodrug of Psidium
    guajava folia in the treatment of acute diarrheic disease. Journal of Ethno-
    pharmacology, 2002, 83:19–24.
28. Wei L et al. Clinical study on treatment of infantile rotaviral enteritis with
    Psidium guajava L. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi, 2000, 20:893–895
    [in Chinese].
29. Santos FA et al. Investigation on the antinociceptive effect of Psidium gua-
    java leaf essential oil and its major constituents. Phytotherapy Research,
    1998, 12:24–27.
30. Lutterodt GD. Inhibition of Microlax-induced experimental diarrhoea with
    narcotic-like extracts of Psidium guajava leaf in rats. Journal of Ethnophar-
    macology, 1992, 37:151–157.
31. Olajide OA, Awe SO, Makinde JM. Pharmacological studies on the leaf of
    Psidium guajava. Fitoterapia, 1999, 70:25–31.
32. Lin J, Puckree T, Mvelase TP. Anti-diarrhoeal evaluation of some medicinal
    plants used by Zulu traditional healers. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2002,
    79:53–56.
33. Maruyama Y et al. Study on Psidium guajava L. (I). Anti-diabetic effect and
    effective components of the leaf of Psidium guajava L. Shoyakugaku Zasshi,
    1985, 39:261–269 [in Japanese].
34. Kavimani S et al. Anti-inﬂammatory activity of volatile oil of Psidium gua-
    java. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1997, 59:142–144.
35. Gessler MC et al. Screening Tanzanian medicinal plants for antimalarial ac-
    tivity. Acta Tropica, 1994, 56:65–77.
36. Weenen H et al. Antimalarial activity of Tanzanian medicinal plants. Planta
    Medica, 1990, 56:368–370.
37. Tona L et al. Biological screening of traditional preparations from some me-
    dicinal plants used as antidiarrhoeal in Kinshasa, Congo. Phytomedicine,
    1999, 6:59–66.
38. Lutete T et al. Antimicrobial activity of tannins. Fitoterapia, 1994, 65:276–
    278.
39. Razak FA, Rahim ZH. The anti-adherence effect of Piper betle and Psidium
    guajava extracts on the adhesion of early settlers in dental plaque to saliva-
    coated glass surfaces. Journal of Oral Science, 2003, 45:201–206.
40. Qian H, Nihorimbere V. Antioxidant power of phytochemicals from Psidi-
    um guajava leaf. Journal of Zhejiang University Science, 2004, 5:676–683.

138
                                                                    Folium Guavae


41. Lozoya X, Becerril G, Martinez M. Modelo de perfusión intraluminal del
    ileon del cobayo in vitro en el estudio de las propiedades antidiarréicas de la
    guayaba (Psidium guajava) [Intraluminal perfusion model of in vitro guinea
    pig’s ileum as a model of study of the antidiarrheal properties of the guava
    (Psidium guajava)]. Archivos de Investigacion Médica (México), 1990,
    21:155–162 [in Spanish].
42. Meckes M et al. Terpenoids isolated from Psidium guajava hexane extract
    with depressant activity on central nervous system. Phytotherapy Research,
    1996, 10:600–603.
43. Kambu K et al. Activité antispasmodique d’extraits à partir de plantes utili-
    sées en préparations comme antidiarrhéiques à Kinshasa, Zaïre [Antispas-
    modic activity of extracts used in traditional plant antidiarrheic preparations
    in Kinshasa, Zaire]. Annales Pharmaceutiques Françaises, 1990, 48:200–208
    [in French].
44. Jaiarj P et al. Anticough and antimicrobial activities of Psidium guajava Linn.
    leaf extract. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1999, 67:203–212.
45. Lutterodt GD, Maleque A. Effects on mice locomotor activity of a narcotic-
    like principle from Psidium guajava leaves. Journal of Ethnopharmacology,
    1988, 24:219–231.
46. Shaheen HM et al. Effect of Psidium guajava leaves on some aspects of the
    central nervous system in mice. Phytotherapy Research, 2000, 14:107–111.
47. Jaiarj P et al. Guava leaf extract and topical haemostasis. Phytotherapy Re-
    search, 2000, 14:388–391.
48. Conde Garcia EA, Nascimento VT, Santiago Santos AB. Inotropic effects of
    extracts of Psidium guajava L. (guava) leaves on the guinea pig atrium. Bra-
    zilian Journal of Medical and Biological Research, 2003, 36:661–668.
49. Attawish A et al. Toxicity study of Psidium guajava Linn. leaves. Bulletin of
    the Department of Medical Sciences, 1995, 37:289–305.
50. Thanangkul B, Chaichantipayut C. Double-blind study of Psidium guava L.
    and tetracycline in acute diarrhea. Siriraj Hospital Gazette, 1987, 39:263–
    267.
51. Obi M et al. Allergic contact dermatitis due to guava tea. Contact Dermatitis,
    2001, 44:116–117.




                                                                              139
                      Lichen Islandicus




Deﬁnition
Lichen Islandicus consists of the whole or cut dried thalli of Cetraria is-
landica (L.) Acharius s.l. (Parmeliaceae) (1).

Synonyms
Physcia islandica DC, Lichene islandicus L. (2).

Selected vernacular names
Al kharaza, Blätterﬂechte, brodmose, cetraria, broedmasa, erba rissa, Fie-
berﬂechte, Fiebermoos, focus, hazaz, Heideﬂechte, Iceland lichen, Ice-
land liver wort, Iceland moss, Icelandic moss, Isländische Flechte, Islän-
dische Tartschenﬂechte, Isländisches Moos, kharaz assoukhour, lichen
catharticus, lichen d’Islande, lichène islandico, líquén de islandia, Lun-
genmoos, matmasa, muscus, Purgiermoos, svinmasa (2–5).

Geographical distribution
Grows in northern, eastern and central Europe, Siberia and North Amer-
ica (5, 6).

Description
A lichen of approximately 10 cm in height, growing on the ground, the
brown shrubby thallus lobed and forked, and with a fringed margin. Up-
per surface olive-green to brown, with occasional dark reddish brown
copular apothecia, and the lower surface whitish-grey with numerous
small, whitish depressed spots (5, 7).

Plant material of interest: dried thalli
General appearance
Pieces of foliaceous lichen up to about 15 cm long, composed of numer-
ous erect branches about 6 mm broad or more, in an unevenly developed
dichotomy, consists of glabrous, groove-shaped or almost ﬂat, stiff, brittle

140
                                                              Lichen Islandicus


bands, 0.3–1.5 cm wide and 0.5 mm thick, sometimes serrated with the
margin appearing ciliated (pycnidial) thick; lower surface pale greyish,
with scattered small, white, ovoid, depressed spots; occasional, dark red-
dish-brown, cup-shaped, fruiting bodies (apothecia), about 6 mm in di-
ameter, on the upper surface (greenish to greenish brown) near the mar-
gins; texture harsh, springy and brittle; on the apex of the terminal lobes,
very rarely, there are brown, discoid apothecia (1).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: none; taste: mucilaginous and distinctly bitter (1).

Microscopic characteristics
Cut transversely, branches show upper and lower colourless cortical re-
gions composed of closely-packed hyphae, appearing as small-celled pseu-
doparenchyma; below the upper cortex, the algal or gonidial layer contain-
ing numerous yellowish-green, subspherical cells of the alga Chlorococcum
humicola; a central medulla with more closely-packed, greyish-brown hy-
phae ﬁlaments. Section through an apothecium shows a hymenium layer
in the upper cortex with ﬂask-shaped asci, each containing eight ascospores,
separated by numerous, narrow, thread-like paraphyses (3).

Powdered plant material
A greyish brown powder, abundant fragments of pseudoparenchyma consist-
ing of narrow-lumened, thick-walled hyphae from the marginal layer and
wide-lumened hyphae from the adjacent layer consisting of loosely entwined
hyphae, in the medullary zone of which, yellowish green algal cells about
15 Mm in diameter are embedded; occasionally marginal fragments of the thal-
lus with tube-like or cylindrical spermogonia, up to about 160 Mm wide and
400 Mm long. Many of the particles stain blue-black with iodine water (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations and microchemical tests (1,
3), thin-layer chromatography for characteristic lichen acid proﬁle (1),
and high-performance liquid chromatographic analysis of protolichester-
inic and fumarprotocetraric acids (8).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (9).

                                                                          141
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Foreign organic matter
Not more than 5% (3).

Total ash
Not more than 3% (3).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 1.5% (3).

Water-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Loss on drying
Not more than 12% (10).

Swelling value
Not less than 4.5 determined on the powdered drug (1).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (1). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (1)
and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (9) and pesticide residues (11).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (9).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (9).

Chemical assays
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Major chemical constituents
Contains water-soluble polysaccharides (50%), primarily lichenin, a lin-
ear cellulose-like polymer of B-D-glucose units, and isolichenin, an A-D-
glucose polymer. Two glucans, lichenan and isolichenan, have been iso-
lated from the lichen Cetraria islandica (12), as well as galactomannans
(5). Major secondary metabolites include the lichen acids (depsidones),

142
                                                                                    Lichen Islandicus


fumarprotocetraric acid, protolichestearic acid and cetraric acids (5, 13).
A biologically active aliphatic D-lactone, (+)-protolichesterinic acid has
also been reported (14). The structures of fumarprotocetraric acid, ce-
traric acid and (+)-protolichesterinic acid are presented below.

        CHO       H3C                                  CHO       H3C
HO                      CO2H                   HO                          CO2H
              O                                              O

                            OH                                                 OH
                  O                                              O
  H3C                                            H3C                       O
         O              O                               O
                                                                                       CO2H
Cetraric acid                CH3   Fumarprotocetraric acid             O


                                       H   H
H3 C
                                               CO2H
                                   O
                                               CH2
(+)-Protolichesterinic acid            O




Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Used orally as a demulcent to treat inﬂammation and dryness of the pha-
ryngeal mucosa (15, 16).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Used orally for treatment of loss of appetite and nausea (3, 17).

Uses described in traditional medicine
Used to treat asthma, cramps, bronchitis, cough, diabetes, exhaustion,
gastric disturbances, immune depletion, migraine, nausea in pregnancy
and wounds. Also used as an emergency food source, an emollient and a
galactagogue (4, 18–20).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antimicrobial and antiviral activities
An aqueous extract of the thalli and protolichesterinic acid were screened
for in vitro activity against Mycobacterium aurum, a nonpathogenic or-
ganism with a similar sensitivity proﬁle to M. tuberculosis. Protolichester-
inic acid had a minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of q 125.0 μg/ml
(21). An aqueous extract of the thalli was screened for in vitro activity
against Helicobacter pylori. (+)-Protolichesterinic acid was identiﬁed as

                                                                                                143
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


an active component. The MIC range of protolichesterinic acid, in free as
well as salt form, was 16.0–64.0 μg/ml (14).
   Protolichesterinic acid, isolated from the thalli, inhibited the DNA
polymerase activity of human immunodeﬁciency virus-1 reverse tran-
scriptase, with a median inhibitory concentration (IC50) of 24.0 μM (22).
Antioxidant activity
The antioxidant activity, reducing power, superoxide anion radical scav-
enging and free radical scavenging activities of an aqueous extract of the
thalli were investigated in vitro. The antioxidant activity increased with
increasing amount of extract (from 50.0 to 500.0 μg) added to linoleic acid
emulsion. About 50.0, 100.0, 250.0 and 500.0 μg of aqueous extract of the
thalli exhibited higher antioxidant activity than 500.0 μg of A-tocopherol.
The samples showed 96, 99, 100 and 100% inhibition of peroxidation of
linoleic acid, respectively. On the other hand, 500.0 μg of A-tocopherol
showed 77% inhibition of peroxidation of linoleic acid emulsion (23).
Antiproliferative effects
The effects of protolichesterinic acid, isolated from the thalli, on three ma-
lignant cell-lines (T-47D and ZR-75-1 from breast carcinomas and K-562
from erythroleukaemia), as well as normal skin ﬁbroblasts and peripheral
blood lymphocytes were assessed in vitro. Protolichesterinic acid caused a
signiﬁcant reduction in DNA synthesis, as measured by thymidine uptake,
in all three malignant cell lines. The IC50 was between 1.1 and 24.6 μg/ml
for protolichesterinic acid. The breast cancer cell-lines were more sensitive
than K-562. The proliferative response of mitogen-stimulated lymphocytes
was inhibited with an IC50 of 24.5 μg/ml for protolichesterinic acid. These
concentrations are of the same order of magnitude as the MICs in the 5-
lipoxygenase assay. Signiﬁcant cell death (assessed by the 3-(4,5-dimethyl-
thiazol-2-yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-2-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetra-
zolium assay and trypan blue exclusion) occurred in the three malignant
cell-lines at concentrations of protolichesterinic acid greater than 30.0 μg/
ml. In K-562, morphological changes consistent with apoptosis were de-
tected. At a concentration of protolichesterinic acid of 20 μg/ml, up to 38%
cell death was observed in mitogen-stimulated lymphocytes, but unstimu-
lated lymphocytes were clearly less sensitive. In contrast, the DNA syn-
thesis, proliferation and survival of normal skin ﬁbroblasts were unaffected
at doses of protolichesterinic acid of up to 20 μg/ml (24).
Immune effects
A polysaccharide, isolated from the lichen, and described as a branched
galactomannan, with a backbone composed of two structural elements;

144
                                                              Lichen Islandicus


(1l6)-linked A-D-mannopyranosyl and A-D-(1l6)-galactopyranosyl
units, had pronounced immunostimulating activity. The polysaccharide
enhanced granulocytic phagocytosis by 68%, when administered at a
concentration of 1 mg/ml, in human granulocytes in vitro. Intraperito-
neal administration of the polysaccharide to mice, at a dose of 1.0 mg/kg
body weight (bw), increased the rate of carbon clearance, indicating sig-
niﬁcant activation of the reticuloendothelial system (13, 25, 26). A poly-
saccharide named Ci-3, isolated from an aqueous extract of the thalli, as
well as from an alkali extract of the thalli had immune stimulating activity
in vitro. At a concentration of 100.0 μg/ml, the polysaccharide Ci-3 stim-
ulated granulocytic phagocytosis and reduced the complement-induced
haemolysis in sheep erythrocytes by 80% (27).
Toxicity
Lichens are known to naturally contain bitter and potentially toxic lichen
acids, as well as concentrated heavy metals that are taken up from the
environment. The toxicity of the thalli was investigated using traditional
preparation methods (boiling, ash-soaking). Untreated and brieﬂy boiled
thalli were lethal to mice when added to feed at concentrations of 25 and
50% w/w, but when the thalli were prepared by ash-soaking, the mice
tolerated the crude drug reasonably well for 3 weeks (28).
   In another study, the toxicity of the traditionally prepared thalli was as-
sessed in mice and rats. As a 50% w/w mixture in normal feed neither the
pretreated nor the untreated thalli additive was well tolerated by mice.
However, rats tolerated 25% w/w ash-treated thalli in normal feed over
3 months, although the body weight did not increase as much as in control
animals. At the end of the experiment, the rats in the thalli-treated group
had proteinuria, and on autopsy some tubular changes were found, proba-
bly due to high concentrations of lead in the thalli and in the kidneys (29).

Clinical pharmacology
In an open clinical trial, 100 patients (children and adults) suffering from
inﬂammatory irritative conditions of the respiratory tract were treated
with lozenges containing an aqueous extract of the thalli. The illnesses
ranged from pharyngitis and laryngitis to chronic or acute bronchitis. The
patients were treated with lozenges containing 160.0 mg of an aqueous
extract of the crude drug, for between 4 days and 3 weeks. After evaluation
of the symptoms such as cough, hoarseness, secretion, inﬂammation and
pain, a positive outcome was observed in 86% of patients. The lozenges
were well tolerated, with few side-effects and good gastric tolerance (16).
   Sixty-one patients who had recently undergone surgery to the nasal
septum were included in a randomized, placebo-controlled, clinical trial.

                                                                          145
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


These patients suffer especially from dryness and inﬂammation of the
oral cavity due to breathing only through the mouth while the nose is
permanently closed by a nasal package. Three groups of patients treated
with three different concentrations of an aqueous extract of the thalli
(0.048 g drug per pastille/day, 0.3 g drug per pastille/day or 0.5 g drug per
pastille/day) were compared. Coating, dryness and inﬂammation of the
mucosa, lymph nodes and tongue, the patients’ tolerance of the drug, and
symptoms such as hoarseness and sore throat were documented. The oral
application was performed from the ﬁrst to the ﬁfth day after the opera-
tion. The treatment with the lichen caused a direct reduction of the ob-
served pathological changes. There were no signiﬁcant differences be-
tween the three test groups. A dose of 0.48 g per day (10 pastilles per day)
is a sufﬁcient treatment (15).

Adverse reactions
Allergic reactions, abdominal pain and nausea have been reported. Few
adverse events were observed in a study of 3143 children aged 4–12 years
who were administered 320–600 mg of an aqueous extract of the thalli in
lozenges per day over a 1–2 week period. The adverse events were mild
and transient (30).

Contraindications
Hypersensitivity or allergic reactions to the crude drug.

Warnings
No information was found.

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
No information was found.

Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug, extracts, ﬂuidextract, infusion and tinctures (3, 17).

Storage
Store in tightly sealed containers away from light and moisture (5).

146
                                                                   Lichen Islandicus


Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated) (3, 17, 18)
As a demulcent to treat inﬂammation and dryness of the pharyngeal mu-
cosa: comminuted herb for infusions and other Galenical formulations
for internal use. For loss of appetite: comminuted herb, cold macerates
for internal use.
   Average daily dosage: 4–6 g of herb in divided doses, or equivalent
preparations (17). Infusion: 1.5 g of crude drug in 150 ml water. Fluid-
extract 1:1 (g/ml): 4–6 ml. Tincture 1:5 (g/ml): 20–30 ml (18).

References
1. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
2. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
3. British herbal pharmacopoeia. Exeter, British Herbal Medicine Association,
    1996.
4. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services) 30 June 2005.
5. Wichtl M. (Bisset NG, ed and trans.) Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuti-
    cals, English ed. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
6. Evans WC. Trease and Evans Pharmacognosy, 15th ed. Edinburgh, WB
    Saunders, 2002.
7. Gathercoal EN, Wirth EH. Pharmacognosy, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, Lea & Fe-
    biger, 1948.
8. Gudjónsdottir GA, Ingólfsdottir K. Quantitative determination of protoliches-
    terinic- and fumarprotocetraric acids in Cetraria islandica by high-performance
    liquid chromatography. Journal of Chromatography A, 1997, 757:303–306.
9. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
10. Deutsches Arzneibuch 10th ed. (DAB 10). Stuttgart, Deutscher Apotheker
    Verlag, 1991.
11. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
12. Kramer P et al. Rational approach to fractionation, isolation, and character-
    ization of polysaccharides from the lichen Cetraria islandica. Arzneimittel-
    forschung, 1995, 45:726–731.
13. Ingolfsdottir K. Bioactive compounds from Iceland moss. Proceedings of the
    Phytochemistry Society of Europe, 2000, 44:25–36.
14. Ingolfsdottir K et al. In vitro susceptibility of Helicobacter pylori to proto-
    lichesterinic acid from the lichen Cetraria islandica. Antimicrobial Agents
    Chemotherapy, 1997, 41:215–217.

                                                                               147
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


15. Kempe C et al. Isländisch-Moos-Pastillen zur Prophylaxe bzw. Heilung von
    und ausgetrockneter Rachenschleimhaut [Icelandic moss lozenges in the pre-
    vention or treatment of oral mucosa irritation and dried out throat mucosa].
    Laryngorhinootologie, 1997, 76:186–188 [in German].
16. Vorberg G. Erfahrungsbericht: Flechtenwirkstoffe lindern Reizzustände der
    Atemwege: Noben den entzündungshemmenden Eigenschaften wirkt sich
    der Schleimhautschutz besonders günstig aus. Ärztliche Praxis, 1981,
    85:3068.
17. Blumenthal M et al. The complete German Commission E monographs: ther-
    apeutic guide to herbal medicines. Austin, TX, American Botanical Council,
    1998.
18. Blumenthal M et al, eds. Herbal medicine: expanded Commission E mono-
    graphs. Newton, MA, Integrative Medicine Communications, 2000.
19. Lesiovskaya EE et al, eds. Pharmacotherapy with the principles of phytother-
    apy, Moscow, Geotar-Med Publishers, 2003 [in Russian].
20. Mommsen H. [Icelandic moss as a drug.] Zeitschrift für Allgemeinmedizin,
    1970, 46:1566–1567 [in German].
21. Ingolfsdottir K, Jurcic K, Wagner H. Immunomodulating polysaccharides
    from aqueous extracts of Cetraria islandica (Iceland moss). Phytomedicine,
    1998, 5:333–339.
22. Pengsuparp T et al. Mechanistic evaluation of new plant-derived compounds
    that inhibit HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. Journal of Natural Products, 1995,
    58:1024–1031.
23. Gulcin I et al. Determination of antioxidant activity of lichen Cetraria is-
    landica (L) Ach. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2002, 79:325–329.
24. Ogmundsdottir HM et al. Anti-proliferative effects of lichen-derived inhibi-
    tors of 5-lipoxygenase on malignant cell-lines and mitogen-stimulated lym-
    phocytes. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, 1998, 50:107–115.
25. Ingolfsdottir K et al. Immunologically active polysaccharide from Cetraria
    islandica. Planta Medica, 1994, 60:527–531.
26. Ingolfsdottir K et al. Antimycobacterial activity of lichen metabolites in vit-
    ro. European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1998, 6:141–144.
27. Olafsdottir ES et al. Immunologically active (1 l 3)-(1 l 4)-alpha-D-glucan
    from Cetraria islandica. Phytomedicine, 1999, 6:33–39.
28. Airaksinen MM, Peura P, Antere S. Toxicity of Iceland lichen and reindeer
    lichen. Archives of Toxicology (Suppl) 1986, 9:406–409.
29. Airaksinen MM et al. Toxicity of plant material used as emergency food dur-
    ing famines in Finland. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1986, 18:273–296.
30. Hecker M, Volp A. Tolerability of Icelandic moss lozenges in upper respira-
    tory tract diseases – multicentric drug monitoring study with 3,143 children.
    Forschende Komplementarmedizin und klassische Naturheilkunde, 2004,
    11:76–82.




148
                   Fructus Macrocarponii




Deﬁnition
Fructus Macrocarponii consists of the fresh or dried ripe fruit of Vaccini-
um macrocarpon Ait. (Ericaceae) (1).
Note: Cranberry liquid preparation is ofﬁcial in the United States Phar-
macopeia (2).

Synonyms
Oxycoccus macrocarpus (Alt.) Pursh., O. painstris var. macrocarpus (1).

Selected vernacular names
Afonya, American cranberry, bear berry, black cranberry, cranberry,
Kronsbeere, large cranberry, low cranberry, marsh apple, Moosbeere,
Preisselbeere, suureviljaline jõhvikas, trailing swamp cranberry (1, 3, 4).

Geographical distribution
Native to eastern North America (1).

Description
Trailing evergreen shrub up to 15 cm in height; rhizomatous. Stem: slender,
glabrous to hairy, rooting at nodes. Leaf: simple, alternate, sub-sessile; blade
narrowly elliptic, rarely oblong, (5–) 7–10 (–18) mm long, (2–) 3–4 (–5) mm
wide, apex rounded; leathery, upper surface green, lower surface glaucous;
margin entire, rarely revolute. Inﬂorescence: ﬂowers solitary in leaf axils of
new shoots; bracts 2, green, 1–2 mm wide; pedicels 2–3 cm, recurved, joint-
ed to the ﬂower. Flower: perfect, radially symmetrical with a nectariferous
disc surrounding the style; calyx 4-lobed; corolla white to pink, cup-shaped,
4-lobed with lobes much longer than cup and strongly reﬂexed at anthesis;
stamens 8, ﬁlaments with stiff hairs along margins, anthers dehiscent by
apical pores; ovary inferior, style 1, stigma capitate. Fruit: berry, globose,
9–20 mm in diameter, glabrous, red to crimson, dark burgundy or almost
black, many-seeded. Chromosome number: n = 12 (1).

                                                                            149
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Plant material of interest: dried ripe fruit
General appearance
The dried berry is dark red to almost black, 7.0–11.5 mm in width and
10–15 mm in length, with a smooth but deeply wrinkled, slightly lustrous
surface. At the fruit apex is the dried, slightly raised nectariferous disc,
1.5–2 mm across, with a shallow depression in its centre inside which is a
small protuberance from the remains of the style. At the fruit base is a
small scar where the berry was attached to the pedicel. The texture is
spongy. In cross-section, the mesocarp and endocarp are a dull red. The
mesocarp has large air pockets, and varies in thickness when dried from
0.1–2 mm. In cross-section, the fruit is divided into 4 chambers (carpels),
each running the entire length of the fruit. The chambers are separated by
dull red, thin, translucent septa and each chamber contains 1–5 seeds.
Each seed is narrowly ovoid with an acute apex, 1–2.7 mm long and ap-
proximately 1 mm wide, with a lustrous rose to red testa that is longitudi-
nally wrinkled. The endosperm is an opaque white (1).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: slightly fruity and sweet; taste: very acidic and tart (1).

Microscopic characteristics
Fruit: the exocarp consists of anthocyanin-coloured polygonal cells cov-
ered by a thick cuticle. Groups of cells are separated by fairly thick,
colourless walls, whereas the walls within the groups are very thin. The
mesocarp consists of large, spherical, thin-walled cells in which small
bundles of spirally thickened vessels are embedded.
Seed (cross-section): the epidermis of the testa is composed of radially
elongated rectangular cells ﬁlled with mucilage. The walls are thickened in
a U-shape, the thickest wall being the exterior one; the mucilage is radially
striated, and in the centre of the cell is a small lumen. Below the epidermis
are several layers of polygonal cells with thick, brown, occasionally reticu-
lately thickened walls. These cells are 250–350 Mm long and approximately
80 Mm broad. The innermost layer of the testa consists of compressed, rec-
tangular cells with sinuous longitudinal walls. The voluminous endosperm
is made up of small polygonal and oil-containing cells (1).

Powdered plant material
Numerous fragments of the exocarp with colourless cell walls and violet
contents; thin-walled parenchyma of the mesocarp; thickened and pitted
cells of the testa; oil droplets (1).

150
                                                       Fructus Macrocarponii


General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations and high-performance thin-
layer chromatography (1).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (5).

Foreign organic matter
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Total ash
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Acid-insoluble ash
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Water-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Alcohol-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Loss on drying
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (6). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (6)
and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (5) and pesticide residues (7).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (5).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (5).

                                                                       151
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Other purity tests
Chemical tests to be established in accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Major chemical constituents
Contains organic acids (e.g. citric and quinic acids predominate), phenolic
acids (e.g. chlorogenic and p-coumaric acids). The fruits contain up to 10%
tannins (mostly catechol tannins). The major ﬂavonoids are myricetin and
quercitin glycoside. The primary constituents of interest in cranberry are
the anthocyanins and related compounds based on the anthocyanidins,
cyanidin and peonidin, to which are attached a glucose, arabinose or galac-
tose sugar at the number 3 carbon, giving a total of 6 anthocyanins. The
galactosides of peonidin and cyanidin predominate, with moderate amounts
of the arabinosides. Also of interest are proanthocyanidins (condensed tan-
nins) consisting of oligomers of two ﬂavan-3-ols, primarily epicatechin
plus small amounts of epigallocatechin. Cranberry proanthocyanidins con-
tain a variety of complex linkages, including A-type, B-type and branching
chains. A-type proanthocyanidins have doubly-linked ﬂavan-3-ol units
with both a carbon–oxygen–carbon (C2–O–C7) bond and a carbon–car-
bon (C4–C8 or C4–C6) bond (1, 3). Structures of cyanidin, peonidin,
myricetin and proanthocyanidin trimer are presented below.


                          OR                                Myricetin          OH
                                OH   Cyanidin                                         OH
                                          R=H
HO             O+                                           HO          O
                                                                                      OH
                                     Peonidin
                    3 OH                                                    3 OH
                                          R = CH3
          OH                                                      OH    O


              OH
                               OH
     HO                                         OH
                     HO
                                      HO

          H
                    OH     H
          O                          OH     H
                                                          Proanthocyanidin (trimer)
                           O                         OH
                                            O


HO             OH
                 HO             OH
                                  HO                OH



152
                                                         Fructus Macrocarponii


Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Orally as adjunct therapy for the prevention and symptomatic treatment
of urinary tract infections in adults (8–20). Two clinical trials have as-
sessed the effect of the fruit juice in paediatric populations (17, 21), but
the results were negative. Results from clinical trials involving the use of
cranberry for the treatment of children with neurogenic bladder were also
negative and do not support the use of cranberry products in paediatric
populations (22).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
No information was found.

Uses described in traditional medicine
Treatment of asthma, fever, loss of appetite, scurvy and stomach ailments,
as well as gallbladder and liver disease and for treatment of wounds (3, 23).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antimicrobial and antiadhesive activity
A concentrated extract of the juice of the crude drug was tested for activ-
ity against the following pathogens: Alcaligenes faecalis, Clostridium per-
fringens, Enterococcus faecalis, Escherichia coli, Mycobacterium phlei,
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Salmonella california, Salmonella enteritidis,
Salmonella typhimurium, Shigella sonnei, Staphylococcus aureus and me-
thicillin-resistant S. aureus, as well as Candida albicans. The crude drug
concentrate did not inhibit the growth of C. albicans, but had variable
activity against the bacteria at dilutions of 1:5 and 1:10 (24).
    Early investigations of the mechanism of cranberry’s bacteriostatic ac-
tivity suggested that acidiﬁcation of the urine may be responsible for its
activity. However, more recent studies have demonstrated that urinary
acidiﬁcation is not the mechanism by which cranberry exerts its effects,
but it does so through a mechanism that involves the inhibition of bacte-
rial adherence (25–27). In vitro studies have shown that, in the 77 clinical
isolates tested, cranberry juice decreased bacterial adherence of E. coli to
uroepithelial cells by 60% when compared with saline solution (28). Fur-
thermore, cranberry juice inhibited the adherence of E. coli to human uri-
nary epithelial cells three times more stongly than E. coli isolated from
other clinical sources (27, 28). One study demonstrated that cranberry
juice dose-dependently inhibited the haemagglutination activity of E. coli
urinary isolates expressing type I and P adhesion (27).

                                                                         153
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


    The effect of the fruit on the expression of P-ﬁmbriae of E. coli was as-
sessed by growing P-ﬁmbriated E. coli in solid media containing cranberry
juice. Cranberry concentrate at pH 7.0 was added to the medium to achieve
a ﬁnal concentration of 25%. E. coli strains JR1 and DS17 were plated on
to this medium, with a plain medium control, and incubated at 37 °C. Cul-
tures were tested for ability to agglutinate P-receptor-speciﬁc beads. The
results demonstrated that for E. coli strain JR1, P-ﬁmbrial agglutination
was inhibited after the third plating and strain DS17 was fully inhibited
after the second plating. Fully inhibited bacteria had a 100% reduction in
expression of ﬁmbriae (25). Two compounds in cranberry juice inhibited
lectin-mediated adherence of E. coli to mucosal cells. One of these com-
pounds was fructose and the other was a nondialysable polymeric com-
pound (25). Further investigations have found that exposure of pathogen-
ic bacteria to the nondialysable polymeric compound in either the gut or
bladder produces a bacteriostatic effect by inhibiting the expression of
speciﬁc adhesins present on the pili on the bacterial surface (26, 28).
    The proanthocyanidin fraction, isolated from an ethyl acetate extract
of the fruit, was assessed for its ability to prevent adherence of E. coli by
measuring the ability to prevent agglutination of both isolated P-receptor
resin-coated beads and human erythrocytes. The proanthocyanidin frac-
tion, at a concentration as low as 75.0 mg/ml, exhibited potent antiadher-
ence activity in uropathogenic isolates of P-ﬁmbriated E. coli bacteria to
cellular surfaces containing alpha-Gal(1l4)beta-Gal receptor sequences
similar to those on epithelial cells in the urinary tract. The chemical struc-
tures of the proanthocyanidins consisted predominantly of epicatechin
units containing at least one A-type linkage. The procyanidin A2 was the
most common terminating unit, occurring about four times as frequently
as the epicatechin monomer (29). Isolated A-type proanthocyanidins iso-
lated from cranberry juice cocktail had anti-adhesive activity at 60 Mg/ml,
while the B-type exhibited weak activity at 1.2 mg/ml (30).
    A high-molecular-weight constituent of the fruit, named nondialys-
able material, at concentrations of 100.0 μg/ml, inhibited the adhesion of
Helicobacter pylori strain BZMC-25 to human gastric mucosal cells. The
inhibition of adhesion by nondialysable material was dose-dependent,
and the 50% inhibitory concentration was strain-dependent, the concen-
trations being 37.0, 125.0 and 305.0 μg/ml for H. pylori strains BZMC-25,
EHL-65 and 17874, respectively (31).
    In one study, uropathogenic P-ﬁmbriated E. coli isolates were obtained
from the urine of women with clinically diagnosed, culture-conﬁrmed
urinary tract infections and incubated for 20 minutes in urine collected
over a 12-hour period from healthy women before and after consumption

154
                                                          Fructus Macrocarponii


of 240 ml of commercial cranberry juice cocktail (30% pure juice), and in
cranberry proanthocyanidin extract (pH 6.5) (2-fold dilution series).
These bacteria were then harvested and screened for ability to adhere to
isolated uroepithelial cells and to agglutinate human red blood cells (A1,
Rh+), and resin beads coated with isolated P-receptor oligosaccharides.
Urine collected from healthy women after consumption of the cranberry
juice cocktail (average pH 6.2) prevented adhesion in 31 (80%) of the
39 isolates and 19 (79%) of the 24 antibiotic-resistant isolates in all bioas-
says, while urine collected prior to the administration of the juice (average
pH 6.2) failed to prevent adhesion in any of the samples. Anti-adhesion
activity was evident in the urine within 2 hours and persisted for up to
10 hours following ingestion of the cranberry juice cocktail. The extracted
proanthocyanidins inhibited adhesion of all isolates at concentrations
ranging from 6 to 375.0 μg/ml, demonstrating potent in vitro anti-adhe-
sion activity against these bacterial strains (32).
    In another study, urine samples were collected from groups of volunteers
following the consumption of water, ascorbic acid or cranberry supplements
(unspeciﬁed) and tested in an anti-adhesion assay. Only intake of ascorbic
acid consistently produced acidic urine. Surface tension measurements of
the urine collected showed that both water and cranberry supplementation
consistently produced urine with a surface tension higher than that in urine
from the control group or urine collected following ascorbic acid intake.
Urine obtained after supplementation with ascorbic acid or cranberry re-
duced the initial in vitro deposition rates and numbers of adherent E. coli
and Enterococcus faecalis, but not Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus
epidermidis, or Candida albicans. Conversely, urine obtained from subjects
with increased water intake vastly increased the initial deposition rates and
numbers of adherent E. coli and E. faecalis (p < 0.05) (33).
Antioxidant activity
The antioxidant activities of the fruit and its phenolic constituents were
measured in vitro. The fruit had an anthocyanin concentration of 0.32 mg/g
fresh weight and a total phenolic concentration of 3.15 mg/g fresh weight.
In vitro the fruit exhibited antioxidant effects at a concentration of
18.5 μmol/g fresh weight. Chlorogenic acid, peonidin 3-galactoside, cya-
nidin 3-galactoside and cyanidin 3-galactoside were the most important
antioxidants in the fruit (34). Methanol extracts of the fruit were assayed
for radical-scavenging activity and cell growth inhibition using seven tu-
mour cell lines. A methanol extract of the fruit caused inhibition of the
proliferation of K562 and HT-29 cell lines at concentrations in the range
of 16.0–125.0 μg/ml. Radical-scavenging activity was greatest in an ex-
tract composed primarily of ﬂavonol glycosides. Seven ﬂavonol mono-

                                                                          155
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


glycosides: myricetin 3-alpha-arabinofuranoside, quercetin 3-xyloside,
3-methoxyquercetin 3-beta-galactoside (isorhamnetin), myricetin 3-beta-
galactoside, quercetin 3-beta-galactoside, quercetin 3-alpha-arabinofura-
noside and quercetin 3-alpha-rhamnopyranoside were evaluated for 1,1-
diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl radical-scavenging activity and ability to
inhibit low-density lipoprotein oxidation in vitro. Most of the ﬂavonol
glycosides had antioxidant activity comparable to or superior to that of
vitamin E. Cyanidin 3-galactoside showed activity superior to that of the
ﬂavonoids as well as vitamin E or of a water-soluble vitamin E analogue
in both antioxidant assays (35).
    In another in vitro study, the antioxidant and anti-inﬂammatory ef-
fects of cranberry anthocyanins and hydroxycinnamic acids were mea-
sured against hydrogen peroxide- and tumour necrosis factor (TNFA)-
induced damage to human microvascular endothelial cells. Polyphenols
from the crude drug were absorbed into endothelial cells and subsequent-
ly reduced the vulnerability of endothelial cells to increased oxidative
stress in the membrane and cytosol. Furthermore, the polyphenols also
reduced TNFA-induced up-regulation of various inﬂammatory media-
tors (interleukin-8) involved in the recruitment of leukocytes to sites of
damage or inﬂammation along the endothelium. Maximum inhibition for
all treatments was observed at a concentration of 0.1 mg/ml for 2 hours
(p < 0.001 in all cases) (36).

Clinical pharmacology
Numerous clinical studies have assessed the effects of the fruit and of fruit
juice preparations in humans, but only 18 clinical trials have assessed the
effects of cranberry juice on urinary pH and urinary tract infections (8–20,
37). Of these 18 trials assessing the safety and efﬁcacy of cranberry for the
prevention and treatment of urinary tract infections (UTIs), only four
were controlled and of sufﬁcient scientiﬁc quality (8, 14, 16, 19, 38).
   A double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 376 elderly patients
in hospital assessed the prophylactic effects of cranberry juice (30% pure
juice, 300 ml per day) against the onset of urinary tract infections (37).
Although the results suggested that cranberry supplementation may be
protective, these results were not statistically signiﬁcant.
   A randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial compared the effective-
ness and cost-effectiveness of concentrated cranberry tablets (1:30 pure
dried juice), cranberry juice, and a placebo used as prophylaxis against
lower urinary tract infections in adult women. One hundred and ﬁfty
sexually active women aged between 21 and 72 years were randomly as-
signed for one year to one of three groups receiving prophylaxis: placebo
juice + placebo tablets; placebo juice + cranberry tablets; or cranberry

156
                                                        Fructus Macrocarponii


juice + placebo tablets. Tablets were taken twice daily; juice was adminis-
tered at a dose of 250 ml three times daily. Outcome measures were:
       — a > 50% decrease in number of symptomatic UTIs per year
           (symptoms q 100 000 single organisms/ml); and
       — a > 50% decrease in annual consumption of antibiotics.
Cost-effectiveness was calculated as cost in US dollars per urinary tract
infection prevented. Both cranberry juice and cranberry tablets led to a
statistically signiﬁcant decrease in the number of patients experiencing at
least one symptomatic UTI per year (to 20% and 18%, respectively) com-
pared with placebo (to 32%) (p < 0.05) (19).
    An open, randomized controlled 12-month follow-up trial was per-
formed to determine whether recurrences of urinary tract infection could
be prevented with cranberry–lingonberry juice or with a lactobacillus
drink. One hundred and ﬁfty women, with UTIs caused by E. coli, were
allocated to one of three groups. The ﬁrst group received 50.0 ml of cran-
berry–lingonberry juice concentrate mixed in 200.0 ml water (7.5 g cran-
berry concentrate and 1.7 g lingonberry concentrate in 50.0 ml water, no
sugar added) daily for 6 months; the second, 100 ml of lactobacillus drink
5 days per week for one year; and the third group received no interven-
tion. Outcomes measured included the ﬁrst recurrence of symptomatic
UTI, deﬁned as bacterial growth of q 105 colony-forming units/ml in a
clean voided midstream urine specimen. The cumulative rate of the ﬁrst
recurrence of UTI during the 12-month follow-up period differed sig-
niﬁcantly between the groups (p = 0.048). After 6 months, eight (16%)
women in the group treated with cranberry, 19 (39%) in the lactobacillus-
treated group, and 18 (36%) in the control group had had at least one re-
currence. A 20% reduction in absolute risk in the group given cranberry
was observed as compared with the control group (14).
    A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled parallel trial in-
volving 153 elderly female volunteers (mean age 78.5 years) assessed the
effect of a cranberry juice preparation (27% pure juice, saccharin-sweet-
ened) on asymptomatic bacteriuria (deﬁned as > 105 colony forming
units/ml) and pyuria (38). The subjects were randomly assigned to re-
ceive 300 ml/day of cranberry juice or a cranberry-ﬂavoured placebo
containing vitamin C for 6 months. Urine samples were collected at
monthly intervals. The subjects receiving the cranberry juice had a low-
er frequency of bacteriuria with pyuria than the subjects in the control
group (odds ratio 42% of the control group, p = 0.004), of nearly 50%
after 4–8 weeks of cranberry use. There was no evidence of urinary acid-
iﬁcation, and the median pH of urine in the cranberry-treated group
was 6.0.

                                                                        157
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


   A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial assessed the ef-
fects of capsules containing concentrated cranberry (400.0 mg of cran-
berry solids) in 19 women with a history of recurring UTI (20). Half of
the women were given two capsules of a dried extract of the crude drug
daily for 3 months followed by 3 months of treatment with a placebo. The
other group received a placebo for the ﬁrst 3 months then the active treat-
ment for a further 3 months. However nine subjects dropped out due to
pregnancy or unrelated infections, or were lost to follow-up. Treatment
with cranberry capsules signiﬁcantly reduced the occurrence of UTIs
(p < 0.005). On average, 2.4 UTIs per year were recorded in the cranber-
ry-treated group and 6.0 UTIs per year occurred in the placebo-treated
group. Treatment was well tolerated and no side-effects were reported.
   A pilot study of 15 patients who had spinal cord injuries was per-
formed to determine whether alteration of ﬂuid intake and use of cran-
berry juice altered the bacterial bioﬁlm load in the bladder. Urine samples
were collected on day 0 (start of study), on day 7 – after each patient had
drunk one glass of water three times during the day in addition to the
normal diet, and on day 15 – after each patient had drunk one glass of
cranberry juice three times during the day. The results showed that cran-
berry juice intake signiﬁcantly reduced the bioﬁlm load compared to
baseline (p = 0.013). This was due to a reduction in adhesion of Gram-
negative (p = 0.054) and Gram-positive (p = 0.022) bacteria to cells. Water
intake did not signiﬁcantly reduce the bacterial adhesion or bioﬁlm pres-
ence (16).
   A randomized, placebo-controlled trial assessed the efﬁcacy of 30 ml
of pure cranberry juice for reducing the bacterial concentrations in the
urine of elderly subjects with a mean age of 81 years (10). Thirty-eight
volunteers were treated with 30 ml of cranberry juice mixed with water or
with water alone for 4 weeks, followed by cross-over for a further 4 weeks.
Statistically signiﬁcant results were reported; cranberry treatment de-
creased the frequency of bacteriuria (p = 0.004). However, 21 patients
dropped out before the end of the trial, leaving only 17 patients in the ﬁ-
nal evaluation. No side-effects were reported (10).
   In an uncontrolled study involving 60 subjects with symptoms of acute
UTI such as frequency, dysuria, urgency and nocturia, the effects of cran-
berry on the numbers of bacteria in the urine was assessed (15). Patients
were treated with 16 ounces of cranberry juice daily for 21 days. After
3 weeks, a positive clinical response (no urogenital complaints and fewer
than 100 000 bacteria per ml of urine) was noted in 32 patients (53%). An-
other 12 patients (20%) were “moderately improved” and 16 patients (27%)
showed no bacteriological improvement or symptomatic relief (15).

158
                                                         Fructus Macrocarponii


   In an uncontrolled study, 28 patients in a nursing home were treated
with 4–6 ounces of cranberry juice (30% juice) daily for 7 weeks (9).
Twice-weekly urine samples were examined for leukocytes and/or ni-
trates as a measure of UTI. At the end of 7 weeks, 10 patients had no
leukocytes or nitrates in the urine; nine patients had from a trace to 2+
leukocytes and no nitrates; nine had a trace or greater number of leuko-
cytes. However, this study did not include a non-exposure cohort (con-
trol) (9).
   A number of uncontrolled observational studies have assessed the ef-
fects of cranberry juice (33% juice) on urinary pH (12, 13). In the study
by Kinney & Blount (13), 59 patients (40 of whom completed the study)
were treated with 450–720 ml of a preparation containing 80% cranberry
juice per day for 6 days, followed by 6 days of no juice, and the pH of
their urine was measured. A decrease in urine pH was observed, but it
was not dose-related. The second study involved four healthy volunteers
who were administered from 1.5 to 4.0 l per day of a 33% cranberry juice
product (12). Three of the four subjects showed transient changes in urine
pH, from 6.6 to 6.33 (p = 0.01) and titratable acidity (12).
   A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study was conducted
on 48 patients with neurogenic bladder secondary to spinal cord injury
(39). Twenty-six of the patients received 2 g of cranberry juice concen-
trate and 22 received placebo. After 6 months of treatment, bacteriuria
and pyuria were not reduced (39).
Paediatric populations
An uncontrolled study assessed the efﬁcacy of cranberry (30% pure juice)
in 17 children with spina biﬁda who were using either an indwelling cath-
eter or intermittent self-catheterization (21). The children received one,
two or three glasses of cranberry juice over a 2-week period. The results
of this study showed a reduction of white and red blood cell counts in
nearly all urine samples; however the urine from most of the children
remained positive for E. coli (21).
   At least two controlled clinical trials have assessed the effects of cran-
berry in children with neurogenic bladder. A randomized single-blind,
cross-over study assessed the efﬁcacy of 15 ml/kg body weight/day of
cranberry cocktail juice (30% concentrate) as prophylaxis for bacterial
UTIs in 40 children with neuropathic bladder, managed by intermittent
catheterization (8). The subjects were treated for 6 months with either
cranberry juice or water as a control. Outcomes measured were a positive
or negative urine culture with symptomatic UTI. The results of this study
did not support the use of cranberry juice as prophylaxis against UTIs in
children with neuropathic bladder. However, 19 subjects dropped out of

                                                                         159
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


the trial, and the diagnostic criteria for the UTI were much lower than
those used in any other trial (103 colony-forming units/l of a pathogenic
organism).
    The results of this trial were conﬁrmed in a double-blind, placebo-
controlled, cross-over study involving 15 paediatric patients with neuro-
genic bladder receiving clean intermittent catheterization (17). Two
ounces of cranberry juice concentrate (equal to 300 ml of cranberry juice
cocktail) or a placebo were administered daily for 3 months, followed by
a 3-month cross-over (no washout period was described). Weekly home
visits were made, during which a sample of bladder urine was obtained by
intermittent catheterization. Signs and symptoms of UTI and all medica-
tions were recorded, and compliance was assessed. The results of the
study demonstrated that during consumption of the cranberry concen-
trate, the frequency of bacteriuria remained high. Cultures of 75% (114)
of the 151 samples obtained during consumption of placebo were positive
for a pathogen (q 104 colony-forming units/ml) compared with 75% (120)
of the 160 samples obtained during consumption of cranberry concen-
trate. Escherichia coli remained the most common pathogen during peri-
ods of consumption of placebo and cranberry. Three symptomatic infec-
tions occurred during the period of treatment with the placebo and three
during the period of treatment with the cranberry juice. No signiﬁcant
difference was observed between the acidiﬁcation of urine in the placebo-
treated group and that in the cranberry-treated group (median, 5.5 and
6.0, respectively). Thus, cranberry ingestion did not reduce bacteriuria or
symptomatic UTIs in this population (17). Unfortunately the only out-
comes measured were bacteriuria and presence of symptoms and no blood
cell counts were performed.
    A review of these clinical data on cranberry juice and supplements in
paediatric populations indicates that these products are not effective for
the treatment of UTIs in children with neuropathic bladder (22).
    In an uncontrolled trial involving 13 urostomy patients, the effects of
cranberry juice on skin complications were assessed (40). Patients were
treated with 160 to 320 ml of cranberry juice daily for 6 months. The re-
sults of this study showed an improvement of the skin conditions in four
urostomy patients with peristomal skin disorders. A decrease in erythe-
ma, maceration and pseudoepithelial hyperplasia was observed, but no
effects on urine acidity were noted (40).
    A study was performed to assess the effects of cranberry on the com-
plications of long-term indwelling bladder catheterization (e.g. encrusta-
tion and blockage by crystalline Proteus mirabilis bioﬁlms). Urine was
collected from groups of volunteers who had been treated with up to

160
                                                        Fructus Macrocarponii


1000 ml of cranberry juice or water over an 8-hour period. Laboratory
models of the catheterized bladder were supplied with urine from these
groups and then inoculated with P. mirabilis. After incubation for 24 or
48 hours, the extent of catheter encrustation was determined by chemical
analysis for calcium and magnesium. The amount of calcium and magne-
sium recovered from catheters incubated in urine pooled from individuals
who had drunk 500 ml of cranberry juice did not differ signiﬁcantly from
that on catheters incubated in pooled urine from control subjects who
had drunk 500 ml of water. However, there was signiﬁcantly less encrus-
tation (p = 0.007) on catheters from models incubated in urine from vol-
unteers who had been given 1000 m1 of water than on catheters incubated
in models supplied with urine from volunteers who had been given
1000 ml of cranberry juice. The amounts of encrustation on these two
groups of catheters were also signiﬁcantly less than that on catheters in-
cubated in models supplied with urine from volunteers who had not sup-
plemented their normal ﬂuid intake (p < 0.001) (41).
Urolithiasis
The potential inﬂuence of cranberry juice on urinary biochemical and
physicochemical risk factors associated with the formation of calcium ox-
alate kidney stones was assessed in a randomized cross-over trial. Urinary
variables were assessed in 20 South African men with no previous history
of kidney stones. The ﬁrst group of 10 subjects drank 500 ml of cranberry
juice diluted with 1500 ml tap water every day for 2 weeks, while the sec-
ond group drank 2000 ml of tap water daily for the same period. This was
followed by a 2-week washout period before the two groups were crossed
over. During the experimental phase, subjects kept a 3-day food diary to
assess their dietary and ﬂuid intakes; 24-hour urine samples were col-
lected at baseline and on day 14 of the trial periods, and analysed using
modern laboratory techniques. Urine analysis data were used to calculate
the relative urinary supersaturations of calcium oxalate, uric acid and cal-
cium phosphate. The results demonstrated that the ingestion of cranberry
juice decreased oxalate and phosphate excretion and increased citrate ex-
cretion. There was also a decrease in the relative supersaturation of calci-
um oxalate, which tended to be signiﬁcantly lower than that induced by
water alone (42).
   In another study, ﬁve healthy volunteers on a normal diet provided
24-hour urine samples for analysis of pH, volume, creatinine, oxalate, cal-
cium, phosphate, uric acid, sodium, citrate, magnesium and potassium.
Tablets containing the crude drug were administered to these volunteers
at the manufacturer’s recommended dosage (not stated) for 7 days. On
the seventh day, a second 24-hour urine sample was obtained from each

                                                                        161
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


volunteer. The results demonstrate that urinary oxalate levels in the vol-
unteers signiﬁcantly increased (p = 0.01) by an average of 43.4% during
treatment. The excretion of potential lithogenic ions, calcium, phosphate,
and sodium also increased. However, inhibitors of stone formation, mag-
nesium and potassium, rose as well (43).
   The effect of cranberry juice on risk factors for urinary stones was as-
sessed in a trial involving 12 healthy male subjects. The subjects provided
24-hour urine samples (three samples from each patient during the three
loading phases with water only). In each loading phase a neutral mineral
water was substituted for 330 ml of the juice. Cranberry juice decreased
the urinary pH, whereas the excretion of oxalic acid and the relative su-
persaturation for uric acid were increased, indicating the potential for the
development of urinary stones (44).

Adverse reactions
One rare case of immune-related thrombocytopaenia has been reported
in a 68-year-old patient (45).
   Nausea and severe vomiting were reported in a 4-month-old infant
after administration of 180 ml of cranberry juice (46).

Contraindications
The use of cranberry for the treatment of diseases of the urinary tract in
paediatric populations is ineffective and is not recommended (22, 43).

Warnings
Patients with kidney stones or impaired kidney function should use products
containing the fruit only after consulting their health care provider (47).

Precautions
A health care professional should be consulted prior to treatment to rule
out serious conditions such as pyelonephritis.
   People with diabetes should be aware of the high content of sugar in
the juice and use sugar-free preparations.

Drug interactions
One case of a fatal internal haemorrhage was reported in a male patient
whose international normalized ratio (INR) increased to > 50 after being
treated with cefalexin, digoxin, phenytoin and warfarin, as well as cran-
berry juice for 2 weeks. The subject was also unable to eat during the
2-week period (48). One case report of a possible interaction with warfa-

162
                                                           Fructus Macrocarponii


rin was reported in a 69-year-old male patient with a mitral valve replace-
ment (49). The patient was ingesting 2 l of cranberry juice per day in ad-
dition to warfarin and his INR ranged between 8 and 11. The patient was
advised to stop drinking cranberry juice and his INR returned to 3 (nor-
mal) after 3 days.
    The Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHPRA)
in the United Kingdom has reported numerous cases of a possible interac-
tion between cranberry juice and warfarin, leading to changes in the INR or
to bleeding. In four cases, the increase in the INR or bleeding was not
signiﬁcant. Two cases of an unstable INR and one case of a decreased INR
were reported (48).

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
No information was found.

Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug, extracts, juice, tablets, capsules. Store in a well-closed con-
tainer, in a refrigerator (2).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
For the prevention of UTIs in adults the recommended daily dose of cran-
berry juice is 30–300 ml of a 30% pure juice product; for the treatment of
UTIs in adults the daily dosage range is 360–960 ml or equivalent (1).
   Capsules containing a concentrated cranberry extract: 1–6 capsules
daily, equivalent to 3 ﬂuid ounces (90 ml) cranberry juice or 400–450 mg
cranberry solids (1).

References
1. Upton R, Graff A, Swisher D, eds. Cranberry fruit. Vaccinium macrocarpon
   Aiton. In: American herbal pharmacopeia. Santa Cruz, CA, American Herb-
   al Pharmacopeia, 2002.
2. The United States Pharmacopeia. 29. Rockville, MD, United States Pharma-
   copeia Convention, 2005.
3. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
   at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
   of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
   of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.

                                                                           163
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


4. Ernst E et al., eds. The desktop guide to complementary and alternative med-
    icine. Edinburgh, Mosby, 2001.
5. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
6. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe, 2005.
7. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
8. Foda M et al. Efﬁcacy of cranberry in prevention of urinary tract infection in
    a susceptible pediatric population. Canadian Journal of Urology, 1995, 2:98–
    102.
9. Gibson L et al. Effectiveness of cranberry juice in preventing urinary tract
    infections in long term care facility patients. Journal of Naturopathic Medi-
    cine, 1991, 2:45–47.
10. Haverkorn MJ, Mandigers J. Reduction of bacteriuria and pyuria using cran-
    berry juice [letters]. Journal of the American Medical Association, 1994,
    272:590.
11. Jackson B, Hicks LE. Effect of cranberry juice on urinary pH in older adults.
    Home Healthcare Nurse, 1997, 15:199–202.
12. Kahn HD et al. Effect of cranberry juice on urine. Journal of the American
    Dietetic Association, 1967, 51:251.
13. Kinney AB, Blount M. Effect of cranberry juice on urinary pH. Nursing
    Research, 1979, 28:287–290.
14. Kontiokari T et al. Randomised trial of cranberry-lingonberry juice and Lac-
    tobacillus GG drink for the prevention of urinary tract infections in women.
    British Medical Journal, 2001, 322:1–5.
15. Papas PN, Brusch CA, Ceresia GC. Cranberry juice in the treatment of uri-
    nary tract infections. Southwestern Medicine, 1966, 47:17–20.
16. Reid G et al. Cranberry juice consumption may reduce bioﬁlms on uroepi-
    thelial cells: pilot study in spinal cord injured patients. Spinal Cord, 2001,
    39:26–30.
17. Schlager TA et al. Effect of cranberry juice on bacteriuria in children with
    neurogenic bladder receiving intermittent catheterization. Journal of Pediat-
    rics, 1999, 135:698–702.
18. Sobota AE. Inhibition of bacterial adherence by cranberry juice: potential
    use for the treatment of urinary tract infections. Journal of Urology, 1984,
    131:1013–1016.
19. Stothers L. A randomized trial to evaluate effectiveness and cost effectiveness
    of naturopathic cranberry products as prophylaxis against urinary tract in-
    fections in women. Canadian Journal of Urology, 2002, 9:1558–1562.
20. Walker EB et al. Cranberry concentrate: UTI prophylaxis. Journal of Family
    Practice, 1997, 45:167–168.
21. Rogers J. Pass the cranberry juice. Nursing Times, 1991, 87:36–37.
22. Hrastinger A et al. Is there clinical evidence supporting the use of botanical
    dietary supplements in children? Journal of Pediatrics, 2005, 146:311–317.

164
                                                              Fructus Macrocarponii


23. Mahady GB, Fong HHS, Farnsworth NR. Cranberry. In: Botanical dietary
    supplements: quality, safety and efﬁcacy. Lisse, Swets & Zeitlinger, 2001.
24. Cavanagh HMA, Hipwell M, Wilkinson JM. Antibacterial activity of berry
    fruits used for culinary purposes. Journal of Medicinal Food, 2003, 6:57–61.
25. Ahuja S, Kaack B, Roberts J. Loss of ﬁmbrial adhesion with the addition of
    Vaccinum macrocarpon to the growth medium of P-ﬁmbriated Escherichia
    coli. Journal of Urology, 1998, 159:559–562.
26. Howell AB et al. Inhibition of the adherence of P-ﬁmbriated Escherichia coli
    to uroepithelial cell surfaces by proanthocyanidin extracts from cranberries.
    New England Journal of Medicine, 1998, 339:1085–1086.
27. Ofek I et al. Anti-Escherichia adhesin activity of cranberry and blueberry
    juices. New England Journal of Medicine, 1991, 324:1599.
28. Zafriri D et al. Inhibitory activity of cranberry juice on adherence of type 1
    and type P ﬁmbriated Escherichia coli to eucaryotic cells. Antimicrobial
    Agents Chemotherapy, 1989, 33:92–98.
29. Foo LY et al. The structure of cranberry proanthocyanidins which inhibit
    adherence of uropathogenic P-ﬁmbriated Escherichia coli in vitro. Phy-
    tochemistry, 2000, 54:173–181.
30. Howell AB et al. A-type cranberry proanthocyanidins and uropathogenic
    bacterial anti-adhesion activity. Phytochemistry, 2005, 66:2281–2291.
31. Burger O et al. A high molecular mass constituent of cranberry juice inhibits
    Helicobacter pylori adhesion to human gastric mucus. FEMS Immunology
    and Medical Microbiology, 2000, 29:295–301.
32. Howell AB, Foxman B. Cranberry juice and adhesion of antibiotic-resistant uro-
    pathogens. Journal of the American Medical Association, 2002, 287:3082–3083.
33. Habash MB et al. The effect of water, ascorbic acid, and cranberry derived
    supplementation on human urine and uropathogen adhesion to silicone rub-
    ber. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 1999, 45:691–694.
34. Zheng W, Wang SY. Oxygen radical absorbing capacity of phenolics in blue-
    berries, cranberries, chokeberries, and lingonberries. Journal of Agricultural
    and Food Chemistry, 2003, 51:502–509.
35. Yan X et al. Antioxidant activities and antitumor screening of extracts from
    cranberry fruit (Vaccinium macrocarpon). Journal of Agricultural and Food
    Chemistry, 2002, 50:5844–5849.
36. Youdim KA et al. Potential role of dietary ﬂavonoids in reducing microvas-
    cular endothelium vulnerability to oxidative and inﬂammatory insults. Jour-
    nal of Nutritional Biochemistry, 2002, 13:282–288.
37. McMurdo MET et al. Does ingestion of cranberry reduce symptomatic uri-
    nary tract infections in older people in hospital? A double-blind, placebo-
    controlled trial. Age and Ageing, 2005, 34:256–261.
38. Avorn J et al. Reduction of bacteriuria and pyuria after ingestion of cranberry
    juice. Journal of the American Medical Association, 1994, 271:751–754.
39. Waites KB et al. Effect of cranberry extract on bacteriuria and pyuria in per-
    sons with neurogenic bladder secondary to spinal cord injury. Journal of Spi-
    nal Cord Medicine, 2004, 27:35–40.

                                                                              165
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


40. Tsukada K et al. Cranberry juice and its impact on peri-stomal skin condi-
    tions for urostomy patients. Ostomy/Wound Management, 1994, 40:60–62,
    64, 66–67.
41. Morris NS, Stickler DJ. Does drinking cranberry juice produce urine inhibi-
    tory to the development of crystalline, catheter-blocking Proteus mirabilis
    bioﬁlms? British Journal of Urology International, 2001, 88:192–197.
42. McHarg T, Rodgers A, Charlton K. Inﬂuence of cranberry juice on the uri-
    nary risk factors for calcium oxalate kidney stone formation. British Journal
    of Urology International, 2003, 92:765–768.
43. Terris MK, Issa MM, Tacker JR. Dietary supplementation with cranberry
    concentrate tablets may increase the risk of nephrolithiasis. Urology, 2001,
    57:26–29.
44. Kessler T, Jansen B, Hesse A. Effect of blackcurrant-, cranberry- and plum
    juice consumption on risk factors associated with kidney stone formation.
    European Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2002, 56:1020–1023.
45. Davies JK, Ahktar N, Ranasinge E. A juicy problem. The Lancet, 2001,
    358:216.
46. Garcia-Calatayud S, Larreina Córdoba JJ, Lozano de la Torre MJ. Intoxi-
    cación grave por zumo de arándanos [Cranberry intoxication in a 4-month-
    old infant]. Anales Espanoles de Pediatriá, 2002, 56:72–73 [in Spanish].
47. Nowack R. Die amerikanische Cranberry (Vaccinum macrocarpon Aiton).
    Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 2003, 24:40–46.
48. Suvarna R, Pirmohamed M, Henderson L. Possible interaction between war-
    farin and cranberry juice. British Medical Journal, 2003, 327:20–27.
49. Grant P. Warfarin and cranberry: an interaction? Journal of Heart Valve Dis-
    ease, 2004, 13:25–26.




166
                               Cortex Magnoliae




Deﬁnition
Cortex Magnoliae consists of the dried stem, trunk or root bark of Mag-
nolia ofﬁcinalis Rehder and Wilson, M. ofﬁcinalis Rehder and Wilson var.
biloba Rehder and Wilson (1–3), or of M. obovata Thunberg. (1, 3, 4)
(Magnoliaceae).12

Synonyms
Magnolia hypoleuca Diels, non Sieb. et Zucc. (6, 7).

Selected vernacular names
Chung-pu, danghoobak, hou-po, hou-pu, hòupò, hsin-j, koboku, mag-
nolia bark, mubak (8–11).

Geographical distribution
Native to China (7, 9, 11).

Description
Deciduous tree, large, up to 22 m in height. Bark smooth, light rusty-ash
grey colour and aromatic. Branchlets light-green or yellowish. Leaves en-
tire, very large, elliptic-obovate, up to 35 cm long and 10–20 cm wide.
Large creamy-white, fragrant ﬂowers, bisexual, 15–20 cm in diameter;
9–15 petals, 8–10 cm in length by 3 cm in width, with the outer 3 being
pale green tinged pink on the edge and the inner 6–12 being creamy white.
Fruit oblong-ovoid, 10–12 cm in length, apex truncate and base rounded.
Carpels rounded at the base. Seeds single (7, 9).



1
    The ﬂowers of Magnolia ofﬁcinalis Rehder and Wilson and M. ofﬁcinalis Rehder and Wilson var.
    biloba Rehder and Wilson are also ofﬁcial in the Chinese Pharmacopoeia and the Japanese Stan-
    dards for Herbal Medicines (2, 3, 5). However, there is currently insufﬁcient information available
    to warrant the preparation of a monograph on this material.


                                                                                                  167
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Plant material of interest: dried stem, trunk or root bark
General appearance
Trunk bark: rough, 2–7 mm thick, plate-like or semi-tubular bark rolled
into large, tight cylinders. The outer surface is greyish white to greyish
brown, and rough, sometimes cork layer removed, and externally brown.
Inner surface smooth, light brown to purplish brown. Cut surface ex-
tremely ﬁbrous, light reddish brown to purplish brown (1, 3, 4). Stem
bark: quilled or double-quilled, 30–35 cm long, 2–7 mm thick, commonly
known as tongpu. Root bark: quilled singly or irregular pieces some
curved like chicken intestine, commonly known as jichangpo (2).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: aromatic; taste: pungent and slightly bitter (1–4).

Microscopic characteristics
Transverse section reveals a thick cork layer or several thin cork layers.
The outer surface of the cortex shows a ring of stone cells and scattered
on the inner surface are numerous oil cells and groups of stone cells. Phlo-
em rays 1–3 cells wide; ﬁbre groups, mostly several in bundles, scattered.
Bast ﬁbre groups lined stepwise between the medullary rays in the sec-
ondary cortex. Most of the oil cells are scattered in the primary cortex,
with small numbers scattered in the secondary cortex, but some can also
be observed in the narrow medullary rays (1–4).

Powdered plant material
Yellow-brown powder consisting of a yellowish to red-brown cork layer;
stone cells of various sizes or groups; numerous ﬁbres, 12–32 μm in diameter,
walls strongly thickened, sometimes undulate or serrate on one side, 1igni-
ﬁed, pit canals indistinct; oil cells containing a yellowish-brown to red-brown
substance; single starch grains of about 10 μm in diameter and 2- to 4-com-
pound starch grains, and parenchyma cells containing starch grains (1, 2, 4).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1–4), microchemical test (4)
and thin-layer chromatography (1–3).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (12).

168
                                                           Cortex Magnoliae


Chemical
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Foreign organic matter
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Total ash
Not more than 6% (1, 3–5).

Acid-insoluble ash
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Water-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Alcohol -soluble extractive
Not less than 12% (1).

Loss on drying
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (13). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (13),
and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with ref-
erence to contaminants and residues (12) and pesticide residues (14).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (12).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (12).

Chemical assay
Total magnolol and honokiol not less than 2.0% by high-performance
liquid chromatography (2).

Major chemical constituents
Magnolol (0.01–16%) and honokiol (0.005–9%) are bioactive major con-
stituents belonging to the lignan group of compounds. Another major

                                                                       169
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


constituent is the isoquinoline alkaloid, magnocurarine (0.15–0.23%).
The presence of liriodendrine has also been reported. The bark also con-
tains an essential oil, the major constituents of which are cadinol (14%),
1,4-cineole (6%), p-cymene (8%), and B-eudesmol (17%) and geraniol
(9%), among others (8, 15–18). The structures of magnolol, honokiol and
magnocurarine are presented below.

Honokiol                  Magnolol                   Magnocurarine            OH
           H2 C
H2C                    OH H2C        HO
                                                              H       CH3
                                                      HO
                                                                     N+ CH3

                  OH                      OH   CH2   H3CO




Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
No information was found.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Used orally for the treatment of gastrointestinal disorders such as consti-
pation, dyspepsia, gastritis, nausea and vomiting. Also used orally to treat
anxiety, coughs and shortness of breath (2).

Uses described in traditional medicine
Treatment of allergic rhinitis, headache, lack of appetite, respiratory con-
gestion, neurosis and fever, and as a uterine stimulant (6, 8, 19, 20).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Since no clinical studies have directly evaluated Cortex Magnoliae for any
therapeutic condition and very few pharmacological studies have been
conducted on extracts of the bark, most of this section describes the phar-
macology and clinical studies of the major chemical constituents, particu-
larly magnolol. The correlation of these data to the crude drug or its ex-
tracts requires further investigation.

Anti-allergic activity
Oral administration of 0.01–1.0 g/kg body weight (bw) of an aqueous
extract of the bark dose-dependently inhibited compound 48/80-induced
systemic anaphylaxis in rats (21). At the same dose, the aqueous extract

170
                                                          Cortex Magnoliae


also signiﬁcantly inhibited local immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated pas-
sive cutaneous anaphylactic reaction and reduced the levels of plasma his-
tamine in a dose-dependent manner (p < 0.05). In vitro, the extract (at
concentrations of 0.001–1.0 mg/ml) concentration-dependently inhibited
the histamine release from rat peritoneal mast cells activated by com-
pound 48/80 or anti-dinitrophenyl IgE (21).

Anti-asthmatic activity
Magnolol stimulates calcium channel activity in tracheal smooth muscle
cells as assessed by the patch clamp technique (22). In whole-cell current
recordings, magnolol reversibly increased the amplitude of potassium
outward currents. The increase in outward current caused by magnolol
was sensitive to inhibition by iberiotoxin (200 nM) or paxilline (1 μM),
but not by glibenclamide (10 μM). In inside-out patches, addition of mag-
nolol to the bath did not modify single channel conductance, but effec-
tively enhanced the activity of large conductance calcium (Ca) activated
potassium BK (Ca) channels. Magnolol increased the probability of these
channel openings in a concentration-dependent manner with a median
effective concentration (EC50) value of 1.5 μM. The direct stimulation of
these BK (Ca) channels by magnolol may explain the mechanism by
which it acts as an anti-asthmatic compound (22).

Antibacterial activity
An ethanol extract of the bark inhibited the growth of Actinomyces visco-
sus ATCC 19246, Streptococcus mutans Ingbritt and Streptococcus sobri-
nus 6715, with a minimum bactericidal concentration of 0.488, 0.488 and
1.250 g/l, respectively (23). The antimicrobial activities of honokiol and
magnolol were assayed using the agar dilution method and the minimum
inhibitory concentration (MIC) was determined for each compound us-
ing a twofold serial dilution assay. The results showed that honokiol and
magnolol have a marked antimicrobial effect (MIC, 25.0 μg/ml) against
Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, Porphyromonas gingivalis, Pre-
votella intermedia, Micrococcus luteus and Bacillus subtilis, but were not
active against Shigella ﬂexneii, Staphylococcus epidermidis, Enterobacter
aerogenes, Proteus vulgaris, Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(24). An extract of the bark and magnolol inhibited the growth of Helico-
bacter pylori in vitro (25).

Anti-gastric ulcer activity
Intragastric administration of aqueous and methanol extract of the crude
drug (400 mg/kg bw) reduced gastric juice secretion and increased the pH
of gastric secretions in mice pretreated with indometacin (26). Indometa-

                                                                      171
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


cin-induced gastric ulceration was reduced in animals treated with 400 mg/
kg bw of the methanol extract (26). Intragastric administration of an etha-
nol extract of the crude drug at a dose of 5.0 or 15.0 g/kg bw inhibited
hydrochloric acid-induced gastric ulceration in mice (27).

Anti-inﬂammatory activity
Magnolol, isolated and puriﬁed from the crude drug, inhibited mouse
hind-paw oedema induced by carrageenan, compound 48/80 and poly-
myxin B and reversed passive Arthus reaction when administered orally
at a dose of 30 mg/kg bw (28).

Antioxidant activity
The accumulation of oxygen-free radicals and activation of neutrophils
are implicated in the pathophysiological mechanisms that mediate myo-
cardial ischaemia/reperfusion injury. Thus, antioxidants are purported to
have cardioprotective activity. The antioxidant effect of magnolol was
evaluated in an open-chest anaesthetized rat model of myocardial ischae-
mia/reperfusion injury (29). Intravenous pretreatment with magnolol, at
a dose of 0.2 and 0.5 μg/kg bw at 10 minutes prior to 45 minutes of left
coronary artery occlusion, reduced the incidence and duration of ven-
tricular ﬁbrillation and reduced mortality when compared with the con-
trol group. After 1 hour of reperfusion, pretreatment with magnolol re-
duced infarct size. In addition, magnolol, at a dose of 0.2 μg/kg bw,
reduced superoxide anion production and myeloperoxidase activity, an
index of neutrophil inﬁltration in the ischaemic myocardium (29).
    Restenosis, a common complication after balloon angioplasty, involves a
number of cytokines, chemotactic factors and growth factors. Antioxidants
have been shown to inhibit intimal thickening after balloon injury in hyper-
lipidaemic animals. The effects of magnolol on the expression of monocyte
chemotactic protein-1 and on intimal response in balloon-injured aorta of
cholesterol-fed rabbits were investigated. The animals were fed a 2% high-
cholesterol diet together with daily intramuscular injection of either 1 μg/kg
bw of magnolol or vehicle solvent for a total of 6 weeks, while 10 rabbits fed
a regular diet served as a control group. A balloon denudation of abdominal
aorta was performed in each group at the end of the third week, and aortas
were harvested at the end of 6 weeks. Treatment with magnolol signiﬁcantly
inhibited copper-induced low-density lipoprotein oxidation in cholesterol-
fed rabbits and reduced atheroma formation (p < 0.05) in thoracic aortas
without lowering serum cholesterol. The intimal response was signiﬁcantly
attenuated in magnolol-treated rabbits receiving high cholesterol when com-
pared to those of the control high-cholesterol group (p < 0.05) (30).

172
                                                           Cortex Magnoliae


    The protective effect of magnolol against hypoxia-induced cell injury
in cortical neuron-astrocyte mixed cultures was assessed after exposure of
the cells to chemical hypoxia (0.5 mm potassium cyanide). Treatment with
magnolol (10 and 100 μM) signiﬁcantly reduced potassium cyanide-
induced lactose dehydrogenase release in a concentration-dependent
manner (30).
    The effects of magnolol on the course of sepsis, survival rate and bio-
chemical parameters were analysed in rats with induced sepsis. Intragas-
tric administration of magnolol, at doses ranging from 10-9 g/kg to 10-5 g/
kg bw, administered either before or after induction of sepsis by cecal li-
gation and puncture did not alter the course of sepsis induced by two ce-
cal punctures. However, when one cecal puncture was performed, a mod-
erately evolving type of sepsis was induced, and the survival rate of
affected rats was signiﬁcantly improved by pretreatment with 10-7 g/kg
magnolol (p < 0.05). The intensity of lipid peroxidation in plasma, liver
and lung of septic rats was also attenuated in a treatment-dependent
manner (31).
Anxiolytic activity
In rat brain membranes, honokiol and magnolol at a concentration of
5.0 μM, enhanced binding of [3H]muscimol and [3H]ﬂunitrazepam to
the G-aminobutyric acid receptor, but honokiol was 2.5 to 5.2 times more
potent than magnolol. Honokiol and magnolol also enhanced the poten-
tiating effect of 200 nM G-aminobutyric acid on [3H]ﬂunitrazepam bind-
ing with EC50 values of 0.61 μM and 1.6 μM. Honokiol and magnolol in-
creased [3H]muscimol binding by approximately 68% with EC50 values
of 2.3 and 12.0 μM, respectively (32).
    In elevated plus-maze tests, treatment of mice with honokiol pro-
longed the time spent in the open arms, showing an anxiolytic effect. Sev-
en daily treatments with 0.1–1 mg/kg bw honokiol, demonstrated an
anxiolytic effect with the optimal dose at 0.2 mg/kg bw. These results
suggest that honokiol is the chemical responsible for the anxiolytic effect
of the water extract of the bark in vivo (33).
Cardiovascular effects
The effect of magnolol on coronary circulation and vascular resistance
was assessed in anaesthetized rabbits using a Doppler velocimetry probe.
Thirty-nine rabbits received intravenous injection of either vehicle (n =
5), magnolol (10-6–10-4 g/kg bw) or nitroglycerin. Magnolol did not change
blood pressure or coronary blood ﬂow velocity, but at a dose of 10-4 g/kg,
decreased coronary vascular resistance signiﬁcantly more than vehicle
(p < 0.001). Nitroglycerin increased coronary blood ﬂow velocity and

                                                                       173
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


decreased coronary vascular resistance in a dose-dependent manner
(p < 0.01) (34). Magnolol (concentration 10–100 μg/ml) inhibited nor-
epinephrine-induced phasic and tonic contractions in rat thoracic aorta in
vitro (35).
Miscellaneous activities
Honokiol and magnolol increase choline acetyl-transferase activity, in-
hibit acetylcholinesterase, promote potassium-induced acetylcholine re-
lease and exhibit neurotrophic function in vitro. In conscious, freely-
moving rats a dose of honokiol or magnolol (10-4–10-6 M) was perfused
into the hippocampus via a dialysis probe. The results showed that at a
dose of 10-4 M honokiol or magnolol markedly increased extracellular
acetylcholine release to 165.5% and 237.83% of the basal level, respec-
tively. However, lower concentrations of either compound failed to elicit
signiﬁcant acetylcholine release (36).
   The effects of magnolol on thermoregulation and hypothalamic release
of 5-hydroxytryptamine were assessed in normothermic rats and in febrile
rats treated with interleukin-1 beta. Intraperitoneal administration of mag-
nolol (25.0–100.0 mg/kg bw) produced a decrease in colon temperature, an
increase in foot skin temperature, a decrease in metabolic rate and a de-
crease in the endogenous release of 5-hydroxytryptamine in the rat hypo-
thalamus. Depletion of 5-hydroxytryptamine in rat brain, produced by
intracerebroventricular pretreatment with 5,7-dihydroxytryptamine, at-
tenuated the magnolol-induced hypothermia and cutaneous vasodilation,
and decreased metabolism (37).
Muscle relaxation effects
Intraperitoneal administration of an ether extract of the crude drug, at a
dose of 1.0 g/kg bw induced a loss of the righting reﬂex 30 minutes after
injection. In mice, intraperitoneal administration of magnolol (50.0–
500.0 mg/kg bw) produced sedation, ataxia, muscle relaxation and a loss
of righting reﬂex. Intraperitoneal administration of magnolol and hono-
kiol (50.0 mg/kg bw) to young chicks suppressed spinal reﬂexes (38–40).
Toxicity
The median lethal dose after intraperitoneal injection of a decoction is
6 g/kg bw in mice, and the median lethal dose is 4.25 g/kg bw in cats after
intravenous administration (19, 34).

Clinical pharmacology
No information was found for single-entity preparations of Cortex
Magnoliae.

174
                                                            Cortex Magnoliae


Contraindications
Hypersensitivity or allergy to the plant material.

Warnings
No information was found.

Precautions
General
No information was found.

Drug interactions
None reported.

Drug and laboratory test interactions
None reported.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
An aqueous extract of the bark was not mutagenic in the Ames test in
Salmonella typhimurium strains TA98 and TA100 at concentrations up to
40.0 mg per agar plate (41). Magnolol at concentrations of 10-9 and 10-7 M
reduced ferrous sulfate-induced lipid peroxidation and reduction in sperm
motility and protected sperm from lipid peroxidation in vitro (42).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
None reported.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Due to a lack of safety data the use of the crude drug during pregnancy is
not recommended.

Nursing mothers
Due to a lack of safety data the use of the crude drug during breastfeeding
is not recommended.

Paediatric use
Due to a lack of safety data the use of the crude drug in children under the
age of 12 years is not recommended.

Adverse reactions
No information was found.

                                                                        175
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Dosage forms
Crude drug, decoction. Store in a tightly sealed container away from heat
and light (2).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
For oral administration: 3–9 g of crude drug for decoction daily in divided
doses (2, 19).

References
1. The Japanese pharmacopoeia, 14th ed. (English ed.). Tokyo, Ministry of
    Health, Labour and Welfare, 2001 (http://jpdb.nihs.go.jp/jp14e/).
2. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Vol. I (English ed.). Bei-
    jing, Chemical Industry Press, 2005.
3. Pharmacopoeia of the Republic of Korea, 8th ed. (English ed.). Seoul, Korea
    Food and Drug Administration, and Korean Association of Ofﬁcial Com-
    pendium for Public Health, 2004.
4. Asian crude drugs, their preparations and speciﬁcations. Asian Pharmacopoe-
    ia. Manila, Federation of Asian Pharmaceutical Associations, 1978.
5. The Japanese standards for herbal medicines. Tokyo, Yakuji Nippon, 1993.
6. Perry LM, Metzger J. Medicinal plants of east and southeast Asia, attributed
    properties and uses. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1980.
7. Keys JD. Chinese herbs, their botany, chemistry, and pharmacodynamics.
    Rutland, VT, CE Tuttle, 1976.
8. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
9. Medicinal plants in China. Manila, World Health Organization Regional Of-
    ﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc, 1989 (WHO Regional Publications, Western Pa-
    ciﬁc Series, No. 2).
10. Han DR et al. Modern Pharmacognosy. Seoul, Hakchang, 1989 [in Korean].
11. Kim IH et al. Medicinal botany. Seoul, Hakchang, 1988.
12. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
13. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe, 2005.
14. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
15. Bae EA et al. Quality evaluation on magnoliae cortex. Yakhak Hoeji [Journal
    of the Pharmaceutical Society of Korea], 1997, 41:78–84.
16. Cui JF, Zhang GD, Song WZ. Reverse phase ion-pair HPLC determina-
    tion of quaternary ammonium alkaloids in the traditional Chinese drug

176
                                                                   Cortex Magnoliae


    hou-po (Magnolia ofﬁcinalis). Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica, 1988, 23:383–
    387 [in Chinese].
17. Zhao ZZ et al. Pharmacognostical studies on the Magnolia bark (3). Determi-
    nation of magnolol and honokiol in “hou po” (Cortex Magnoliae) prepared
    from the bark of different age. Shoyakugaku Zasshi, 1991, 45:145–147.
18. Pu QL, Pannell LK, Ji X. The essential oil of Magnolia ofﬁcinalis. Planta
    Medica, 1990, 56:129–130.
19. Bensky D, Gamble A, eds. Chinese herbal medicine: materia medica. Revised
    ed. Seattle, WA, Eastland Press, 1993.
20. Lee MM et al. Magnolol protects cortical neuronal cells from chemical hy-
    poxia in rats. Neuroreport, 1998, 9:3451–3456.
21. Shin TY et al. Antiallergic action of Magnolia ofﬁcinalis on immediate hyper-
    sensitivity reaction. Archives of Pharmacal Research, 2001, 24:249–255.
22. Wu SN et al. Stimulation of the BKCa channel in cultured smooth muscle cells
    of human trachea by magnolol. Thorax, 2002, 57:67–74.
23. Wang SH, Fan MW, Bian Z. [Experimental study of bacteriostatic activity of
    Chinese herbal medicines on primary cariogenic bacteria in vitro]. Zhonghua
    Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi, 2001, 36:385–387 [in Chinese].
24. Ho KY et al. Antimicrobial activity of honokiol and magnolol isolated from
    Magnolia ofﬁcinalis. Phytotherapy Research, 2001, 15:139–141.
25. Bae EA et al. Anti-Helicobacter pylori activity of herbal medicines. Biological
    and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1998, 21:990–992.
26. Kim YH, Whang WK, Kim IH. The comparative effects of antigastric ulcer
    of Magnoliae Cortices. Chung-Ang Journal of Pharmacy Sciences, 1995,
    9:97–110.
27. Zhu ZP et al. Pharmacological effect of cortex Magnolia ofﬁcinalis on diges-
    tive system. Zhongguo Zhongyao Zazhi, 1997, 22:686–688.
28. Wang JP et al. Anti-inﬂammatory and analgesic effects of magnolol. Nau-
    nyn-Schmiedebergs Archives of Pharmacology, 1992, 346:707–712.
29. Lee YM et al. Magnolol reduces myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury via
    neutrophil inhibition in rats. European Journal of Pharmacology, 2001,
    422:159–167.
30. Chen YL et al. Magnolol, a potent antioxidant from Magnolia ofﬁcinalis,
    attenuates intimal thickening and MCP-1 expression after balloon injury of
    the aorta in cholesterol-fed rabbits. Basic Research in Cardiology, 2001,
    96:353–363.
31. Kong CW et al. Magnolol attenuates peroxidative damage and improves sur-
    vival of rats with sepsis. Shock, 2000, 13:24–28.
32. Squires RF et al. Honokiol and magnolol increase the number of [3H] mus-
    cimol binding sites three-fold in rat forebrain membranes in vitro using a
    ﬁltration assay, by allosterically increasing the afﬁnities of low-afﬁnity sites.
    Neurochemical Research, 1999, 24:1593–1602.
33. Kuribara H et al. Application of the elevated plus-maze test in mice for eval-
    uation of the content of honokiol in water extracts of magnolia. Phytothera-
    py Research, 1999, 13:593–596.

                                                                                177
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


34. Huang CH et al. Effect of magnolol on coronary vascular resistance in rab-
    bits: measurement with pulsed Doppler velocimetry. Journal of the Formo-
    san Medical Association, 2000, 99:554–558.
35. Teng CM et al. EDRF-release and Ca+(+) channel blockade by magnolol, an
    antiplatelet agent isolated from Chinese herb Magnolia ofﬁcinalis, in rat tho-
    racic aorta. Life Sciences, 1990, 47:1153–1161.
36. Hou YC, Chao PD, Chen SY. Honokiol and magnolol increased hippocam-
    pal acetylcholine release in freely-moving rats. American Journal of Chinese
    Medicine, 2000, 28:379–384.
37. Hsieh MT, Chueh FY, Lin MT. Magnolol decreases body temperature by
    reducing 5-hydroxytryptamine release in the rat hypothalamus. Clinical and
    Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology, 1998, 25:813–817.
38. Watanabe K et al. Studies on the active principles of magnolia bark. Cen-
    trally acting muscle relaxant activity of magnolol and honokiol. Japanese
    Journal of Pharmacology, 1975, 25:605–607.
39. Watanabe H, Watanabe K, Hagino K. Chemostructural requirement for cen-
    trally acting muscle relaxing effect of magnolol and honokiol. Journal of
    Pharmacobio-Dynamics, 1983, 6:184–190.
40. Watanabe K et al. Pharmacological properties of magnolol and honokiol ex-
    tracted from Magnolia ofﬁcinalis: central depressant effects. Planta Medica,
    1983, 49:103–108.
41. Yin XJ et al. A study on the mutagenicity of 102 raw pharmaceuticals used in
    Chinese Traditional Medicine. Mutation Research, 1991, 260:73–82.
42. Lin MH, Chao HT, Hong CY. Magnolol protects human sperm motility
    against lipid peroxidation: a sperm head ﬁxation method. Archives of An-
    drology, 1995, 34:151–156.




178
                         Herba Millefolii




Deﬁnition
Herba Millefolii consists of the whole or cut, dried ﬂowering tops (1, 2)
or aerial parts collected during the ﬂowering season (3, 4) of Achillea
millefolium L. (Asteraceae).

Synonyms
Achillea borealis Bong., A. lanulosa Nutt., A. magna auct., A. millefolium
ssp. borealis (Bong.) Breitung., A. millefolium ssp. lanulosa (Nutt.) Piper,
A. millefolium var. occidentale DC (5).

Selected vernacular names
Achillée, achillenkraut, amelotu, artemisia bastarda, Bauchwehkraut, berbe
militaris, biranjasif, bloodwort, bumadaran, carpenter’s grass, carpenter’s
weed, chipmunk grass, centofoglie, cickafark, ciento en rama, common
yarrow, daun seribu, dog daisy, egel tologch ovs, erba da carpentierir, erba
da falegnam, erva d’o marchese, ﬂor de la pluma, gandana, gordoloba, green
arrow, herbe au charpentier, herbe de millefeuille, hezarbarg, Jungfraukraut,
Katzenkraut, knight’s milfoil, mil de tama, mil en rama, mil ﬂores, mil ho-
jas, milefolio, milfoil, millefolium, milenrama, nosebleed, old man’s pepper,
oum alf ouraka, pharange, saigum, sanguinary, sataraatyoutas, Schafgarbe,
Schafgarbenkraut, seiyonokogiriso, seiyounokogirisou, sneezeweed, sol-
dier’s milfoil, stratictes, tansy, thou alf ouraka, thousand leaf, thousand leaf
grass, thousand seal, thousand weed, trava tysyachelistnik, troneto, umm
alf waraqah, western yarrow, wound wort, yarrow, yerba de carpintero,
yerba de la muela (2, 6–10).

Geographical distribution
Native to Asia, Europe and North America, now widely distributed and
cultivated in the temperate regions of the world (2, 7, 8, 11, 12).

Description
A perennial herb, 30–90 cm in height, with aromatic odour and greyish-
green colour from the numerous small hairs; stem angular. Leaves green

                                                                            179
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


or greyish-green, faintly pubescent on the upper surface and more pubes-
cent on the lower surface, 2–3 pinnately divided with linear lobes and a
ﬁnely pointed whitish tip, alternate, clustered at the base of the stem.
Flowering heads (capitula) in a ﬂat-topped corymb (3–5 cm in diameter),
small, pedunculate, varying in colour from white to pink, magenta and
red; involucral bracts in few rows, the outer somewhat shorter than the
inner, with a scarious margin. Outer ﬂorets in each capitulum usually 5,
female, ligulate with more or less 3-dentate, patent ligules; inner ﬂorets
hermaphrodite, 5-lobed, with compressed corolla tube and a receptacle
scale at the base. Fruit a compressed achene, oblong or obovate, without
pappus (1).

Plant material of interest: dried ﬂowering tops and aerial part
General appearance
Flowering tops: Leaves green or greyish-green, faintly pubescent on the
upper surface and more pubescent on the lower surface, 2–3 pinnately di-
vided with linear lobes and a ﬁnely pointed whitish tip. The capitula are
arranged in a corymb at the end of the stem. Each capitulum (3–5 cm in
diameter) consists of the receptacle, usually 4 or 5 ligulate ray-ﬂorets and
3–20 tubular disc ﬂorets. The involucre consists of 3 rows of imbricate
lanceolate, pubescent green bracts arranged with a brownish or whitish,
membranous margin. The receptacle is slightly convex, and in the axillae of
paleae, bears a ligulate ray ﬂoret with a 3-lobed, whitish or reddish ligule
and tubular disc ﬂorets with a radial, 5-lobed, yellowish or light brownish
corolla. The pubescent green, partly brown or violet stems are longitudi-
nally furrowed, up to 3 mm thick with a light-coloured medulla (1).
Aerial part: Stems rounded, pubescent, furrowed, usually unbranched,
40 cm or more in length, distinctly woolly, pale green, sometimes pur-
plish. Lanceolate leaves, up to 15 cm in length and 3 cm in width, 2 to
3 pinnate with the ultimate segments linear and subulate, pale grey-
ish-green and covered with long white hairs; lower leaves with a short
petiole, upper leaves sessile, often with two or three small axillary leaves
at the base. Flowers numerous, in dense terminal corymbs, each capitu-
lum about 3–5 cm in diameter with an ovoid involucre composed of
3 rows of imbricate lanceolate, pubescent green bracts arranged with a
brownish or whitish, membranous margin; 4 or 5 white, pink or reddish
ligulate ray-ﬂorets and 3–20 white or cream tubular disc ﬂorets; achenes
2 mm long, shiny, greyish-brown, slightly curved (1, 3, 4).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: slightly aromatic; taste: bitter, faintly aromatic (3, 4, 7).

180
                                                              Herba Millefolii


Microscopic characteristics
Aerial part: Stem shows epidermal cells axially elongated with occasional
anomocytic stomata and a faintly striated cuticle; abundant covering and
scattered glandular trichomes; cortex narrow, parenchymatous with sev-
eral layers of collenchyma in the ridges; numerous vascular bundles, ar-
ranged in a ring in transverse section, each with a small group of phloem
and a wide cap of thick-walled, ligniﬁed pericyclic ﬁbres; parenchyma-
tous cells of outer pith ligniﬁed and pitted, those of the central region
unligniﬁed and sometimes collapsed in older stems forming a hollow.
Leaf cells isobilateral, with palisades composed of 1–3 layers; upper and
lower epidermal cells with sinuous anticlinal walls and numerous anomo-
cytic stomata; abundant covering trichomes and scattered glandular
trichomes occurring on both epidermises. Flower epidermal cells consist-
ing of bracts, longitudinally elongated, thin-walled, ﬁlled with dark brown
striated pigment, scattered covering trichomes and occasional stomata;
the inner central region composed of elongated cells with ligniﬁed and
ﬁnely pitted walls. Corolla of the ray ﬂoret with the epidermis of the
ligule composed of wavy-walled cells with rounded papillae; corolla of
the disc ﬂoret composed of rectangular cells with moderately thickened
walls; numerous small cluster crystals of calcium oxalate occur in both
ray and disc ﬂorets. Pollen grains spherical, 30–35 μm in diameter, with a
spiny exine and 3 distinct pores (4).

Powdered plant material
Flowering tops: Green or greyish-green. Fragments of stems, leaves, and
bracts bearing rare glandular trichomes with a short stalk and a head
formed of 2 rows of 3–5 cells enclosed in a bladder-like membrane and
uniseriate covering trichomes consisting of 4–6 small, more or less isodia-
metric cells at the base and a thick-walled, often somewhat tortuous ter-
minal cell, 400–1000 μm in length; fragments of the ligulate corolla with
papillary epidermal cells; small-celled parenchyma from the corolla tubes
containing cluster crystals of calcium oxalate; groups of ligniﬁed and pit-
ted cells from the bracts; spherical pollen grains, about 30 μm in diameter,
with 3 germinal pores and spiny exine; groups of sclerenchymatous ﬁbres
and small vessels with spiral or annular thickening, from the stem (1).
Aerial part: Greyish-green powder with epidermal fragments of stem and
leaf with abundant covering trichomes and less numerous glandular
trichomes, the covering trichomes frequently broken off and occurring
scattered; groups of thick-walled, ligniﬁed ﬁbres from the pericycle and
xylem, those of the xylem sometimes associated with small vessels with
spiral or annular thickening; ligniﬁed, pitted parenchyma from the pith;

                                                                         181
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


dark brown fragments of the membranous margins of the bracts and
groups of ligniﬁed and pitted elongated cells from the central region; oc-
casional fragments of the papillose epidermis of the ligulate ﬂorets;
small-celled parenchyma containing cluster crystals of calcium oxalate;
pollen grains with a spiny exine (4).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1, 3, 4), and thin-layer chro-
matography (1).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (13).

Foreign organic matter
Flowering tops: not more than 5% of stems with a diameter greater than
3 mm and not more than 2% of other foreign matter (1).
Aerial part: not more than 2% (4).

Total ash
Flowering tops: not more than 10.0% (1).
Aerial part: not more than 10% (4).

Acid-insoluble ash
Flowering tops: not more than 2.5% (1).
Aerial part: not more than 2.5% (4).

Water-soluble extractive
Aerial part: not less than 15.0% (4).

Loss on drying
Flowering tops: not more than 12.0% (1).
Aerial part: not more than 13% (3).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (1). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (1)
and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (13) and pesticide residues (14).

182
                                                              Herba Millefolii


Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (13).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (13).

Chemical assays
Flowering tops: not less than 0.2% (v/w) of essential oil calculated on the
basis of dried weight; and not less than 0.02% of proazulenes expressed as
chamazulene by a combination of steam distillation and spectroscopic
analysis (1).
Aerial part: not less than 0.1% (v/w) of essential oil determined by steam
distillation (3).

Major chemical constituents
Contains 0.2–1.0% of essential oil. Being a chemically polymorphic aggre-
gate plant species, the chemical constitution depends on the number of
chromosomes present. Diploid and tetraploid plants contain proazulene
sesquiterpenes, which when exposed to heat will be transformed to coloured
azulenes, including chamazulene (up to 25%) and achillicin. Other major
constituents in tetraploid plants include B-pinene (23%), A-pinene (5%)
and caryophyllene (10–22%). Hexaploid plants are azulene sesquiterpene-
free, and contain approximately 50% mono- and sesquiterpenes, many of
which are in the oxidized form, as well as camphor (18%), sabinene (12%),
1,8-cineol (10%) and B-pinene (9%), among other constituents. Octaploid
plants contain approximately 80% oxygen-containing monoterpenes, with
linalool being the major constituent. Among the non-essential-oil constitu-
ents are ﬂavonoids, coumarins and tannins (6, 7, 9, 11, 15). The structures
of representative mono- and sesquiterpenes are presented below.

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Orally for loss of appetite, common cold, dyspeptic ailments such as mild
spastic discomfort of the gastrointestinal tract, as a choleretic and for the

                                                                         183
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


                O                                     CH3
                        CH3                                                     H3C                  CH3
            O            H                                H
H3C     H                O        CH3
                H                                 H
                         H                                          CH2
                              O                  H3C                                        CH3
                                                              CH3
            HO CH3
                          Achillicin             Caryophyllene                    Chamazulene

        CH3                                        CH3                          CH3      H3C OH
                    O                                                                                CH2
H3C                                                       O               H3C
                        and enantiomer
H3C                                                            CH3               and enantiomer
                                                              CH3
        H
                Camphor                        1,8-Cineole                            Linalool

            H                                         H
 H3 C                                     H3 C
                    CH3                                        CH2               H3 C
H3 C                                     H3 C                                                        CH2

  H                                        H                                     H3 C            H
  and enantiomer                           and enantiomer                             and enantiomer

      -Pinene                              -Pinene                                    Sabinene


treatment of fevers (6, 12, 16). Externally for skin inﬂammation and
wounds (6).
   Externally as a sitz bath for treatment of painful, cramp-like condi-
tions due to menstrual disorders (12).

Uses described in traditional medicine
Orally as an emmenagogue, eyewash, haemostat, laxative, sleep aid, stim-
ulant tonic, and to treat baldness, prostatitis and vertigo (8, 9, 15, 17, 18).
   Used externally for the treatment of haemorrhoids, haematoma and
burn injuries (19).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Note: While the ﬂowering tops of the plant are ofﬁcial in the European
pharmacopoeia 2005 (1), much of the research on the pharmacology of
this plant has been performed using the aerial parts of the plant, which
include the ﬂowering tops. These data have been included and designated
as coming from studies conducted on the aerial parts, but their direct ap-
plicability to the ﬂowering tops needs to be further investigated.

184
                                                              Herba Millefolii


Antibacterial activity
A 50% ethanol extract of the ﬂowers inhibited the growth of Shigella
dysenteriae, but not that of Escherichia coli or Salmonella enteritidis, in
vitro at a concentration of 50 μl/agar plate (20). A methanol extract of the
aerial parts inhibited the growth of 18 clinical strains of Helicobacter py-
lori in vitro, with a minimum inhibitory concentration of 50 μg/ml (21).

Anticonvulsant activity
Intraperitoneal injection of a 95% ethanol extract of the aerial parts to
mice, at a dose of 2.0–4.0 ml/kg body weight (bw), had anticonvulsant
activity against supramaximal electroshock- and corazol-induced convul-
sions, but was not effective against strychnine-induced convulsions (22).

Anti-inﬂammatory activity
In a study in mice, intraperitoneal injection of a fraction from an aqueous
extract of the ﬂower heads, at a dose of 40.0 mg/kg bw, inhibited yeast-
induced pedal oedema (23). Intragastric administration of an 80% etha-
nol extract of the aerial parts to rats, at a dose of 100.0 mg/kg bw, inhib-
ited carrageenan-induced pedal oedema by 29% (24). External application
of a methanol extract of the aerial parts to mice, at a dose of 1.0 mg/ear,
had weak anti-inﬂammatory effects (25). An aqueous extract of the aeri-
al parts did not inhibit prostaglandin synthesis in microsomes at a con-
centration of 0.2 mg/ml (26). Santamarin, a sesquiterpene lactone from
the crude drug, moderately inhibited the transcription of nuclear factor-
kappa-beta, a protein that regulates the transcription of inﬂammatory
mediators such as the cytokines and chemokines, at a concentration of
100 μM (27).

Antioxidant activity
Chamazulene, an artefact constituent of the aerial parts, inhibited cell
membrane lipid peroxidation induced by Fe2+/ascorbate as assessed in
the 2-thiobarbituric acid reactive assay. Chamazulene inhibited lipid per-
oxidation in a concentration- and time-dependent manner, with a median
inhibitory concentration of 18 μM. It also inhibited the autoxidation of
dimethylsulfoxide (33 mM) by 76% at 25 mM, and had a weak capacity
to interact with 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl (28).

Antipyretic activity
Oral administration of a hot aqueous extract or the juice of the aerial
parts of the plant to rabbits, at a dose of 25 and 55 g/kg bw, respectively,
reduced body temperature, while the 95% ethanol extract was not ac-
tive (29).

                                                                         185
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Antispasmodic activity
An aqueous or methanol extract of the aerial parts of the plant (concentration
not stated) inhibited contractions of rabbit small intestines in vitro (30).
Antiviral activity
A 50% methanol extract of the aerial parts inhibited HIV-1 reverse tran-
scriptase in vitro at a concentration of 10% of the nutrient medium (31).
Intraperitoneal administration of a hot-water extract of the dried ﬂowers
and leaves of the plant to mice (dose not stated) was active against tick-
borne viral encephalitis (32).
Toxicology
Intraperitoneal administration of an aqueous extract of the aerial parts to
rats had a median lethal dose of 1.5 g/kg bw (33). Intragastric or subcuta-
neous administration of an aqueous extract of the ﬂowers to mice had a
median lethal dose of > 1 g/kg bw (33).

Clinical pharmacology
Oral administration of a 70% ethanol extract of the ﬂowers (dose not
stated) increased the secretion of gastric juice in healthy volunteers by
178% (16). No further information on this study was available.

Adverse reactions
Numerous reports of allergic contact dermatitis have been published (33–
39). In clinical testing, product formulations containing 2% of extracts of
the crude drug were generally not irritating. In provocative testing, pa-
tients reacted to a Compositae mix that contained the crude drug, as well
as to the crude drug alone. In clinical testing, a formulation containing
0.1% yarrow extract (propylene glycol and water) was not a sensitizer in
a maximization test and alcoholic extracts of aerial parts of A. millefolium
did not produce a phototoxic response (33).
   A 5-year follow-up (1985–1990) of patients who were sensitive to
Compositae showed that more than 50% reacted when tested with an
ether extract of the plant, indicating cross-sensitivity (35). However, exac-
erbation of the patch test sites by irradiation with UV light was not ob-
served in any of the tested patients. One guaianolide compound, with a
peroxide-bridged cyclopentane ring and an A-methylene-G-butyrolactone
structure, named A-peroxyachifolide, has been isolated from the ﬂowers
and appears to be responsible for the allergic contact dermatitis (35, 37).
   Therefore, direct contact with the crude drug or its preparations may
cause hypersensitivity reactions of the skin or mucosa, such as rash, for-
mation of vesicles and pruritus, in sensitive individuals.

186
                                                               Herba Millefolii


Contraindications
Hypersensitivity to the plant and other Asteraceae (Compositae) (12, 40, 41).
Gastric and duodenal ulcer, occlusion of the bile duct and gallbladder dis-
ease (12).
   Due to the traditional use of the drug as an emmenagogue, it is
contraindicated during pregnancy (9).

Warnings
Patients presenting with hypersensitivity or allergic reactions that include
the formation of vesicles should stop treatment with Herba Millefolii im-
mediately (40). If signs of hypersensitivity reaction reappear upon further
use, the crude drug should not be used again.

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
A tincture of the crude drug was not mutagenic in the Ames test at a con-
centration of 160 μl/disc in Salmonella typhimurium strains TA98 and
TA100. Metabolic activation had no effect on the results (33). An infusion
of the aerial parts was tested for genotoxicity in the wing somatic mutation
and recombination test (SMART) which makes use of the two recessive
wing cell markers, multiple wing hairs (mwh) and ﬂare (ﬂr) on the left arm
of chromosome 3 of Drosophila melanogaster. Three-day-old larvae, trans-
heterozygous for these two markers, were fed the beverage (an infusion of
Achillea millefolium (20 g/100 ml water) cooled and used immediately for
the larval experiments) at different concentrations and for different feed-
ing periods using Drosophila instant medium. Somatic mutations or mi-
totic recombinations induced in the cells of the wing imaginal discs gave
rise to mutant single or twin spots on the wing blade of the emerging adult
ﬂies showing either the mwh phenotype and/or the ﬂr phenotype. An in-
fusion of Achillea millefolium was weakly genotoxic (42).
    The results of previous investigations assessing the effect of the crude
drug on reproduction have been contradictory. In one study, the addition
of the plant to the feed of rats, at a concentration of 25–50% w/w, sup-
pressed the induction of estrus (43). However, oral administration of an
extract of the leaves to rats did not alter the time of ﬁrst mating, fertility
or litter size (44). The effect of a 96% ethanol extract (200 mg/kg bw per
day, intraperitoneally, for 20 days) and an 80% ethanol extract (300 mg/
kg bw per day, orally, for 30 days) of the ﬂowers on the spermatogenesis
of Swiss mice was assessed by examining morphological characteristics
with light and electron microscopes. Neither dose caused a signiﬁcant dif-

                                                                          187
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


ference in body weight gain or in the weight of the testes and seminal
vesicles. The alterations observed were exfoliation of immature germ cells,
germ cell necrosis, and seminiferous tubule vacuolization. Animals treat-
ed with the extracts had an increased number of metaphases in the germ
epithelium that might be due to cytotoxic substances or substances stimu-
lating cell proliferation (45).

Pregnancy: Non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Nursing mothers
Due to the lack of safety data the crude drug should not be used by breast-
feeding mothers.

Paediatric use
Due to the lack of safety data the crude drug should not be used in chil-
dren under the age of 12 years.

Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug, extracts, ﬂuidextract, infusions, succus (pressed juice from
fresh herb) and tinctures.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated) (12)
Internal: 4.5 g of cut herb (ﬂowering top) per day, or 3.0 g cut ﬂowers for
teas (infusions) and other Galenical preparations; pressed juice of freshly
harvested herb.
Infusion: 1–2 g in 150 ml boiled water for 10–15 minutes, three times dai-
ly between meals.
Succus (pressed juice from fresh herb): 5 ml (1 teaspoon), three times dai-
ly between meals.
Fluidextract 1:1 (g/ml): 1–2 ml, three times daily between meals.
Tincture (1:5 g/ml): 5 ml, three times daily between meals.
External: sitz bath: 100 g per 20 litres of warm or hot water (12).

References
1. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
   Medicines of the Council of Europe, 2005.

188
                                                                    Herba Millefolii


2. Farmacopea homeopática de los estados unidos mexicanos. Mexico City, Se-
    cretaría de Salud, Comisión Permanente de la Farmacopea de los Estados
    Unidos Mexicanos, 1998 [in Spanish].
3. The USSR State Pharmacopoeia, 11th ed. Moscow, Meditsina, 1990.
4. British herbal pharmacopoeia. Exeter, British Herbal Medicine Association,
    1996.
5. Duke JA. Handbook of medicinal herbs, 2nd ed. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press,
    2002.
6. Bradley PR, ed. British herbal compendium. Vol. 1. Dorset, British Herbal
    Medicine Association, 1992.
7. Wichtl M. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals, English ed. [Bisset NG,
    translated and edited], Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
8. de Padua LS, Bunyapraphatsara N, Lemmens RHMJ, eds. Plant resources of
    South-East Asia, No. 12(1). Leiden, Backhuys Publishers, 1999.
9. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
10. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
11. Evans WC. Trease and Evans pharmacognosy, 15th ed. Edinburgh, WB Saun-
    ders, 2002.
12. Blumenthal M, Goldberg A, Brinckmann J, eds. Herbal medicine. Expanded
    Commission E monographs. Austin, TX, American Botanical Council, 2000.
13. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
14. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
15. Rauchensteiner F, Nejati S, Saukel J. The Achillea millefolium group (Aster-
    aceae) in Middle Europe and the Balkans: a diverse source for the crude drug
    Herba Millefolii. Journal of Traditional Medicine, 2004, 21:113–119.
16. Mahler P. Zur Wirkung der Bittermittel auf die Magensaftssekretion [The
    action of bitters on the secretion of gastric juice]. Zeitschrift Gesamte Ex-
    perimentelle Medizin, 1926, 51:267–277 [in German].
17. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India, Part I. Vol. I, 1st ed. New Delhi,
    Government of India Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of
    Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 1990 (reprinted 2001).
18. Lesiovskaya EE et al, eds. Pharmacotherapy with the principles of phytother-
    apy. Moscow, Geotar-Med, 2003 [in Russian].
19. Hagers Handbuch der Drogen [CD ROM]. Heidelberg, Springer Verlag,
    2003 [in German].
20. Caceres A et al. Plants used in Guatemala for the treatment of gastrointesti-
    nal disorders. 1. Screening of 84 plants against enterobacteria. Journal of Eth-
    nopharmacology, 1990, 30:55–73.

                                                                               189
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


21. Mahady GB et al. In vitro susceptibility of Helicobacter pylori to botanical
    extracts used traditionally for the treatment of gastrointestinal disorders.
    Phytotherapy Research, 2005, 19:988–991.
22. Athanassova SS, Roussinov K. Pharmacological studies of Bulgarian plants
    with a view to anticonvulsive effect. Critical Reviews of the Academy of Bul-
    garian Sciences, 1965, 18:691–694.
23. Goldberg AS et al. Isolation of the anti-inﬂammatory principles from Achil-
    lea millefolium (Compositae). Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 1969,
    58:938–941.
24. Mascolo N et al. Biological screening of Italian medicinal plants for anti-in-
    ﬂammatory activity. Phytotherapy Research, 1987, 1:28–31.
25. Yasukawa K et al. Inhibitory effect of the methanol extracts from Composi-
    tae plants on 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate-induced ear oedema in
    mice. Phytotherapy Research, 1998, 12:484–487.
26. Tunon H, Olavsdotter C, Bohlin L. Evaluation of anti-inﬂammatory activity
    of some Swedish medicinal plants. Inhibition of prostaglandin biosynthesis
    and PAF-induced exocytosis. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1995, 48:61–76.
27. Lyss G et al. A sesquiterpene and sesquiterpene lactones from the Achillea
    millefolium group possess anti-inﬂammatory properties but do not inhibit
    the transcription factor NF-KB. Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Let-
    ters, 2000, 10:13–15.
28. Rekka EA, Kourounakis AP, Kourounakis PN. Investigation of the effect of
    chamazulene on lipid peroxidation and free radical processes. Research Com-
    munications in Molecular Pathology and Pharmacology, 1996, 92:361–364.
29. Nikonorow M. Investigation of the antipyretic action of native medicinal
    plants. Acta Poloniae Pharmaceutica, 1939, 3:23–56.
30. Hoerhammer L. Flavone concentration of medicinal plants with regard to
    their spasmolytic action. Congress Scientiﬁca Farmicia, Conference Commu-
    nications, 1962, 21:578–588.
31. Mlinaric A et al. Screening of selected plant extracts for in vitro inhibitory ac-
    tivity on HIV-1 reverse transcriptase (HIV-1 RT). Pharmazie, 2000, 55:75–77.
32. Fokina GI et al. Experimental phytotherapy of tick-borne encephalitis.
    Soviet Progress in Virology, 1991, 1:27–31.
33. Anonymous. Final report on the safety assessment of yarrow (Achillea mille-
    folium) extract. International Journal of Toxicology, 2001, 20(Suppl 2):79–84.
34. Guin JD, Skidmore G. Compositae dermatitis in childhood. Archives of Der-
    matology, 1987, 123:500–502.
35. Hausen BM et al. alpha-Peroxyachifolid and other new sensitizing sesquiter-
    pene lactones from yarrow (Achillea millefolium L., Compositae). Contact
    Dermatitis, 1991, 24:274–280.
36. Paulsen E, Andersen KE, Hausen BM. Compositae dermatitis in a Danish
    dermatology department in one year (I). Results of routine patch testing with
    the sesquiterpene lactone mix supplemented with aimed patch testing with
    extracts and sesquiterpene lactones of Compositae plants. Contact Dermati-
    tis, 1993, 29:6–10.

190
                                                                   Herba Millefolii


37. Rucker G, Manns D, Breuer J. Peroxides as plant constituents. 8. Guaiano-
    lide-peroxides from yarrow, Achillea millefolium L., a soluble component
    causing yarrow dermatitis. Archives of Pharmacology (Weinheim), 1991,
    324:979–981 [in German].
38. Schempp CM, Schopf E, Simon JC. Plant-induced toxic and allergic derma-
    titis (phytodermatitis). Hautarzt, 2002, 53:93–97 [in German].
39. Uter W et al. Occupational contact urticaria and late-phase bronchial asthma
    caused by compositae pollen in a ﬂorist. American Journal of Contact Der-
    matitis, 2001, 12:182–184.
40. Bisset NG, Wichtl M, eds. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals, 2nd ed.
    Stuttgart, Medpharm GmbH Scientiﬁc Publishers, 2001.
41. Rodrigues E, Towers GHN, Mitchell JC. Biological activities of sesquiter-
    pene lactones. Phytochemistry, 1976, 15:1573–1580.
42. Graf U et al. Genotoxicity testing of different types of beverages in the Dros-
    ophila wing Somatic Mutation and Recombination Test. Food and Chemical
    Toxicology, 1994, 32:423–430.
43. de Laszlo H, Henshaw PS. Plant materials used by primitive peoples to affect
    fertility. Science, 1954, 119:626–631.
44. Barnes CS, Price JR, Hughes RL. An examination of some reputed antifertil-
    ity plants. Lloydia, 1975, 38:135–140.
45. Montanari T, de Carvalho JE, Dolder H. Antispermatogenic effect of Achil-
    lea millefolium L. in mice. Contraception, 1998, 58:309–313.




                                                                              191
                     Fructus Momordicae




Deﬁnition
Fructus Momordicae consists of the fresh (1) or the dried fruits of Mo-
mordica charantia L. (Cucurbitaceae).

Synonyms
Momordica balsamina Blanco, M. chinensis Spreng., M. elegans Salisb.,
M. indica L. (2, 3).

Selected vernacular names
African cucumber, amargoso, ampalaya, art pumpkin, asorosi, assorossi,
balsam apple, balsam pear, Balsambirne, balsamina, balsamino, ban kareli,
baramasiya, barbof, bitter cucumber, bitter gourd, bitter melon, bitter
pear melon, bobobo, broomweed, calaica, caprika, carailla, carilla, cera-
see, concombre, condiamor, coraillie, cun de amor, cundeamor, ejirin, em-
busabusu, eyezom, futoreishi, goya, haagalakaayi, hagalakai, ‘ha, ‘hail,
kaakara kaaya, kabiral, kaippa, kakara, kakayi, kakiral, kakle, kakral,
karala, kãravella, kãravellí, karawila, karela, karla, karlara, karolla, kathila,
khoor qua, khyar carilla, kokouli, kugua tea, kuguazi, lenzaa, lumba-lum-
ba, lumbuzi, ma ra, machete, maha, maiden apple, maiden’s blush, mana-
mat, mange kuli, mara, mara khee nok, margoze, mbosa, mbunbulu, melao
de sao caetano, meleni, mexicaine, miniklalasni, momotica, mreah, muw,
nagareishi, nania nania, nara cheen, nguene, nigauri, nyanyra, nyinya,
okookoo, pagel, paharkai, palia, panaminik, papari, papayilla, papilla,
paria, pavakka, pavel, ‘phak, paroka, pavackkai, pavakkachedi, pepino
montero, peria, periya laut, phakha, pom kouli, pomme nerveille, pomme
z’indiens, pomme-cooli, qara à mor, qisaul-barri, quisaul-barri, serimen-
tok, seripupa, saga, sail, salara, sorosi, sorrow see, sushavi, tasplira, tofah
al, uchhe, ulhimar, varivallí, wild balsam pear, wild sopro, yesquin, zague
zrou (1, 3, 4, 5–9).

Geographical distribution
Pantropical distribution and cultivated widely (3).

192
                                                         Fructus Momordicae


Description
A monoecious, annual climbing vine up to 5 m long. Stem 5-ridged, with
simple tendrils. Leaves alternate, petiolate, broad blade ovate to subor-
bicular or ovate-reniform in outline, 2.5–10.0 × 3.0–12.5 cm with 3–9 deep
palmate lobes quite variable in size. Unisexual solitary ﬂowers, yellow to
orange, 3.5 cm in diameter; male ﬂowers on a 0.5–3.0 cm long peduncle
bearing an apical bract up to 2.2 cm long, and 2.0–5.5 cm long pedicel;
female ﬂowers on a 0.2–5.0 cm long peduncle bearing an apical bract of up
to 1.2 cm long, and pedicel 1.0–10 cm in length. Fruits, ﬂeshy, oblong-
fusiform-cylindrical, irregularly warty, usually 3–11 cm, but can be up to
45 cm in length × 2–8 cm in diameter, orange, dehiscing. Seeds, 8–16 ×
4–10 × 2.5–3.5 mm, brown, testa ornamented (3, 7, 10).

Plant material of interest: fresh or dried fruits
General appearance
Fleshy, oblong-fusiform-cylindrical, irregularly warty, usually 3–11 cm,
but cultivars can be up to 45 cm in length × 2–8 cm in diameter, green
(young) to orange (old), dehiscing. Seeds, 8–16 × 4–10 × 2.5 × 3.5 mm,
brown, testa ornamented (3, 7, 10).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: characteristic; taste: bitter (10).

Microscopic characteristics
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Powdered plant material
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

General identity tests
Macroscopic examination (3, 7, 10).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (11).

Foreign organic matter
None (1).

                                                                       193
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Total ash
Not more than 8.5% (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 0.6% (1).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 28% (1).

Alcohol-soluble extractive
Not less than 6% (1).

Loss on drying
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (12). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (12)
and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (11) and pesticide residues (13).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (11).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (11).

Chemical assays
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Major chemical constituents
A variety of primary and secondary constituents have been reported in the
fruits of M. charantia. Characteristic constituents include sterols, tri-
terpenes and bioactive proteins (A- and B- momorcharins; sterols (e.g. dau-
costerol); triterpenes, goyaglycosides a–h, goyasaponins I–III, cucurbit-
acins and their glycosides such as momordicosides E1, F1, F2, F–K. Gallic
acid, gentisic acid, catechin, chlorogenic acid and epicatechin are the most
frequently found low-molecular-weight phenolics (5, 14–20, 22, 23).
Structures of representative major constituents are presented below.

194
                                                                                                                                                Fructus Momordicae

         HO                                                  HO

                           O                                                O                                             O
    All =                                            Glc =         OH                             Xyl =           OH
         HO                                                  HO                                           HO
                  OH OH                                                     OH                                            OH

-D-allopyranosyl                                -D-glucopyranosyl                             -D-xylopyranosyl
                                                                                                                  R1          R2          R3
                                                                             Momordicoside I                      Glc          H          H

                                                                            Momordicoside F2                      All          H          H
                                   H3 C H
                                                                            Momordicoside F1                      Glc          H         CH3
                                   CH3                         CH3
                  H                          H                              Momordicoside G                       All          H         CH3
         R2                                                        O
                              H                        H3C                   Goyaglycoside a                      Glc      OCH3           H
                                                                   R3
 H           O         H           CH3                                       Goyaglycoside b                      All      OCH3           H

O                                                                            Goyaglycoside c                      Glc      OCH3          CH3
      H3 C       CH3
R1                                                                           Goyaglycoside d                      All      OCH3          CH3

                                                                             Goyaglycoside e                      All          H          Glc

                                                                             Goyaglycoside g                      All      OCH3           Glc
                                   H3 C H
                                    CH3                            CH3
                                             H
                                                                   O
                                                                            Momordicoside K R = CH3
              OHC              H                       H3C
                                                                   R
    H                     H         CH3                                      Momordicoside L R = H
HO                                  O
                               H
        H3C      CH3                Glc

                                                                                                                                         OH
                                   H3 C H                                                                                 H3 C H           H O
                                   CH3                                                                                    CH3                     CH3
                                             H                     CH3                                                              H
                                                 O                                                                                         H      OH
                              H                                             O                         H3 C            H             HO
                                                       H3C                                                                                 H3C
                                                 All
                                                                            Glc
 H           O         H           CH3                                                                        H           CH3
                                                                                        O O
O                                                                                 OH            H
      H3C        CH3                                                                            H3C     CH3
Glc                                                                         HO
                     Goyaglycoside f                                                    OH                        Goyaglycoside h


Goyasaponin I                                                  H3C CH3

              R=H
                                                           H
Goyasaponin II                                                                                        Goyasaponin III
                                                                                 O
              R = Xyl                       CH3        CH3
                                                                            O                                                             H3C    CH3
             CO2H
                                        H        H         CH3
                      O O                                      CH3
                              H                                                                                                      H
            OH                                          HO              O
                               H3C      CHO
  HO                                    HO             O       O                                                        CH3        CH3            CO2H
HO
                      O                      CH3
                                                                                            CO2H      H           H        H         CH3
HO               O                                                      O               O
                                                                                                  O O
        OH                                   OH OH
                                            O O                    O             H3 C       O             H3 C     CH3

                 OH                 O R                    CH3                          O
                               HO                                                       Glc       O
                                            OH             OH OH                                  Xyl




                                                                                                                                                              195
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Used as an antidiabetic agent, an emetic, a laxative and a tonic (1, 6).
   Although a number of case-reports and pilot studies have suggested
that various preparations of the fruit may improve glucose tolerance, fast-
ing blood glucose levels and glycosuria (24–31), none of the trials were
randomized or blinded. Furthermore, the dosage, toxicity and adverse
events have not been systematically assessed. Adequately powerful, ran-
domized, placebo-controlled trials are needed to properly assess the safe-
ty and efﬁcacy of preparations of the fruit before therapeutic recommen-
dations can be made.

Uses described in traditional medicine
Used to treat anaemia, arthritis, colds, fever, gout, infertility, kidney
stones, peptic ulcers, stomach ache and worms (5, 7).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Effects on streptozotocin-induced diabetes
The effects of a dried ethanol extract of the fruit pulp (1 kg fruit pulp mi-
nus seeds in 1500 ml 95% ethanol) were investigated in a normal glucose-
primed rat model and streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Oral admin-
istration of the extract, at a dose of 500.0 mg/kg body weight (bw), reduced
the plasma glucose levels in normal rats by 10–15% after 1 hour. In rats
with streptozotocin-induced diabetes, the extract signiﬁcantly improved
the oral glucose tolerance (p < 0.002) and reduced plasma glucose by 26%
at 3.5 hours while metformin caused a 40–50% reduction after 1, 2 and
3.5 hours (32).
    A diet containing the crude drug (30.0 g/kg bw) was fed to mice with
streptozotocin-induced diabetes daily for 21 days. The serum glucose
concentration of mice fasting for 12 hours and 2 hours after a meal was
determined on the 21st day of the experiment. The results demonstrated
that the serum glucose levels of diabetic mice were signiﬁcantly higher
than those of the mice in the normal control group (p < 0.01). After treat-
ment for 21 days, the serum glucose concentrations of the treated dia-
betic mice were signiﬁcantly lower than those of the mice in the strepto-
zotocin-induced diabetic control group (p < 0.01), but were still higher
than the normal control group (33).

196
                                                          Fructus Momordicae


   Alcohol- and aqueous extracts of the fruit pulp (1:1) (50.0, 100.0 and
200.0 mg/kg bw per day) were evaluated in a pilot study (plasma glucose
> 180 mg/dl, 21 days), a chronic study in alloxanized rats (plasma glucose
> 280.0 mg/dl, 120 days) and streptozotocin-treated mice (plasma glucose
> 400.0 mg/dl, 60 days). The maximum antihyperglycaemic effect oc-
curred with an aqueous extract at week 3, at a dose of 200.0 mg/kg bw per
day. In chronic alloxanized rats, treatment with the aqueous extract led to
a reduction of 64.33%, 66.96%, 69.7% and 70.53% in plasma glucose
levels after 1, 2, 3 and 4 months of treatment, respectively. In mice with
chronic streptozotocin-induced diabetes, treatment with the aqueous ex-
tract led to a mean reduction of 15.37%, 18.68% and 22.86% in plasma
glucose levels on days 40, 50 and 60, respectively (34).
   Another similar study that examined the hypoglycaemic potency of
the crude drug in rats with streptozotocin-induced diabetes found no ef-
fect (35). In this investigation the animals were maintained on a semi-
synthetic diet containing 0.5% freeze-dried bitter gourd powder for
6 weeks. The excretion of glucose, protein, urea and creatinine was moni-
tored throughout the experiment. Plasma glucose, albumin, urea and chol-
esterol were analysed at the end of the experiment. No beneﬁcial effects
were observed (35).
   The anti-hyperglycaemic effects of three extracts of the crude drug
were assessed in rats. Three different aqueous extracts of powdered fresh
or dried whole fruits were prepared and orally administered to rats with
streptozotocin-induced diabetes. An aqueous extract of the powdered
fresh unripe whole fruits was the most active, and, at a dose of 20.0 mg/kg
bw, reduced fasting blood glucose by 48%, an effect comparable to that of
glibenclamide. The aqueous extract was tested for nephrotoxicity, hepa-
totoxicity and elevation of liver enzymes and showed no signs of nephro-
toxicity or hepatotoxicity (36).
   The antidiabetic activity of an aqueous extract of the fruit was assessed
in KK-Ay mice with type 2 diabetes with hyperinsulinaemia. The extract
reduced the blood glucose of KK-Ay mice 3 weeks after oral administra-
tion (p < 0.01) and also signiﬁcantly lowered the serum insulin of KK-Ay
mice under similar conditions (p < 0.01). However, the extract did not af-
fect the blood glucose in normal mice. In KK-Ay mice treated with the
extract, blood glucose was signiﬁcantly decreased in an insulin tolerance
test. Moreover, the muscle content of facilitative glucose transporter iso-
form 4 (GLUT4) protein in the plasma membrane fraction of muscle sig-
niﬁcantly increased in the mice that received the extract orally when com-
pared with that of the controls (p < 0.01) (37). In a follow-up study, the
antidiabetic activity of the extract combined with exercise was investi-

                                                                        197
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


gated in KK-Ay mice. The extract in combination with exercise reduced
the blood glucose concentration of KK-Ay mice 5 weeks after oral ad-
ministration daily for 5 weeks (p < 0.001), and also signiﬁcantly lowered
the plasma insulin of KK-Ay mice under similar conditions (p < 0.01).
The blood glucose concentration following treatment with the extract
plus exercise was lower than that following treatment with the extract
only or exercise only, 5 weeks after the administration. Administration of
the extract combined with exercise decreased blood glucose in a glucose
tolerance test (38).
Effect on insulin resistance
In a study in rats, the effect of the crude drug on insulin resistance, a
major contributor to the development of hyperglycaemia, was assessed
in vivo. The effects of different doses (100.0, 200.0 and 400.0 mg per day)
of alcohol extracts or aqueous extracts of the fruits (1 kg of fruit to 500 ml
ethanol) on the metabolic parameters (body weight and serum glucose
insulin and triglyceride levels) of rats fed fructose were studied. Feeding
fructose for 15 days increased serum glucose and insulin levels markedly
and triglyceride levels marginally when compared with the controls
(75.46 versus 55.59 mg/dl, 6.26 versus 15.04 mg/dl and 50.93 ver-
sus 41.1 mg/dl, respectively). Treatment with 400.0 mg/day of aqueous
extract (1 kg in 500 ml water) for 15 days substantially reduced hyper-
glycaemia and hyperinsulinaemia induced by a diet high in fructose (39).
   The antidiabetic activity of an aqueous extract of the fruit was investi-
gated in KK-Ay mice, an animal model having type 2 diabetes with
hyperinsulinaemia. Intragastric administration of an aqueous extract of
the fruit reduced the blood glucose of KK-Ay mice after 3 weeks of intra-
gastric administration (p < 0.01) and also signiﬁcantly lowered the se-
rum insulin (p < 0.01). However, the extract did not affect the blood glu-
cose in normal mice. Blood glucose in treated KK-Ay mice was
signiﬁcantly decreased in an insulin tolerance test (p < 0.01) (37).
   The activity of the fruit juice was assessed in vitro on streptozotocin-
treated RIN cells and isolated islet cells, and in vivo in mice. It was found
that feeding juice caused a reduction in streptozotocin-induced hypergly-
caemia in mice. The juice reduced the streptozotocin-induced lipid per-
oxidation in pancreas of mice, RIN cells and islets. It also reduced the
streptozotocin-induced apoptosis in RIN cells indicating the mode of
protection of the juice on RIN cells, islet cells and pancreatic beta-cells
(40). The activity of the fruit juice on the distribution and number of al-
pha, beta and delta cells in the pancreas of rats with streptozotocin-in-
duced diabetes was determined using immunohistochemical methods. The
results suggested that there was a signiﬁcant (p < 0.004) increase in the

198
                                                            Fructus Momordicae


number of beta cells in treated animals, as compared with untreated dia-
betic rats, but their number was still signiﬁcantly smaller than that ob-
tained for normal rats. There was also a signiﬁcant (p < 0.006) increase in
the number of delta cells in rats with streptozotocin-induced diabetes
compared to non-diabetic rats, but the number of alpha cells did not
change. These data indicate that oral administration of the crude drug may
renew the beta cells in rats with streptozotocin-induced diabetes or alter-
natively may permit the recovery of partially destroyed beta cells (41).
   The effect of the fruit juice on rats fed a hyperinsulinaemic high-fat
diet was investigated. In a dose–response study (0.375, 0.75 and 1.5%
freeze-dried juice administered in rations), oral glucose tolerance was im-
proved in rats fed a high fat (30%) diet supplemented with freeze-dried
juice at a dose of 0.75% or higher (p < 0.05). At the highest dose, treated
rats had lower energy efﬁciency (p < 0.05) and tended to have a lower
visceral fat mass (p = 0.10). In a subsequent experiment, rats habitually fed
a high fat diet either continued to consume the diet or were switched to a
high fat + fruit juice, low fat (7%), or low fat + fruit juice (0.75%) diet for
7 weeks. Rats which had been switched to the high fat + fruit juice diet
gained less weight and had less visceral fat than those fed the high fat diet
(p < 0.05). Supplementation of the high fat diet with the crude drug im-
proved insulin resistance, lowered serum insulin and leptin, but raised
free fatty acid concentration in the serum (p < 0.05) (42).
Antihypercholesterolaemic activity
A long-term (10-week) feeding experiment measured the effect of a fruit
extract (10 ml 100% fruit juice/kg bw) on blood plasma and tissue lipid
proﬁles in normal rats and rats with streptozotocin-induced type 1 diabe-
tes. The results showed a signiﬁcant (p < 0.05) increase in plasma non-
esteriﬁed cholesterol, triglycerides and phospholipids in rats with strep-
tozotocin-induced diabetes, accompanied by a decrease in high-density
lipoprotein-cholesterol. A moderate increase in the plasma lipid peroxi-
dase product, malondialdehyde, and about a twofold increase in kidney
plasma lipid peroxidase was also observed. The treatment of diabetic rats
with the fruit extract over a 10-week period returned these levels to nor-
mal. In addition, the extract exhibited an inhibitory effect on membrane
plasma lipid peroxidase under in vitro conditions (43).
    The effects of a freeze-dried powder of the fruit on serum glucose lev-
els and lipid parameters of the serum and liver were studied in rats fed
diets supplemented with cholesterol and without cholesterol. For 14 days,
rats were fed the diets either containing the freeze-dried powder at 0.5, 1
or 3% without added dietary cholesterol (experiment 1) or containing
1% powder with or without 0.5% cholesterol and 0.15% bile acid (ex-

                                                                           199
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


periment 2). Dietary intake of powdered crude drug resulted in a consis-
tent decrease in serum glucose levels in rats fed cholesterol-free diets, but
not in those fed cholesterol-enriched diets, although no dose–response
was noted. The crude drug had no effect on serum lipid parameters, ex-
cept for high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol levels, which were elevated,
indicating an anti-atherogenic activity. In addition, the crude drug caused
a marked reduction of hepatic total cholesterol and triglyceride levels
both in the presence and absence of dietary cholesterol (44).
Antiviral activity
MAP30 (Momordica anti-HIV protein of 30 kDa), isolated from the plant
material, is capable of inhibiting infection of HIV type 1 (HIV-1) in
T lymphocytes and monocytes as well as replication of the virus in in-
fected cells. An investigation of the effect of MAP30 on HIV-1 integrase
suggests that the protein exhibits a dose-dependent inhibition of HIV-1
integrase. In the presence of 20 ng of viral substrate, 50 ng of target sub-
strate, and 4 μM integrase, total inhibition was achieved at equimolar con-
centrations of the integrase and the antiviral proteins, with a median ef-
fective concentration of 1 μM (45).
   A protein (MRK29), isolated from the fruit and seed, inhibited HIV-1
reverse transcriptase by 50% at a concentration of 18 μg/ml. MRK29, at a
concentration of 0.175 μg/ml, reduced viral core protein, p24, expression
in HIV-infected cells by 82%. MRK29 also produced a 3-fold increase in
tumour necrosis factor activity (46).
Xenobiotic metabolism
The effects of a fruit juice (10 ml of 100% pure juice) on streptozotocin-
induced diabetes on tissue-speciﬁc cytochrome P450 (CYP) and gluta-
thione-dependent xenobiotic metabolism was investigated in rats. Results
demonstrated that rats with streptozotocin-induced diabetes exhibited an
increase (35–50%) in cytochrome P4504A-dependent lauric acid hydroxy-
lation in liver, kidney and brain. About a twofold increase in cytochrome
P4502E-dependent hepatic aniline hydroxylation and a 90–100% increase
in cytochrome P4501A-dependent ethoxycoumarin-O-deethylase activ-
ities in kidney and brain was also observed. A signiﬁcant increase (80%,
p < 0.01) in aminopyrene N-demethylase activity was observed only in the
kidney of rats with streptozotocin-induced diabetes, and a decrease was
observed in the liver and brain of rats with streptozotocin-induced diabe-
tes. A signiﬁcant increase (77%) in NADPH-dependent lipid peroxida-
tion (plasma lipid peroxidase) in kidney of diabetic rats was also observed.
A marked decrease (65%) in hepatic glutathione content and glutathione
S-transferase activity and an increase (about twofold) in brain glutathione

200
                                                            Fructus Momordicae


and glutathione S-transferase activity was observed in diabetic rats treated
with the extract. Chronic feeding of rats with the extract reversed the ef-
fect of chronic diabetes on the modulation of both P450-dependent mono-
oxygenase activities and glutathione-dependent oxidative stress-related
lipid peroxidase and glutathione S-transferase activities (47).
    The effect of oral feeding of the fruit juice (10 ml of 100% juice) on the
hepatic cytochrome P450 and glutathione S-transferase drug-metabolizing
enzymes was investigated in rats with streptozotocin-induced diabetes. He-
patic cytochrome P450 contents, ethoxycoumarin-O-deethylase, ethoxy-
resoruﬁn-O-deethylase, aniline hydroxylase and aminopyrene N-demethylase
activities were measured in control, diabetic and juice-fed animals. Diabetic
rats exhibited a 50–100% increase in aniline hydroxylase and ethoxyresoru-
ﬁn-O-deethylase activities, which were reversed after being fed the juice. In
addition, a decrease (17–20%) in the activities of N-demethylase and ethoxy-
coumarin-O-deethylase was observed in the liver of diabetic rats. Feeding
the juice to the diabetic animals brought the level of N-demethylase close to
that of control animals, while ethoxycoumarin-O-deethylase was further
reduced to 60% of the levels in the control animals (48).
Toxicology
The effect of the fruit on certain key hepatic enzymes was investigated in
rats. A fruit juice product was administered by gavage at a daily dose of
10 ml of pure juice/kg bw for 30 days under light ether anaesthesia while
the control group received equivalent amounts of distilled water under
identical conditions (n = 10 in each group). Serum G-glutamyl transferase
and alkaline phosphatase concentrations were found to be signiﬁcantly
elevated (p < 0.001 and p < 0.01–0.001, respectively), following oral ad-
ministration of the fruit juice. No consistent signiﬁcant histopathological
changes in the liver were observed in either treatment group, although the
prevalence of dilatation and/or congestion of the central vein sinusoidal
system appeared to be twice as high following fruit juice treatment as in
the other two groups (49).
   Feeding of the fruit to normal adult rats at 0.02, 0.1 and 0.5% (dry
weight) in a semi-synthetic diet for a period of 8 weeks had no adverse
inﬂuence on the food intake, growth or organ weights of normal adult
rats. The haematological parameters of the experimental rats were also
normal. Serum cholesterol levels of the rats receiving 0.5% of the crude
drug were signiﬁcantly lower than those of the control rats (50).

Clinical pharmacology
Numerous case-reports and clinical studies have found that the juice,
fruit, and dried fruit powder have a moderate hypoglycaemic effect. These

                                                                          201
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


studies were small and were not randomized or double-blinded. Most of
them assessed the anti-diabetic effects of the crude drug in both non-
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (type II) and insulin-dependent
(type I) diabetes.
   In a pilot study, the efﬁcacy of the powdered fruit was assessed in
41 patients with diabetes. The patients were treated with varying doses of
the fruit for 6 months and the blood glucose level was reduced by up to
25% from a baseline value of 200 mg/dl and glycosylated haemoglobin
was lowered by an average of 0.5% (27).
   The effects of the fruit on blood glucose levels were assessed in pa-
tients with diabetes (26). Nineteen subjects were enrolled in the study,
including 14 patients with type I or type II diabetes mellitus, and ﬁve
healthy volunteers. The preparation used in this investigation was a pro-
tein isolated from the crude drug and termed “vegetable insulin”. The
protein extract was suspended in sterile water and administered subcuta-
neously at a concentration of 1.8 mg of protein per 40-unit dose. Nine of
the diabetic patients received 10 units of the formulation if their fasting
blood sugar was less than 180 mg/dl; 20 units when it was 180–250 mg/dl;
and 30 units when it was > 250 mg/dl. Five patients with diabetes and ﬁve
healthy volunteers received a placebo (sterile water). The primary end-
point was a decrease in fasting blood glucose, which was measured over
12 hours after administration. The results showed a mean decrease in se-
rum glucose levels for the diabetic patients receiving treatment as early as
30 minutes after administration, a 21.5% decrease from mean baseline of
295 mg/dl. After 4 hours, a maximum decrease of 49.2% in serum glucose
was observed, and at 12 hours a 28% drop persisted. In contrast, patients
administered the placebo had a 5% decrease in serum glucose over the
study period. The patients with diabetes who received treatment had sub-
stantially reduced mean baseline serum glucose concentrations, 295 mg/dl
versus a concentration in the placebo group of 210 mg/dl. No blinding,
randomization or statistical analyses were performed (26).
   One investigation reports a series of case-studies in Asian patients with
type II diabetes (n = 9), of whom eight were taking concomitant sulfonyl-
urea drugs (29). After undergoing a baseline glucose tolerance test, the
test was repeated after oral administration of the fruit juice (50 ml), and
then again after oral ingestion, approximately 0.23 kg/day, of the fried
fruit for 8–11 weeks. The glucose tolerance test performed after ingestion
of the fruit showed a reduction in glucose levels of approximately 6%
after 1 hour, but this ﬁnding was not statistically signiﬁcant. The glucose
tolerance test, done after consumption of the juice, showed a signiﬁcant
decrease in glucose levels of 12% after 1 hour (p < 0.05) and in conjunc-

202
                                                            Fructus Momordicae


tion with a glucose load resulted in a signiﬁcant improvement in glucose
tolerance (p < 0.05) without increasing insulin levels in the blood. In ad-
dition, daily consumption of the fried fruit for 8–11 weeks reduced levels
of glycosylated haemoglobin by 8% from baseline (29). However, no ran-
domization, blinding or proper controls were used in this study.
   In another small case-report study (n = 8) an improvement in blood
glucose tolerance and fasting blood glucose levels was observed in male
and female patients (38–50 years of age) with uncomplicated type II dia-
betes. Patients were treated with 50 mg/kg bw of the dried fruit powder
twice daily for 1 week (25). In addition, excretion of glucose in the urine
was reduced by day 3 and was completely absent after 7 days of treat-
ment. Mean post-treatment blood glucose levels were signiﬁcantly lower
than pre-treatment values. A decrease from 248 mg/dl to 155 mg/dl
(p < 0.001) was observed in treated patients and this difference was con-
siderably higher after the administration of 60 g of glucose. No adverse
effects were reported.
   In a similar case-report study, involving 12 patients with newly diag-
nosed type II diabetes, the effect of the crude drug on blood glucose levels
was assessed. Each patient received one of two crude drug preparations.
The ﬁrst was an aqueous extract prepared by boiling 100 g of the crude
drug in 200 ml of water until the volume was reduced to 100 ml. The sec-
ond preparation was dried fruit powder, administered at a dose of 5 g
three times daily. After 3 weeks of treatment the group using the powder
preparation showed a reduced post-prandial blood glucose level of 25%,
but the result was not statistically signiﬁcant. However, in the group re-
ceiving the aqueous extract, a signiﬁcant reduction (54%, p < 0.01) in
blood glucose was observed, as well as a reduction in glycosylated haemo-
globin from 8.37% to 6.95% (p < 0.01) (30).
   A series of case-reports involving 18 patients with newly diagnosed
type II diabetes assessed the effects of the fruit juice on blood sugar levels
(53). The results of oral administration of 100.0 ml of the fruit juice
30 minutes prior to glucose loading for a glucose tolerance test were com-
pared with the results of a glucose tolerance test done the previous day
using water as the control test substance. Seventy-three per cent of the
patients showed a moderate or signiﬁcant improvement in glucose toler-
ance test results after taking the fruit juice before the glucose tolerance
test (51). Unfortunately, the study was neither randomized nor blinded,
and the patients’ baseline characteristics were poorly described.
   In a clinical study, 22 subjects (12 healthy volunteers and 10 patients
with type II diabetes) were administered a powder of the fruit after which
the serum cholesterol and glucose tolerance were assessed (31). Oral

                                                                          203
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


administration of the powdered fruit to 10 patients with type II diabetes,
at a dose of 2.0 g/day for 11 days, reduced blood glucose and total choles-
terol levels by 10.02%. The reduction in blood glucose levels during the
glucose tolerance test was 10.64–15.15% in the patients with diabetes, and
was highly signiﬁcant (p < 0.001).
    The effects of the crude drug on fasting and post-prandial serum glucose
levels (2 hours after oral administration of 75 g glucose) were studied in
100 subjects with moderate non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. Drink-
ing the aqueous homogenized suspension of the vegetable pulp led to a sig-
niﬁcant reduction (p < 0.001) of both fasting and post-prandial serum glucose
levels. This hypoglycaemic action was observed in 86 (86%) of the patients.
Five patients (5%) showed lowering of fasting serum glucose only (24).
Immune stimulation
Cervical cancer patients have a decreased total white blood cell count,
including that of natural killer cells. Natural killer cells, one type of lym-
phocyte, play a role in eliminating cancer cells by antibody-dependent
cell-mediated cytotoxicity. A clinical study assessed the effect of the crude
drug in cervical cancer patients undergoing normal treatment (radiother-
apy). Subjects were divided into three groups:
      — normal control (women aged 35–55 years, n = 35);
      — patient control (n = 30); and
      — patient treatment (n = 30).
The women in the patient control and patient treatment groups were cer-
vical cancer patients (stage II or III) being treated with radiotherapy
(without or with addition of the crude drug). Blood samples from women
in the patient control and patient treatment groups were analysed for per-
centage of natural killer cells and concentration of P-glycoprotein. The
results showed an increased percentage of natural killer cells in the patient
control and patient treatment groups. The increase in both groups was
signiﬁcant (p < 0.05) when the percentage of natural killer cells from sec-
ond and third blood samples (taken after radiation with or without addi-
tion of the crude drug for 45 and 90 days) was compared with that from
the ﬁrst blood sample (taken before treatment). The results for the wom-
en in the patient treatment group also showed a signiﬁcant decrease of
P-glycoprotein level (p < 0.05) in the second and third blood samples
when compared with the ﬁrst blood samples. There was no signiﬁcant
difference in the P-glycoprotein (P-gp) level between the ﬁrst, second and
third blood samples from the women in the patient control group. Inges-
tion of the crude drug did not affect numbers of natural killer cells, but it
did affect the decrease of P-gp level on natural killer cell membrane (52).

204
                                                         Fructus Momordicae


Adverse reactions
The reported adverse effects of the crude drug include hypoglycaemic
coma and convulsions in children, increases in G-glutamyl transferase and
alkaline phosphatase levels, and headaches (53).

Contraindications
Owing to potential abortifacient effects and possible teratogenicity (54,
55), the seeds of the crude drug should not be taken during pregnancy.
   Owing to reported adverse events such as severe hypoglycaemia and
convulsions in children, the crude drug and its preparations should not be
administered to children or taken during breastfeeding (53).

Warnings
Patients with liver disorders should seek advice from their health care
professional before taking any crude drug preparation.

Precautions
Drug interactions
The fruit and preparations thereof may have additive effects when taken
with other glucose-lowering agents; however these interactions need to
be investigated (53).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
Momorcharins, isolated from the seeds of the crude drug have been
shown to induce early and midterm abortions in mice and were terato-
genic in cultured mouse embryos at the early organogenesis stage. Mor-
phological abnormalities were observed in the head, trunk and limbs of
the embryos (54, 55).
    The genotoxic potential of extracts of the crude drug was assessed in
the Salmonella typhimurium microsome activation assay and the alkaline
single-cell gel electrophoresis (COMET) assay. The extract did not pro-
duce a positive response in strains TA98 and TA100 with or without met-
abolic activation, but produced an increase above negative control values
in the COMET assay (56).

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Breastfeeding mothers
See Contraindications.

                                                                       205
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Paediatric use
See Contraindications.

Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug, extracts, fruit juice and tablets.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Adult daily oral dose: 10–15 ml of fresh juice (1); 2–15 g of dried crude
drug (25, 28, 30).

References
1. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India, Part I. Vol. II, 1st ed. New Delhi,
    Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Department of Indian System of Med-
    icine and Homeopathy, 1999.
2. Perry LM, Metzger J. Medicinal plants of east and southeast Asia: Attributed
    properties and uses. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1980.
3. de Padua LS, Bunyapraphatsara N, Lemmens RHMJ, eds. Plant resources of
    South-East Asia, No 12(1): Medicinal and poisonous plants – 1. Leiden, Back-
    huys Publishers, 1999.
4. Ross IA. Medicinal plants of the world. Totowa, NJ, Humana Press, 1999.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
6. Nadkarni AK. Dr. K.M. Nadkarni’s Indian materia medica. Bombay, Popu-
    lar Prakashan, 1976.
7. Medicinal plants in the South Paciﬁc. Manila, World Health Organization
    Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc, 1998 (WHO Regional Publications,
    Western Paciﬁc Series, No. 19).
8. Medicinal plants of India. Vol. II. New Delhi, Indian Council of Medical
    Research, 1987.
9. Germosén-Robineau L. ed. Farmacopea Vegetal Caribeña. 2nd ed. Leon,
    Nicaragua, Universitaria, UNAN-Leon, 2005.
10. Medicinal plants in Thailand. Vol. I. Bangkok, Department of Pharmaceuti-
    cal Botany, Faculty of Pharmacy, Mahidol University, 1996.
11. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
12. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe, 2005.

206
                                                                   Fructus Momordicae


13. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
14. Sucrow W. Constituents of Momordica charantia. I. $5, 25-stigmastadien-3-
    ol and its B-D-glucoside. Chemische Berichte, 1966, 99:2765–2777.
15. Sucrow W. Constituents of Momordica charantia. II. Two new $7-sterols
    from Momordica charantia. Chemische Berichte, 1966, 99:3559–3567.
16. Ng T, Yeung H. Bioactive constituents of Cucurbitaceae plants with special
    emphasis on Momordica charantia and Tricosanthes kirilowii. Proceedings
    5th Symposium Medicinal Plants and Spices. Seoul, Korea, 1984.
17. Yeung HW et al. Trichosanthin, A-momocharin and B-momocharin: identity
    of abortifacient and ribosome-inactivating proteins. International Journal of
    Peptide and Protein Research, 1988, 31:265–268.
18. Tse PMF et al. New ribosome-inactivating proteins from seeds and fruits of
    the bitter gourd Momordica charantia. International Journal of Biochemistry
    and Cell Biology, 1999, 31:895–901.
19. Murakami T et al. Medicinal food stuffs. XXI. Structures of new cucurbitane-
    type triterpene glycosides-a, -b, -c, -d, -e, -f, -g, and -h, and new oleanane-type
    triterpene saponins, goyasaponins I, II, and III, from the fresh fruit of Japanese
    Momordica charantia L. Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 2001, 49:54–63.
20. Xiao ZY, Chen D, Si J. [Chemical constituents of Momordica charantia.]
    Zhongcaoyao, 2000, 31:571–573 [in Chinese].
21. Okabe H, Miyahara Y, Yamauchi T. Studies on the constituents of Momordi-
    ca charantia. 3. Characterization of new cucurbitacin glycosides of the im-
    mature fruits. (1). Structures of momordicosides G, F1, F2 and I. Chemistry
    and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1982, 30:3977–3986.
22. Okabe H, Miyahara Y, Yamauchi T. Studies on the constituents of Momordi-
    ca charantia L. IV. Characterization of new cucurbitacin glycosides of the
    immature fruits. (2). Structures of bitter glycosides, momordicosides K and
    L. Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1982, 30:4334–4340.
23. Horax R. et al. Total phenolic contents and phenolic acid constituents in
    4 varieties of bitter melons (Momordica charantia) and antioxidant activities
    of their extracts. Journal of Food Science, 2005, 70:C275–280.
24. Ahmad N et al. Effect of Momordica charantia (Karolla) extracts on fasting
    and postprandial serum glucose levels in NIDDM patients. Bangladesh
    Medical Research Council Bulletin, 1999, 25:11–13.
25. Akhtar MS. Trial of Momordica charantia Linn (Karela) powder in patients
    with maturity-onset diabetes. Journal of the Pakistan Medical Association,
    1982, 32:106–107.
26. Baldwa VS et al. Clinical trial in patients with diabetes mellitus of an insulin-
    like compound obtained from a plant source. Uppsala Journal of Medical
    Science, 1977, 82:39.
27. Bielenberg J. Bittermelone-Blutzuckersenkung durch ergänzende Bilanziert
    diät mit Momordica charantia [Bitter melon-reduction of blood sugar levels
    by supplementary balanced diet with Momordica charantia]. Arztezeitschrift
    für Naturheilverfahren, 2004, 45:96–101.

                                                                                  207
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


28. Grover JK, Gupta SR. Hypogylcemic effect of seeds of Momordica charan-
    tia. European Journal of Pharmacology, 1990, 183:1026–1027.
29. Leatherdale BA et al. Improvement in glucose tolerance due to Momordica
    charantia (karela). British Medical Journal (Clinical Research Edition), 1981,
    282:1823–1824.
30. Srivastava Y. Antidiabetic and adaptogenic properties of Momordica charan-
    tia extract: an experimental and clinical evaluation. Phytotherapy Research,
    1993, 7:285–289.
31. Upadhyaya GL, Ajai K, Pant MC. Effect of karela as hypoglycemic and hypo-
    cholesterolemic agent. Journal of the Diabetic Association of India, 1985, 25:12–15.
32. Sarkar S, Pranava M, Marita R. Demonstration of the hypoglycemic action of
    Momordica charantia in a validated animal model of diabetes. Pharmacologi-
    cal Research, 1996, 33:1–4.
33. Lin XM et al. [Effects of cactus, aloe vera, Momordica charantia on reducing
    the blood glucose of diabetic mice.] Wei Sheng Yan Jiu, 2001, 30:203–205 [in
    Chinese].
34. Rathi SS, Grover JK, Vats V. The effect of Momordica charantia and Mucuna
    pruriens in experimental diabetes and their effect on key metabolic enzymes in-
    volved in carbohydrate metabolism. Phytotherapy Research, 2002, 16:236–243.
35. Patel K, Srinivasan K. Effect of dietary intake of freeze dried bitter gourd
    (Momordica charantia) in streptozotocin induced diabetic rats. Die Nah-
    rung, 1995, 39:262–268.
36. Virdi J et al. Antihyperglycemic effects of three extracts from Momordica
    charantia. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2003, 88:107–111.
37. Miura T et al. Hypoglycemic activity of the fruit of the Momordica charantia
    in type 2 diabetic mice. Journal of Nutrition Science and Vitaminology, 2001,
    47:340–344.
38. Miura T et al. Suppressive activity of the fruit of Momordica charantia with
    exercise on blood glucose in type 2 diabetic mice. Biological and Pharmaceu-
    tical Bulletin, 2004, 27:248–250.
39. Vikrant V et al. Treatment with extracts of Momordica charantia and Eugenia
    jambolana prevents hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia in fructose fed rats.
    Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2001, 76:139–143.
40. Sitasawad SL, Shewade Y, Bhonde R. Role of bittergourd fruit juice in stz-
    induced diabetic state in vivo and in vitro. Journal of Ethnopharmacology,
    2000, 73:71–79.
41. Ahmed I et al. Effects of Momordica charantia fruit juice on islet morphol-
    ogy in the pancreas of the streptozotocin-diabetic rat. Diabetes Research in
    Clinical Practice, 1998, 40:145–151.
42. Chen Q, Chan LL, Li ET. Bitter melon (Momordica charantia) reduces adi-
    posity, lowers serum insulin and normalizes glucose tolerance in rats fed a
    high fat diet. Journal of Nutrition, 2003, 133:1088–1093.
43. Ahmed I et al. Hypotriglyceridemic and hypocholesterolemic effects of anti-
    diabetic Momordica charantia (karela) fruit extract in streptozotocin-induced
    diabetic rats. Diabetes Research in Clinical Practice, 2001, 51:155–161.

208
                                                                  Fructus Momordicae


44. Jayasooriya AP et al. Effects of Momordica charantia powder on serum glu-
    cose levels and various lipid parameters in rats fed with cholesterol-free and
    cholesterol-enriched diets. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2000, 72:331–336.
45. Lee-Huang S et al. Inhibition of the integrase of human immunodeﬁciency
    virus (HIV) type 1 by anti-HIV plant proteins MAP30 and GAP31. Proceed-
    ings of the National Academy of Sciences USA, 1995, 92:8818–8822.
46. Jiratchariyakul W et al. HIV inhibitor from Thai bitter gourd. Planta Medi-
    ca, 2001, 67:350–353.
47. Raza H et al. Modulation of xenobiotic metabolism and oxidative stress in
    chronic streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats fed with Momordica charantia fruit
    extract. Journal of Biochemistry and Molecular Toxicology, 2000, 14:131–139.
48. Raza H et al. Effect of bitter melon (Momordica charantia) fruit juice on the
    hepatic cytochrome P450-dependent monooxygenases and glutathione S-
    transferases in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. Biochemical Pharmacol-
    ogy, 1996, 52:1639–1642.
49. Tennekoon KH et al. Effect of Momordica charantia on key hepatic enzymes.
    Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1994, 44:93–97.
50. Patel K, Shurpalekar KS, Srinivasan K. Inﬂuence of bitter gourd (Momordica
    charantia) on growth and blood constituents in albino rats. Die Nahrung,
    1993, 37:156–160.
51. Welihinda J et al. Effect of Momordica charantia on the glucose tolerance in
    maturity onset diabetes. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1986, 17:277–282.
52. Pongnikorn S et al. Effect of bitter melon (Momordica charantia Linn) on
    level and function of natural killer cells in cervical cancer patients with radio-
    therapy. Journal of the Medical Association of Thailand, 2003, 86:61–68.
53. Basch E, Gabardi S, Ulbricht C. Bitter melon (Momordica charantia): A re-
    view of efﬁcacy and safety. American Journal of Health System Pharmacy,
    2003, 60:356–359.
54. Chan WY et al. Effects of momorcharins on the mouse embryo at the early
    organogenesis stage. Contraception, 1986, 34:537–544.
55. Yeung HW et al. Puriﬁcation and partial characterization of momorcharins,
    abortifacient proteins from the Chinese drug, kuguazi (Momordica charantia
    seeds). In: Chang HM et al., eds. Advances in Chinese medicinal materials
    research. Singapore, World Scientiﬁc, 1985:311–318.
56. Basaran AA et al. An investigation of some Turkish herbal medicines in Sal-
    monella typhimurium and in the COMET assay in human lymphocytes.
    Teratogenesis, Carcinogenesis and Mutagenesis, 1996, 16:125–138.




                                                                                 209
                        Fructus Myrtilli




Deﬁnition
Fructus Myrtilli consists of the dried ripe fruits of Vaccinium myrtillus L.
(Ericaceae) (1).

Synonyms
Vaccinium angelosums Dulac, V. montanum Salisb., Myrtilis niger Gilib. (2).

Selected vernacular names
Adara, aiges, airadech, airelle myrtille, aires, airolle myrtille, arándano,
baceri mirtillo, baggiole, bagolo, Bickbeere, bilberry, bimbelas, blackber-
ry, blaeberry, Blaubeere, Blaubessen, blue berry, blueberry, bog bilberry,
brimbelle, burren myrtle, European blueberry, harilik, hei guo yue ju,
Heidelbeere, Heidelbeerfruchten, huckleberry, maurettes, mirtillo nero,
myrtille, petit myrtle, uva del boschi, uva orsina, waldbeere, whortle-
berry, wineberry (2–4).

Geographical distribution
Found in Europe and in the North American Rocky Mountains (2, 5).

Description
Trailing shrub forming large colonies from creeping rhizomes, 10–60 cm
in height; twigs green, glabrous, 3-angled. Leaves: deciduous, alternate,
short petiolate; blade broadly elliptic to ovate, 6–18 mm wide, 10–30 mm
long, apex acute to obtuse, base rounded; margin serrulate; bright green,
lower surface sparsely glandular with prominent venation. Inﬂorescence:
ﬂowers solitary or paired in leaf axils, bracts 2. Flowers: perfect, radially
symmetrical, 5-lobed; calyx lobes very short to almost absent; corolla pale
green or white to pink, broadly urceolate to globose, 4–7 mm wide, 3–5 mm
long, lobes very short and revolute; stamens 10, ﬁlaments glabrous, an-
thers awned, dehiscent by terminal pores; ovary inferior, style usually in-
cluded. Fruit: berry, oblate-globose, 5–9 mm diameter, blue to black, rare-
ly glaucous, many-seeded. Chromosome number: 2x = 2n = 24 (2).

210
                                                                 Fructus Myrtilli


Plant material of interest: dried ripe fruit
General appearance
The dried berry is a dark blue, subglobular, shrunken berry, about 5 mm
in diameter, with a scar at the lower end and coarsely wrinkled exocarp.
The pedicel may be attached or detached, and often the remains of the
style, nectar disc, and calyx are persistent at the apex of the berry, with the
calyx appearing as a circular fold. The mesocarp is purple. There are
4–5 locules, each containing many seeds; each seed is approximately 1 mm
long with a yellowish brown dimpled surface (1).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: no characteristic odour; taste: sweet and slightly bitter (1).

Microscopic characteristics
The exocarp consists of polygonal, rectangular or quadratic cells with
slightly pitted tangential walls. Groups of 2–4 cells occur, each group sur-
rounded by a thick wall, while within the groups the walls are consider-
ably thinner. The mesocarp consists of large parenchymatous cells with
scattered solitary sclereids and vascular bundles containing vessels with
spiral or helical secondary wall thickenings. The endocarp is composed
largely of groups of sclereids similar to those in the mesocarp and having
an elongated or nearly quadratic shape. The outer layer of the testa con-
sists of elongated, heavily thickened and pitted sclereids. In cross-section
these cells have U-shaped secondary walls with the unthickened side oc-
curring on the outer tangential wall. The endosperm cells are thin-walled
and contain droplets of ﬁxed oil. Calcium oxalate crystals may occur oc-
casionally in all tissues (2).

Powdered plant material
Violet-pink sclereids from the endocarp and the mesocarp and testa, usu-
ally aggregated, with thick, channelled walls; reddish brown fragments of
the epicarp consisting of polygonal cells with moderately thickened walls;
brownish yellow fragments of the outer seed testa made up of elongated
cells with U-shaped thickened walls; calcium oxalate crystals of various
sizes as clusters and prisms. Also present are parenchyma cells, vascular
bundles and oil droplets (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, thin-layer chromatography
(1, 2), and high-performance liquid chromatography (6, 7).

                                                                            211
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (8).

Foreign organic matter
Plant material complies with the test for foreign matter (1).

Total ash
Not more than 5% (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Water-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Alcohol-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Loss on drying
Not more than 12% (1).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (1). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (1)
and the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (8) and pesticide residues (9).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (8).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines on assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (8).

Chemical assays
Not less than 1.0% of tannins, expressed as pyrogallol (1).
Not less than 0.2% of anthocyanins, expressed as cyanidin-3-glucoside
chloride (2).

212
                                                                          Fructus Myrtilli


Major chemical constituents
Besides the normal organic acids (3–7%; e.g. citric acid and malic acid),
phenolic acids and other phenols, the fruits contain up to 10% tannins
(mostly catechol tannins). The major characteristic and biologically
active constituents are ﬂavonoids and anthocyanins. Examples of ﬂa-
vonol-O-glycosides in fresh bilberry juice and fruit include quer-
cetin-3-rhamnoside (quercitrin), quercetin-3-glucoside (isoquercit-
rin), quercetin-3-galactoside (hyperoside), and kaempferol-3-glucoside
(astragalin). More than 15 anthocyanins (totalling approximately
0.5%) have been identiﬁed as 3-arabinosides, 3-glucosides and 3-ga-
lactosides of ﬁve anthocyanidins: cyanidin, delphinidin, malvidin,
peonidin and petunidin, with cyanidin and delphinidin glycosides
accounting for 64% of the total anthocyanins (2, 3, 5, 10). Structures
of the 3-glucosides of cyanidin, delphinidin, malvidin, peonidin and
petunidin are presented below.


                          R1          Cyanidin    R1 = OH R2 = H              HO
               -               OH   Delphinidin   R1 = R2 = OH
          Cl                                                                            O
HO        O+                          Malvidin    R1 = R2 = OCH3
                                                                      Glc =        OH
                               R2
                                      Peonidin    R1 = OCH3 R2 = H            HO
                   3 O               Petunidin    R1 = OH R2 = OCH3                     OH
     OH             Glc                   3-monoglucosides            -D-glucopyranosyl




Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Oral use for the symptomatic treatment of dysmenorrhoea associated
with premenstrual syndrome (11), circulatory disorders in patients with
capillary leakage or peripheral vascular insufﬁciency (12–16) and oph-
thalmic disorders (17–19).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Oral use for the treatment of acute diarrhoea and local irritation or in-
ﬂammation of the mucous membranes of the mouth and throat (20).

Uses described in traditional medicine
Treatment of capillary fragility, diarrhoea, eye disorders, haemorrhoids,
intestinal disorders, skin disorders and venous insufﬁciency. Also used as
a diuretic (2, 3).

                                                                                        213
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Anti-inﬂammatory activity
An extract of the fruit containing 25% anthocyanidins had vasoprotective
and anti-oedema (anti-inﬂammatory) activities in experimental animals
(21). In rabbits, chloroform-induced skin capillary permeability was re-
duced after intraperitoneal administration of the extract at a dose of 25.0–
100.0 mg/kg body weight (bw) or intragastric administration at a dose of
200.0–400.0 mg/kg bw of anthocyanosides. The anti-inﬂammatory effect
of the extract lasted longer than that of the comparison treatments rutin
or mepyramine. Intragastric administration of the anthocyanins to rats, at
a dose of 25.0 to 100.0 mg/kg bw was effective treatment both in the skin
capillary permeability test and on vascular resistance of animals fed a vi-
tamin P-deﬁcient diet. In both the animal models (rats and rabbits), the
anthocyanins were twice as effective as the ﬂavonoid, rutin. Furthermore,
intragastric administration of the anthocyanins (dose not stated) inhibited
carrageenan-induced paw oedema in rats after intravenous injection or
topical application (21).
Antioxidant activity
An aqueous extract of the fruit inhibited copper-induced oxidation of hu-
man low-density lipoprotein in vitro. Results were obtained by measure-
ment of oxidative resistance as determined by the lag-phase preceding
conjugated diene formation; quantiﬁcation of the amount of lipoperox-
ides, as well as thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances generated, and
measurement of the modiﬁcation in the net negative electrical charge of
the lipoproteins, over a 7-hour time course experiment. Trace amounts of
the extract, at concentrations of 15 to 20 μg/ml induced statistically sig-
niﬁcant changes in the oxidation behaviour of low-density lipoprotein,
which included: prolongation of the lag-phase of conjugated diene pro-
duction (p < 0.01); reduction in the formation of lipoperoxides and of
thiobarbituric acid-reactive substances up to 7 hours and especially be-
tween 1 and 5 hours (p < 0.01); and inhibition of modiﬁcation in the net
negative charge of low-density lipoprotein. These results demonstrate
that the extract exerts potent protective action on low-density lipoprotein
particles during in vitro copper-mediated oxidation (22). An anthocya-
nin-containing extract of the fruit inhibited lipid peroxidation and hy-
droxyl radical formation with a median inhibitory concentration of
50.3 μg/ml in rat liver microsomes (p < 0.01). The extract also exhibited
superoxide scavenging activity (25.0 μg/ml, p < 0.01) (23). A study to
compare the concentration of phenolics and anthocyanins and the anti-

214
                                                              Fructus Myrtilli


oxidant activity of the berries of various Vaccinium cultivars (including
the crude drug) was performed (24). Total antioxidant capacity, measured
as oxygen radical absorbance capacity, ranged from 13.9 to 45.9 μmol/g of
fresh berries in the extract. Bilberry and the lowbush blueberries from
Nova Scotia had the highest antioxidant activity (44.6 and 45.9 μmol/g,
respectively).
   Radical scavenging properties of an extract or tea of the fruit contain-
ing anthocyanins was tested on the 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydryl radical
using electron spin resonance spectroscopy. Both the extract and the tea
were effective 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydryl radical scavengers. No direct
correlation was found between the scavenging activity and the content of
anthocyanosides and ﬂavonoids in the extract, suggesting that the cat-
echins and ascorbic acid may also play a role (25).
Pharmacokinetics
Administration to rats of a fruit extract containing anthocyanins, at a dose
of 20–40 mg/kg bw (intravenous) or 25.0 mg/kg bw (intraperitoneal) un-
derwent rapid body distribution. Elimination occurred primarily in the
urine and bile, following a three-compartment pharmacokinetic model.
After 4 hours, 20% of the dose was eliminated in the urine, regardless of
route of administration, while at 24 hours, 15% and 18% of the dose was
eliminated in the bile after intravenous and intraperitoneal administra-
tion, respectively. The anthocyanins possessed a greater afﬁnity for some
tissues, namely kidneys (79.0 μg/g tissue) and skin (27.4 μg/g tissue) than
for plasma (19.0 μg/g) (26).
    The pharmacokinetics were assessed after intravenous administration
of anthocyanosides (20.0–40.0 mg/kg bw) or oral administration to rats
(400.0 mg/kg bw). The results of the intravenous dose were the same as
those reported by Lietti and Forni (26). After a single oral administration,
the plasma concentrations of anthocyanins reached a peak after 15 min-
utes and then rapidly declined within 2 hours. The extent of cumulative
urinary and biliary elimination, together with the gastrointestinal recov-
ery, demonstrated an absorption rate of approximately 5%. No hepatic
ﬁrst-pass effect was observed. Despite the modest gastrointestinal ab-
sorption and the low absolute bioavailability (1.2% of the administered
dose), the peak levels in plasma (2.0–3.0 μg/ml) measured after the oral
treatment are in the range of biological activity reported for these sub-
stances (27).
Vascular permeability
The anthocyanins contained in the fruit are thought to have “vitamin P”
activity in that they increase the levels of intracellular vitamin C and de-

                                                                         215
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


crease capillary permeability and fragility (26). In one study, the initial
phase of renal hypertension induced by ligature of the abdominal aorta
was accompanied by a transient increase in vascular permeability. This
increase in permeability is higher in the skin and in the aorta wall than in
the blood vessels of the brain. Treatment of rats with anthocyanins from
the crude drug (dose not stated) for 12 days prior to the induction of hy-
pertension kept the blood–brain barrier permeability normal and limited
the increase in vascular permeability in the skin and the aorta wall (28). In
cholesterol-fed rabbits, administration of anthocyanidins from the crude
drug (dose not stated) did not modify the serum cholesterol levels, but
decreased the proliferation of the intima; the extracellular matrix produc-
tion; the deposition of calcium and lipid in the aorta; and decreased the
DNA and lipid contents. Alteration in the biochemical composition of
the isolated brain microvessels was also diminished. The suggested mech-
anism of action may be through an interaction of the anthocyanins with
collagen, increasing the cross-linking and thus diminishing the permeabil-
ity of small, as well as of large, blood vessels (29).
    The effects of anthocyanosides from the fruit on capillary ﬁltration in
diabetic rats were assessed. Rats with streptozotocin-induced diabetes
were randomly allocated to one of three groups to receive either Ginkgo
biloba (group A), the crude drug (group B) or no treatment (group C).
The isotopic test of capillary ﬁltration consisted of intravenously inject-
ing 99mtechnetium-labelled albumin, inducing venous compression on a
hindquarter, and measuring radioactivity externally on the limb before,
during and after removal of venous compression. Interstitial albumin re-
tention and the ratio of the amplitudes of the low- and high-frequency
peaks (LF/HF ratio), an index of lymphatic function obtained by the fast
Fourier transform of the last part of the radioactivity curve, were calcu-
lated. In streptozotocin-treated animals, the isotopic test was performed
at a mean age of 97 days (time 1) and after 6 weeks (time 2) and 12 weeks
(time 3) of treatment (6 and 12 weeks after time 1). At time 1, albumin
retention was signiﬁcantly higher in the three groups of diabetic rats than
in the control rats, with no signiﬁcant difference between these groups. In
group B, albumin retention decreased signiﬁcantly at times 2 and 3
(p = 0.015). In group C, albumin retention increased signiﬁcantly from
time 1 to time 3 (p < 0.0005). In group A, albumin retention increased
slightly (not statistically signiﬁcantly) between time 1 and time 3. In
groups A and C, the LF/HF ratio signiﬁcantly increased with time
(p < 0.0005) and the levels at time 3 were signiﬁcantly higher than those in
control rats (p < 0.0001). In group B, the LF/HF ratio remained unchanged
from time 1 to time 3 and was similar to the values found in the control

216
                                                                Fructus Myrtilli


rats. The study demonstrated that anthocyanins from the crude drug are
effective in preventing the increase in capillary ﬁltration and the failure of
lymphatic uptake of interstitial albumin in diabetic animals (30).
    The effects of an extract of the crude drug containing anthocyano-
sides on ischaemia reperfusion injury were investigated in the hamster
cheek pouch microcirculation. Ischaemia was induced by clamping the
cheek pouch for 30 min followed by 30 min of reperfusion. The micro-
vasculature was visualized by a ﬂuorescence technique. The extract was
administered orally at a dose of 100.0 mg/kg bw for 2 and 4 weeks. The
outcomes measured were the number of leukocytes adhering to venular
vessel walls, the perfused capillary length, the increase in permeability
and the changes in arteriolar diameter. Ischaemia and reperfusion were
associated with an increased number of leukocytes sticking to venules, a
decreased number of perfused capillaries and increased permeability.
Administration of the extract decreased the number of leukocytes stick-
ing to the venular wall and preserved the capillary perfusion; the increase
in permeability was signiﬁcantly reduced after reperfusion. Administra-
tion of the extract preserved the arteriolar tone and induced the appear-
ance of rhythmic changes in the diameter of arterioles, indicating that the
extract reduced microvascular impairments due to ischaemia reperfusion
injury, with preservation of endothelium, attenuation of leukocyte adhe-
sion and improvement of capillary perfusion (31).
    The effects of anthocyanins from the crude drug on arteriolar vasomo-
tion were assessed in cheek pouch microcirculation of anaesthetized ham-
sters and in skeletal muscle microvasculature of unanaesthetized hamster
skin fold window preparation. Intravenously injected anthocyanins in-
duced vasomotion in cheek pouch arterioles and terminal arterioles with
higher frequency in smaller vessels. In the arteriolar networks of skeletal
muscle, anthocyanins increased vasomotion frequency and amplitude in
all orders of vessel. The results indicate that anthocyanins are effective in
promoting and enhancing changes in arteriolar rhythmic diameter that
play a role in the redistribution of microvascular blood ﬂow and intersti-
tial ﬂuid formation (32).

Clinical pharmacology
Cataracts and glaucoma
In one randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving
50 patients with mild senile cortical cataracts, a standardized extract of the
crude drug containing 25% anthocyanosides was administered at a dose
of 180.0 mg twice daily together with vitamin E, in the form of dl-toco-
pheryl acetate (100 mg twice daily) or placebo for 4 months. The treatment

                                                                           217
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


retarded the progression of cataracts in 97% (p < 0.05) of the subjects
(n = 25) compared to 76% in the control group (n = 25) (17). However,
several studies have also shown that administration of vitamin E alone
reduces the incidence of cataracts (18).
   Extracts of the crude drug have also been tested in the treatment of
glaucoma. In one small pilot study, eight patients with glaucoma were
given a single dose of an extract of the crude drug containing 200.0 mg of
anthocyanosides. Electroretinography showed improvements in all pa-
tients; however no further details are available (18, 33).
Diabetic retinopathy
In one report, oral administration of bilberry anthocyanins, at a dose of
600.0 mg/day for 6 months, to 32 patients with diabetes reduced the num-
ber of capillaries with lesions from 34% before treatment to 14% after
treatment (2). In another investigation, 31 patients with various types of
retinopathy were treated with an extract of the crude drug to determine
the effect of anthocyanins on the retinal vessels. In patients with diabetic
retinopathy, a reduction in permeability and tendency to haemorrhage
was observed (34). In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
study the effect of the crude drug was investigated in 40 patients with dia-
betic and/or hypertensive retinopathy. Patients were divided into two
equal groups and either treated with a crude drug extract equivalent to
115 mg anthocyanosides daily, or a placebo, for 1 month. Retinopathy in
the 20 patients receiving placebo remained unchanged and these patients
were treated for a further 30 days. At the end of treatment (30 or 60 days),
detectable retinal abnormalities (seen in 13/20 patients in the treatment
group initially) were reduced in 10 patients and, in three, symptoms were
unchanged. In the placebo group, retinal abnormalities (seen in 15/20 pa-
tients initially) were unchanged after 30 days, but when they were given
active treatment for a further 30 days, 79% of patients improved (19).
Myopia
An extract of the crude drug containing 160 mg anthocyanins was inves-
tigated for its effect on myopia in 26 patients. Improvement of scotopic
function was observed in all patients, but the effects were only statisti-
cally signiﬁcant in subjects with slight myopia (a 6 diopters) (b2 wave,
p < 0.01). In subjects with medium myopia, photopic function was sig-
niﬁcantly improved (critical central fusion frequency, p < 0.005; b1 wave,
p <0.01) (2). The effect of a preparation containing anthocyanosides and
vitamin E on refraction, visual acuity and eye fundus was assessed in
36 patients with progressive myopia. After an observation period of
14.5 months an average increase of myopia by 0.53 diopters per eye was

218
                                                                Fructus Myrtilli


demonstrated. The ﬁnal examination of 29 patients showed a stabilization
of the fundus alterations, as well as a stable, or an improved visual acuity.
In seven patients, a moderate deterioration of the partial or overall medi-
cal condition occurred (35).
Night vision improvement
The effect of the crude drug on the enhancement of night vision was ﬁrst
investigated by researchers in studies of Royal Air Force pilots during the
Second World War. In these case-reports, the investigators suggested that
there were improvements in night vision less than 24 hours after ingesting
an unknown quantity of bilberry jam (36). Administration of the bilberry
jam resulted in improved nighttime visual acuity, faster adjustment to
darkness and faster restoration of visual acuity after exposure to glare (37,
38). Later studies supported these observations (36, 39, 40). Two studies
showed that the administration of four tablets of an unspeciﬁed extract of
the crude drug (100 mg per tablet) increased the light sensitivity threshold
(36). However, these results have not been duplicated in controlled clini-
cal trials. In one study, the ability of anthocyanosides in a single oral dose
to improve night vision in normal individuals was evaluated during three
night vision tests: full-ﬁeld scotopic retinal threshold, dark adaptation
rate and mesopic contrast sensitivity (41). The study, a double-blind, pla-
cebo-controlled, cross-over study, involved 16 young normal volunteers
who were randomly assigned to one of four different regimens of single
oral administrations of 12, 24 and 36 mg of anthocyanosides or a placebo,
with a 2-week washout period between doses. Scotopic retinal threshold,
dark adaptation rate and mesopic contrast sensitivity were measured im-
mediately before, and 4, 8 and 24 hours after treatment. No signiﬁcant
effect of the treatment was found on any of the three night vision tests
during the 24 hours following administration. The study concluded that
single oral administration of 12–36 mg of anthocyanosides lacked any sig-
niﬁcant effect on night vision tests relevant to the military (41).
    In a controlled study, the ability of multiple oral doses of anthocyano-
sides to improve night vision in normal individuals was assessed. The ef-
fect was tested in the three night vision tests: scotopic retinal threshold,
dark adaptation rate and mesopic contrast sensitivity. This double-blind,
placebo-controlled, cross-over study involved 18 young normal volun-
teers who were randomly assigned to one of three different regimens of
oral administrations of 12.0 and 24.0 mg/day anthocyanosides or a pla-
cebo, given twice daily for 4 days. A 2-week washout period was allowed
between each 4-day treatment period. Scotopic retinal threshold, dark ad-
aptation rate and mesopic contrast sensitivity tests were done 1 day be-
fore treatment and on days 1, 2, 3 and 4 during the treatment period.

                                                                           219
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Again, no signiﬁcant effect on any of the three above-mentioned night
vision tests was found (42).
    Another double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over study conduct-
ed on US Navy SEALs personnel investigated the effect of bilberry on
night visual acuity and night contrast sensitivity. The test subjects were
young men with good vision; eight received a placebo and seven received
active capsules containing 160 mg of bilberry extract (25%) for 3 weeks.
After the 3-week treatment period, a 1-month washout period was used
to allow any effect of bilberry on night vision to dissipate. In the second
3-week treatment period, the eight subjects who ﬁrst received the placebo
were given active capsules, and the seven who ﬁrst received active cap-
sules were given the placebo. Night visual acuity and night contrast sen-
sitivity were again tested throughout the 3-month experiment. The results
of this investigation showed no difference in night visual acuity during
any of the measurement periods when examining the average night visual
acuity or the last night visual acuity measurement during active and pla-
cebo treatments. In addition, there was no difference in night contrast
sensitivity during any of the measurement periods when examining the
average night contrast sensitivity or the last night contrast sensitivity
measurement during active and placebo treatments (36).
Premenstrual syndrome and dysmenorrhoea
In a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial the efﬁ-
cacy of a fruit extract containing anthocyanosides on the symptoms of
dysmenorrhoea associated with premenstrual syndrome was assessed.
Women with primary dysmenorrhoea received either the extract corre-
sponding to 115 mg anthocyanosides per day or a placebo for 5 days be-
ginning 3 days before menstruation for two consecutive cycles. A signiﬁ-
cant improvement in pelvic/lumbosacral pain (p < 0.01), mammary tension
(p < 0.01), nausea (p < 0.01), and heaviness of the lower limbs (p < 0.01)
was reported as compared with the baseline (11).
Venous insufﬁciency and varicose veins
The ability of an extract of the crude drug containing anthocyanins to
improve symptoms associated with varicosities and telangiectases was as-
sessed. Twenty-seven patients with varices, varicosities and telangiectases
were treated orally with 4–6 tablets, equivalent to 100–150 mg anthocya-
nins daily for 10–15 days per month for 2 months. An improvement in a
variety of symptoms was observed including a reduction in bruising (12).
In one study in humans, oral administration of a crude drug extract con-
taining anthocyanins (dose not stated) to patients with varicose veins and
ulcerative dermatitis reduced capillary leakage (16). The biochemical and

220
                                                              Fructus Myrtilli


histochemical data suggested that the anthocyanins protect the capillary
walls by a mechanism that involves increasing the endothelium barrier-
effect through stabilization of the membrane phospholipids and by in-
creasing the biosynthetic processes of the acid mucopolysaccharides of
the connective ground substance, by restoring the altered mucopolysac-
charidic pericapillary sheet. A marked increase in newly formed capillar-
ies and collagen ﬁbrils induced by the anthocyanins was also observed
(16). In another study, 47 patients with varicose veins were treated with a
commercial extract of the crude drug at a dose of 480 mg/day for 30 days
(14). Signiﬁcant improvements in microcirculation, oedema, feelings of
heaviness, parasthesia, pain and skin dystrophy were observed (p < 0.01).
A signiﬁcant reduction in oedema was observed by day 15 (p < 0.01). In
another similar study, 15 patients with polyneuritis due to peripheral vas-
cular insufﬁciency were given 480 mg/day of the extract and a signiﬁcant
improvement in microcirculation was noted (43). Furthermore, a review
of uncontrolled trials from 1979 to 1985 involving a total of 568 patients
with venous insufﬁciency of the lower limbs showed that an anthocya-
nin-containing extract of the crude drug was effective in rapidly decreas-
ing symptoms and improving both venous microcirculation and lymph
drainage (13).
Pharmacokinetics and toxicology
A randomized parallel dietary intervention study measured the serum
quercetin concentrations of 40 healthy subjects who were consuming
fruit (including the crude drug) or normal Finnish diets. Twenty subjects
consumed 100 g/day of berries (blackcurrants, lingon berries and bilber-
ries) for 8 weeks. Twenty subjects consuming their normal diets served as
controls. Fasting blood samples were obtained 2 weeks prior to the study,
at baseline, and at 2, 4 and 8 weeks. Intake of quercetin was assessed from
3-day food records collected at baseline and at 8 weeks. The serum quer-
cetin concentrations were signiﬁcantly higher in the subjects consuming
berries than in subjects in the control group (p = 0.039; analysis of vari-
ance with repeated measures). During the period of berry consumption
the mean serum concentrations of quercetin ranged between 21.4 and
25.3 Mg/l in the group consuming the berries; this was 32–51% higher
than in the control group. According to the 3-day food records, there was
no difference in quercetin intake at baseline, but at 8 weeks the intake was
12.3 mg/day (mean) in the group consuming the berries and 5.8 ± 0.6 mg/
day in the control group (p = 0.001) (44).
    Long-term oral administration to humans of doses equivalent to
180 mg/kg anthocyanins per day for 6 months produced no toxic ef-
fects (2).

                                                                         221
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Adverse reactions
No information was found.

Contraindications
No information was found.

Warnings
If diarrhoea persists for more than 3–4 days, or is associated with ab-
dominal pain or rectal bleeding, consult a health care professional.

Precautions
Drug interactions
In one ex vivo study, oral administration of an extract of the fruit contain-
ing anthocyanins inhibited platelet aggregation when given at doses of
480 mg daily for 30–60 days (45).
   Therefore, fruit extracts have antiplatelet aggregating properties
and very high doses should be used cautiously in patients with haem-
orrhagic disorders and those taking anticoagulant or antiplatelet
drugs.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
No mutagenicity or carcinogenicity has been reported.

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
No teratogenic effects were observed in animals treated with 3–5 times
the human dose (2).

Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug, extracts, tablets and capsules.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Internal: daily dosage of crude drug 20–60 g (2). Extracts: 80–160 mg of
extract standardized to 25% anthocyanosides (three times daily). The
dose of anthocyanosides is 20–40 mg three times daily (20). External: 10%
decoction; equivalent preparations (20).

222
                                                                     Fructus Myrtilli


References
1. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe, 2005.
2. Upton R et al., eds. Bilberry fruit. Vaccinium myrtillus L. In: American herb-
    al pharmacopeia. Santa Cruz, CA, American Herbal Pharmacopeia, 2001.
3. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
4. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
5. Bisset NR, Wichtl M, eds. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals, English
    ed. Boca Raton, FL, Medpharm, 1994.
6. Chandra A, Rana J, Li Y. Separation, identiﬁcation, quantitation, and method
    validation of anthocyanins in botanical supplement raw materials by HPLC
    and HPLC-MS. Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry, 2001, 49:3515–
    3521.
7. Ichiyanagi T et al. Structural dependence of HPLC separation pattern of an-
    thocyanins from bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus L.). Chemical and Pharma-
    ceutical Bulletin, 2004, 52:628–630.
8. WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
9. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
10. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisi-
    er, 1995.
11. Colombo D, Vescovini R. Studio clinico controllato sull’efﬁcacia degli anto-
    cianosidi del mirtillo nel trattamento della dismenorrea essenziale [Con-
    trolled trial of anthocyanosides from Vaccinium myrtillus in primary dys-
    menorrhea]. Giornale Italiano di Ostetricia e Ginecologia, 1985, 7:1033–1038
    [in Italian].
12. Coget J, Merlen JF. Etude clinique d’un nouvel agent de protection vascu-
    laire le difrarel 20, compose d’anthocyanosides extraits du vaccinum myrtil-
    lus. Phlébologie, 1968, 21:221–228.
13. Bratman S, Kroll D. Bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus). In: The natural pharma-
    cist: clinical evaluation of medicinal herbs and other therapeutic natural prod-
    ucts. Roseville, CA, Prima Publishing, 1999.
14. Ghiringhelli C, Gregoratti L, Marastoni F. Attivitá capillarotropa di antocia-
    nosidi ad alto dosaggio nella stasi da ﬂebopatia [Capillarotropic activity of
    anthocyanosides in high doses in phlebopathic stasis]. Minerva Cardioangio-
    logia, 1978, 26:255–276 [in Italian].
15. Jayle GE, Aubert L. Action des glucosides d’anthocyanes sur la vision sco-
    topique et mésopique du sujet normal. Thérapie, 1964:19:171–185 [in
    French].

                                                                                223
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


16. Mian E et al. Antocianosidi e parete dei microvasi nuovi aspetti sul modo
    d’azione dell’effetto protettivo nelle sindromi da absorme fragilitá capillare
    [Anthocyanosides and the walls of the microvessels: further aspects of the
    mechanism of action of their protective effect in syndromes due to abnormal
    capillary fragility]. Minerva Medica, 1997, 68:3565–3581 [in Italian].
17. Bravetti G. Preventive medical treatment of senile cataract with vitamin E
    and anthocyanosides: clinical evaluation. Annali di Ottalmologia e Clinica
    Oculistica, 1989, 115:109.
18. Head K. Natural therapies for ocular disorders part two: cataracts and glau-
    coma. Alternative Medicine Review, 2001, 6:141–166.
19. Perossini M et al. Diabetic and hypertensive retinopathy therapy with Vac-
    cinium myrtillus anthocyanosides (Tegens): Double-blind placebo controlled
    clinical trial. Annali di Ottalmologia e Clinica Oculistica, 1987, 113:1173 [in
    Italian].
20. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs:
    therapeutic guide to herbal medicines. Austin, TX, American Botanical
    Council, 1998.
21. Lietti A, Cristoni A, Picci M. Studies on Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyano-
    sides. I. Vasoprotective and antiinﬂammatory activity. Arzneimittel-For-
    schung, 1976, 26:829–832.
22. Laplaud PM, Lelubre A, Chapman MJ. Antioxidant action of Vaccinium
    myrtillus extract on human low density lipoproteins in vitro: initial observa-
    tions. Fundamental & Clinical Pharmacology, 1997, 11:35–40.
23. Martín-Aragón S et al. Antioxidant action of Vaccinium myrtillus L. Phyto-
    therapy Research, 1998, 12:S104–S106.
24. Prior RL et al. Antioxidant capacity as inﬂuenced by total phenolic and an-
    thocyanin content, maturity, and variety of Vaccinium species. Journal of Ag-
    ricultural and Food Chemistry, 1998, 46:2686–2693.
25. Wasek M et al. Electron spin resonance assessment of the antioxidant poten-
    tial of medicinal plants. Part I. Contribution of anthocyanosides and ﬂa-
    vonoids to the radical scavenging ability of fruit and herbal teas. Acta Pola-
    niae Pharmaceutica, 2001, 58:283–288.
26. Lietti A, Forni G. Studies on Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides. II. As-
    pects of anthocyanins pharmacokinetics in the rat. Arzneimittel-Forschung,
    1976, 26:832–835.
27. Eandi M. Post-marketing investigation on Tegens preparation with respect
    to side effects. 1987. Cited in Morazzoni P, Bombardelli E. Vaccinium myrtil-
    lus I. Fitoterapia, 1996, 67:3–29.
28. Detre Z et al. Studies on vascular permeability in hypertension: Action of
    anthocyanosides. Clinical Physiology and Biochemistry, 1986, 4:143–149.
29. Kadar A et al. Inﬂuence of anthocyanoside treatment on the cholesterol-
    induced atherosclerosis in the rabbit. Paroi Arterielle, 1979, 5:187–205.
30. Cohen-Boulakia F et al. In vivo sequential study of skeletal muscle capillary
    permeability in diabetic rats: effect of anthocyanosides. Metabolism, 2000,
    49:880–885.

224
                                                                      Fructus Myrtilli


31. Bertuglia S, Malandrino S, Colantuoni A. Effect of Vaccinium myrtillus
    anthocyanosides on ischaemia reperfusion injury in hamster cheek pouch
    microcirculation. Pharmacology Research, 1995, 31:183–187.
32. Colantuoni A et al. Effects of Vaccinium myrtillus anthocyanosides on arte-
    rial vasomotion. Arzneimittel-Forschung, 1991, 41:905–909.
33. Caselli L. Studio clinico ed elettroretinograﬁco sull’attivitá degli antociano-
    sidi [Clinical and electroretinographic study on activity of anthocyanosides].
    Archivio di Medicina Interna, 1985, 37:29–35 [in Italian].
34. Scharrer A, Ober M. [Anthocyanosides in the treatment of retinopathies (au-
    thor’s translation)]. Klinische Monatsblatter für Augenheilkunde, 1981,
    178:386–389.
35. Politzer M. [Experiences in the medical treatment of progressive myopia (au-
    thor’s translation)]. Klinische Monatsblatter für Augenheilkunde, 1977,
    171:616–619.
36. Muth ER, Laurent JM, Jasper P. The effect of bilberry nutritional supple-
    mentation on night visual acuity and contrast sensitivity. Alternative Medi-
    cine Review, 2000, 5:164–173.
37. Jayle GE et al. Étude concernant l’action sur la vision nocturne [Study con-
    cerning the action of anthocyanoside extracts of Vaccinium myrtillus on night
    vision]. Annales d’oculistique, 1965, 198:556–562 [in French].
38. Terrasse J, Moinade S. Premiers résultats obtenus avec un nouveau facteur
    vitaminique P «les anthocyanosides» extraits du Vaccinium myrtillus. Presse
    Medicale, 1964, 72:397–400 [in French].
39. Gloria E, Peria A. Effetto degli antocianosidi sulla soglia visiva assoluta [Ef-
    fect of anthocyanosides on the absolute visual threshold]. Annali di Ottal-
    mologia e Clinica Oculistica, 1966, 92:595–607 [in Italian].
40. Sala D et al. Effect of anthocyanosides on visual performances at low illumi-
    nation. Minerva Oftalmologia, 1979, 21:283–285.
41. Levy Y, Glovinsky Y. The effect of anthocyanosides on night vision. Eye,
    1998, 12:967–969.
42. Zadok D, Levy Y, Glovinsky Y. The effect of anthocyanosides in a multiple
    oral dose on night vision. Eye, 1999, 13:734–736.
43. Pennarola R et al. The therapeutic action of the anthocyanosides in microcir-
    culatory changes due to adhesive-induced polyneuritis. Gazzette Medicina
    Italiana, 1980, 139:485–491 [in Italian].
44. Erlund I et al. Consumption of black currants, lingonberries and bilberries
    increases serum quercetin concentrations. European Journal of Clinical Nu-
    trition, 2003, 57:37–42.
45. Puilliero G et al. Ex vivo study of the inhibitory effects of Vaccinium myrtillus
    anthocyanosides on human platelet aggregation. Fitoterapia, 1989, 60:69–75.




                                                                                 225
              Radix Panacis Quinquefolii




Deﬁnition
Radix Panacis Quinquefolii consists of the dried roots of Panax quinque-
folius L. (Araliaceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Aralia quinquefolia Dec. & Planch., Ginseng quinquefolium Wool, Panax
americanum Raf. (4).

Selected vernacular names
Ameerika zensen, American ginseng, American white ginseng, Amerika
ninjin, Amerikanischer Ginseng, Amerikanne Ginseng, Canadian gin-
seng, Canadian white ginseng, Chinese seng, ﬁve ﬁngers, garantogen, gin-
seng americano, ginseng d’Amerique, hsi-yang-shen, hua-ch’i-seng, hua-
ch’i-senh, little Indian, man root, matc’etasa, ninsin, North American
ginseng, seng, seiyou ninjin, shang, wenane, wild American ginseng, xi
yang shen, xi-yang-shen (5, 6).

Geographical distribution
Native to Canada and the United States, and cultivated in France and
northern China (7).

Description
Herb, up to more than 1 m high; rootstock fusiform, up to 2 cm in diam-
eter; stem straight, slender, subterete, often striate; leaves 3 or 4, 5 (3–7)-
foliolate, petiole slender, up to 10 (rarely to 15) cm long, leaﬂets thin, el-
liptic to obovate, up to 16 cm long and 8.5 cm broad (the basal ones
smaller, often ovate), acute to rounded at the base, acuminate at the apex,
conspicuously and often doubly serrate, the teeth deltoid, acute, the peti-
olules up to 4.5 cm long, the principal veins slightly raised on both sur-
faces, lateral veins 5–9, ascending; peduncle slender, straight, up to 10
(rarely to 30) cm long, the bractlets deltoid to lanceolate, acute, 2–5 mm
long; pedicels 15–40 per umbel, up to 12 mm long, swollen distally; calyx

226
                                                     Radix Panacis Quinquefolii


carnose, cupuliform, at anthesis about 2 mm long and 2 mm in diameter,
the lobes deltoid, acute, about 0.5 mm long; petals greenish-white, mem-
branous, slightly granular-papillose distally, oblong, about 1.5 mm long
and 1 mm broad, subacute and slightly incurved at the apex; ﬁlaments
carnose, narrowed distally, 1–1.5 mm long, the anthers oblong, about
1 mm long, obtuse at both ends; summit of the ovary ﬂattened or concave,
styles 2, carnose, slightly curved, 1–1.5 mm long; locules 2; fruit laterally
ﬂattened, transversely oblong, up to 7 mm long and 10 mm broad, longi-
tudinally sulcate, the wall at length dry, seeds 2, oblong, 4–5 mm long,
3–4 mm broad (4).

Plant material of interest: dried roots
General appearance
Fusiform, cylindrical or conical, 1–12 cm, sometimes up to 20 cm in length,
and up to 2.5 cm in diameter at the crown, with one or more stem scars.
Externally pale yellow to golden, exhibiting transverse striations and lin-
ear lenticels, and showing ﬁne and dense longitudinal wrinkles, and rootlet
scars. If stem base is present, then scales thin and perishing (differs from
P. ginseng, in which scales at base of stem are ﬂeshy and persistent). The
middle and lower part of the main root with 1 or more lateral roots, most-
ly broken off. Sometimes, the upper part with rhizome showing distinct
annulations, rounded or semi-rounded stem scars, and bearing adventi-
tious roots, or broken off. Texture heavy and hard, not easily broken, frac-
ture short, fractured surface is white to ivory, with distinct aromatic odour
and rings of secretory canals present in secondary phloem, slightly starchy,
bark exhibiting yellowish brown dotted resin canals, cambium ring brown-
ish yellow, wood exhibiting less distinct radiate striations (1, 2).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: slight and characteristic; taste: slightly bitter and sweet (1, 2).

Microscopic characteristics
In contrast to Panax ginseng, transverse sections of P. quinquefolius show
abundant large, thin-walled cork parenchyma cells. Secondary phloem is
characterized by conspicuous air lacunae; abundant starch-containing
storage parenchyma; few sieve elements, found in small groupings; and
rings of schizogenous secretory canal lined with 6–8 epithelial cells that
lack starch. Xylem is characterized by abundant starch-containing stor-
age parenchyma and a few tracheary elements, composed of non-ligniﬁed
tracheids and slightly ligniﬁed spiral or reticulated vessels lacking secre-
tory canals and found in isolation or in small groupings. Druse crystals

                                                                             227
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


are sometimes present within vascular parenchyma cells. Diarch or tri-
arch primary xylem is in the centre of root starch grains, simple or 2–5-
compound, range from 5–6 μm in diameter (1, 8).

Powdered plant material
Pale yellowish brown powder with a slightly aromatic odour. Shows cork
cells; yellowish secretory canals and yellowish brown secretory sub-
stances in and outside the canal; fragments of parenchyma cells contain
starch grains, simple or 2–5-compound, range from 5–6 μm in diameter;
tracheids with spiral or reticulate thickening rings; irregular shaped bast
ﬁbres, lumen smooth, 200–1200 μm in length; rosettes of calcium oxalate
30–33 μm in diameter (1, 8).

General identity tests
Macroscopic (1, 2) and microscopic examinations (1, 8); DNA analysis
(9); and thin-layer chromatography (1, 2, 10) and high-performance liq-
uid chromatography (1, 2, 11, 12) for the presence of 24(R)-pseudogin-
senoside F11 and the absence of ginsenoside Rf.

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (13).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2.0% (1).

Total ash
Not more than 8.0% (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 1% (2).

Water-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Alcohol-soluble extractive
Not less than 30% (2).

Loss on drying
Not more than 10.0% (1).

228
                                                   Radix Panacis Quinquefolii


Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (14). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (14)
and the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (13) and pesticide residues (15).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (13).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (13).

Chemical assays
Not less than 2% total ginsenosides of Rg1, Re and Rb1 (2).

Major chemical constituents
Major constituents of the root are the damamrane triterpene saponins
collectively known as ginsenosides. As in the case of Panax ginseng, the
ginsenosides of P. quinquefolius are derivatives of protopanaxadiol or
protopanaxatriol, with the majority of these compounds (e.g. ginseno-
sides Rb1, Rb2, Rc, Rd, Re, Rg1 and Ro) being common to both spe-
cies. However, there are quantitative and qualitative differences. The
total ginsenoside content of Panax quinquefolius is higher than that of
Panax ginseng whereas the ginsenosides Rf and Rg2 do not occur in
P. quinquefolius. On the other hand, 24(R)-pseudoginsenoside F11 is
found in P. quinquefolius, but not in P. ginseng. In cultivated P. quin-
quefolius, however, the dominant ginsenosides are malonyl (m)-Rbl,
Rb1 and Re with the percentages of m-Rb1 and Rb1 being almost iden-
tical. (Rg1 levels and total ginsenosides are much higher in wild than in
cultivated P. quinquefolius.) (6). Furthermore, the combined amount of
Rbl and m-Rb1 often exceeds half of the total ginsenoside content with
the total malonyl ginsenoside (m-Rb1, m-Rb2, m-Rc and m-Rd) con-
tent being approximately 40% (5, 6). In a study of wild American gin-
seng, total ginsenosides range from 1–16%, with the majority being in
the range of 4–5% (16). Polysaccharides of biological signiﬁcance in-
clude quinquefolans A, B and C (17). The structures of ginsenosides
Rb1, Rb2, Rc, Rd, Re, Rg1 and pseudoginsenoside F11 are presented
below.

                                                                        229
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants

                                                                               HO

                     O                           HO            O                             O                      HO         O
Araf =           OH                     Arap =           OH               Glc =        OH                 Rha =          CH3
                                                                                  HO
      HO
                         OH                                    OH                            OH                          OH OH

-L-arabinofuranosyl                -L-arabinopyranosyl                 -D-glucopyranosyl           -L-rhamnopyranosyl

                                                H3C
                                    HO H
                                                 H
                                                                         CH3
                                                                                  Ginsenoside Rb1 R = Glc
                                                              O
                               CH3       CH3         H             H3C
HO                                                                                Ginsenoside Rb2               R = Arap
               H         H          H        CH3
                                            O
           O O
     OH            H3C       CH3
                                            R                                      Ginsenoside Rc               R = Araf
                                                          O
HO
                                                 OH
           O
                                            HO                                     Ginsenoside Rd               R=H
           Glc
                                                          OH

                              H3C                                                                         H3 C                 OH
                   HO H                                                                           HO H                              CH3
                               H                                                                            H
                                                              CH3                                                   O
                                            O                                                                              H    CH3
               CH3       CH3       H             H3C                                         CH3      CH3       H

 H        H        H          CH3                                                        H        H       CH3
                                       OH                                   HO
HO
                         H                                                        H                   H
   H3C        CH3 O                                                                H3C      CH3 O
                                        O
  HO                                                                              HO
                               OH
               O         HO                                                                  O
       OH                               OH                                             OH
  HO                                                                              HO
               O                                                                             O
               R       Ginsenoside Rg1                    R=H                                Rha

                       Ginsenoside Re                    R = Rha                       Pseudoginsenoside F11


Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
While some preliminary studies have indicated that the root may be use-
ful as an adjunct for the management of postprandial hyperglycaemia in
subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus (18–22), the numbers of subjects
participating in the studies was too small to enable any solid conclusions

230
                                                     Radix Panacis Quinquefolii


to be drawn. Further randomized controlled clinical trials with larger
populations of patients with diabetes and better methodology are needed
before therapeutic recommendations can be made.

Uses described in traditional medicine
Used orally as a diuretic, digestive, tonic and a stimulant (5, 6, 23). Used
to enhance stress resistance, and to treat cough, loss of appetite, colic,
vomiting, insomnia, neuralgia, rheumatism and headaches (5, 24).

Experimental pharmacology
Antihyperglycaemic activity
Intraperitoneal administration of an aqueous extract of the root exhibited
signiﬁcant hypoglycaemic activity in mice with alloxan-induced hyper-
glycaemia when administered at a dose of 10 g/kg body weight (bw)
(p < 0.01). Activity-guided fractionation of the extract led to isolation of
three glycans, the quinquefolans A, B and C, which displayed signiﬁcant
hypoglycaemic activity (p < 0.01, p < 0.05, p < 0.01, respectively) in normal
mice and in mice with alloxan-induced hyperglycaemia at a dose of 10, 100
and 10 mg/kg bw, of quinquefolans A, B and C, respectively (17).

Antioxidant activity
The antioxidant activity of a root extract containing 8% ginsenosides
was assessed in the metal chelation, afﬁnity to scavenge 1,1-diphenyl-2-
picrylhydrazyl stable free radical, and peroxyl and hydroxyl free radical
assays. Dissociation constants (Kd) for the extract to bind transition
metals were of the order of Fe2+ > Cu2+ > Fe3+ and corresponded to the
afﬁnity to inhibit metal-induced lipid peroxidation. In a metal-free lino-
leic acid emulsion, the extract exhibited a signiﬁcant concentration-
dependent (0.01–10 mg/ml) mitigation of lipid oxidation as assessed by
the ammonium thiocyanate method (p a 0.05). The extract also showed
strong 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl radical scavenging activity up to a
concentration of 1.6 mg/ml (r2 = 0.996). The extract also inhibited the
non-site-speciﬁc deoxynucleic acid (DNA) strand breakage caused by
Fenton agents, and suppressed the Fenton-induced oxidation of a 66 Kd
soluble protein obtained from mouse brain over a concentration range
of 2.0–40.0 mg/ml (25). The free radical scavenging capacity and anti-
oxidant effects of the crude drug appear to be related to the concentra-
tion of ginsenosides Rb1 and Rb2 in the plant (26).
    The effect of saponins, isolated from the root, on the oxidation of low-
density lipoprotein (LDL) was measured. The potential of the saponins for
reducing LDL oxidation as well as limiting the ability of oxidized-LDL

                                                                          231
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


(Ox-LDL) to impair endothelium-dependent relaxation in rat aortic rings
was speciﬁcally assessed. Native LDL (0.2 or 0.3 mg/ml) was incubated
with the saponins (0.25–1.0 mg/ml), with vitamin C (50 μM) as a control.
Oxidation was initiated with copper sulfate at 37 ºC for 0–24 h. The results
demonstrate that the saponins reduced lipid peroxide levels concentration-
dependently and also reduced alterations in relative electrophoretic mobil-
ity of Ox-LDL in a similar manner. Furthermore, measurement of content
of phospholipid fractions indicated that the saponins reduced the conver-
sion of phosphatidylcholine to lysophosphatidylcholine in Ox-LDL (27).
Further investigations indicated that lower concentrations of saponins
(1.0–100.0 μg/ml) in combination with vitamin C (1.0–10.0 μM) signiﬁ-
cantly enhanced the protective effects of the saponins. Pretreatment with
the saponins (1.0–100.0 μg/ml) resulted in concentration-dependent inhibi-
tion of LDL oxidation and prolongation of lag time (28).
Antithrombotic activity
The effects of a root extract on thrombin-induced endothelin release were
investigated using cultured human umbilical vein endothelial cells. En-
dothelial cells were pretreated with 1, 10 and 100.0 μg/ml of the extract
and then incubated for 4 and 24 h with thrombin. The results demon-
strated that the concentration of endothelin was signiﬁcantly decreased in
a concentration-dependent, time-related manner (at 4 h, 50% inhibitory
concentration (IC50) = 5.1 μg/ml; at 24 h, IC50 = 6.2 μg/ml). Furthermore,
pretreatment of cultured endothelial cells with NG-nitro-L-arginine, a
nitric oxide synthetase inhibitor, signiﬁcantly (p < 0.05) inhibited throm-
bin-induced endothelin release by the extract indicating that the effect
was partly due to release of nitric oxide (29).
Hormonal activity
A methanol extract of the root (100 g root in methanol 600 ml) did not
signiﬁcantly bind to either estrogen receptor A or B at a concentration of
20.0 μg/ml, but did increase expression of pS2 (an estrogen-sensitive gene)
in S-20 cells (30).
   The expression of the estrogen-regulated gene pS2 in MCF-7 breast
cancer cells was assessed after treatment of the cells with a decoction of
the roots. The extract and estradiol were equally able to induce RNA ex-
pression of pS2, and the extract caused a dose-dependent decrease in cell
proliferation (p < 0.005) (31). The estrogenic effects of a decoction of the
roots on the expression of pS2, an estrogen-regulated gene, in breast can-
cer cell lines MCF-7, T-47D and BT-20 was evaluated by Northern and
Western blot analyses. Competitive studies were also performed with gin-
seng in combination with tamoxifen. The ginseng extract (600.0 μg) and

232
                                                      Radix Panacis Quinquefolii


estradiol (10−9 M) induced the expression of pS2 RNA and protein in
MCF-7 cells, whereas tamoxifen suppressed expression. Neither the ex-
tract nor estradiol induced increased pS2 expression in T-47D or BT-
20 cell lines. Although estradiol exhibited a proliferative effect and ta-
moxifen had an inhibitory effect, the extract of the crude drug had no
signiﬁcant effect on cell proliferation. Because the extract does not ex-
hibit a proliferative effect, it may play a protective role against breast can-
cer rather than serving as a mitogen (32).
   Intragastric administration of the powdered root, at a dose of 100.0 mg/
kg bw for 28 days, enhanced mounting behaviour of male rats and in-
creased sperm counts in rabbit testes (33, 34). The effect of ginsenoside-
Rb1 on the secretion of luteinizing hormone was investigated in vivo and
in vitro. Male rats were orchidectomized 2 weeks or subjected to swim
training for 1 week before catheterization via the right jugular vein. They
were intravenously injected with ginsenoside-Rb1 (10.0 μg/kg bw) or sa-
line 15 minutes before a challenge with gonadotropin-releasing hormone
or a 10 minute-swim. Blood samples were collected at several time inter-
vals following intravenous injection of ginsenoside-Rb1. In the in vitro
experiment, male rats were decapitated and their anterior pituitary glands
were either bisected or enzymatically dispersed. The dispersed anterior
pituitary gland cells were primed with dihydrotestosterone for 3 days,
and then challenged with ginsenoside-Rbl (10.0 and 100.0 μM, n = 8) for
3 h. The concentrations of luteinizing hormone or testosterone in samples
were measured by radioimmunoassay. Administration of ginsenoside-
Rb1 did not alter the levels of plasma luteinizing hormone in either intact
or orchidectomized rats, but signiﬁcantly increased concentration of
plasma luteinizing hormone at the termination of the 10-minute swim-
ming exercise. Administration of ginsenoside-Rb1 resulted in a lower tes-
tosterone response to gonadotropin-releasing hormone challenge or
swimming exercise than seen in saline-treated rats. Ginsenoside-Rb1
dose-dependently increased the release of luteinizing hormone from both
hemi-anterior pituitary gland tissues and the dihydrotestosterone-primed
dispersed anterior pituitary gland cells in vitro. These results suggest that
ginsenoside-Rb1 increases secretion of luteinizing hormone by acting di-
rectly on cells of rat anterior pituitary gland (34).
Immune stimulation effects
The immunostimulatory activities of an aqueous extract (1 g in 10 ml water)
and a methanol extract (1 g in 200 ml methanol) of the root were assessed in
rat alveolar macrophages. Tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNF-A) produc-
tion was used as a measure of activity. The aqueous extracts (1.0–100.0 μg/
ml) signiﬁcantly stimulated alveolar macrophage TNF-A release. By con-

                                                                           233
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


trast, a methanol extract containing ginsenosides (but no polysaccharides),
and pure ginsenoside-Rb1 were not active. Signiﬁcant TNF-A stimulating
activity was found in the extractable polysaccharide fraction (24).
   The effect of an aqueous extract of the powdered root, containing
mainly oligosaccharides and polysaccharides was assessed for immune
stimulatory activity in murine spleen cells and peritoneal macrophages.
The extract (5.0–500.0 μg/ml) stimulated the proliferation of normal
mouse spleen cells, primarily B lymphocytes. The extract activated peri-
toneal exudate macrophages leading to enhanced production of interleu-
kin-1, interleukin-6, TNF-A and nitric oxide (35).
Neurological effects
The neuroprotective effects of a hot aqueous extract of the root (no fur-
ther description available) on sodium channels were assessed, as neuronal
damage during ischaemic episodes has been associated with abnormal so-
dium ﬂuxes. An aqueous extract of the root was evaluated in tsA201 cells
transfected with cDNA expressing alpha subunits of the brain (2a) sodi-
um channel using the whole-cell patch clamp technique. The extract
(3.0 mg/ml) tonically and reversibly blocked the sodium channel in a con-
centration- and voltage-dependent manner. It shifted the voltage-depen-
dence of inactivation by 14 mV (3.0 mg/ml) in the hyperpolarizing direc-
tion and delayed recovery from inactivation, whereas activation of the
channel was unaffected. Ginsenoside Rb1, a major constituent of the ex-
tract, produced similar effects at a concentration of 150 μM (36).
    Brainstem neurons receiving subdiaphragmatic vagal inputs were re-
corded in an in vitro neonatal rat brainstem–gastric preparation. Aqueous
extracts of the root were added to the gastric compartment or to the brain-
stem compartment of the bath chamber to evaluate the peripheral gut and
central brain effects of the extracts on brainstem unitary activity. After
addition of the extract (30.0 μg/ml) to the gastric or brainstem compart-
ment, a concentration-related inhibition of neuronal discharge frequency
in the brainstem unitary activity (38.2%, p < 0.01) was observed, suggest-
ing that extract may play an important role in regulating the digestive
process and modulating brain function (37). In a subsequent study, the
pharmacological effects of P. quinquefolius cultivated in Wisconsin and of
P. quinquefolius cultivated in Illinois were compared. The results showed
that P. quinquefolius cultivated in Illinois had both a stronger peripheral
gastric and a stronger central brain modulating effect on brainstem neu-
ronal activity. The data indicated that this discrepancy was due to a differ-
ent ginsenoside proﬁle (38).
    In a formalin-induced nociception test, mice were force-fed an aque-
ous extract of the roots for 4 days. Another group of mice were fed with

234
                                                     Radix Panacis Quinquefolii


water as a placebo in a similar fashion. A two-phase formalin test was
performed in both groups. Although there was no difference between
groups in the ﬁrst phase, mice treated with the extract spent signiﬁcantly
less time in licking and biting of the injured paws in the second phase,
indicating analgesic effects (39).
    The pseudoginsenoside-F11, an ocotillol-type saponin isolated from the
roots has been shown to have antagonistic actions on morphine-induced
behavioural changes in mice. Pseudoginsenoside-F11 antagonizes mor-
phine-induced intracellular production of cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP) and antagonizes morphine-induced decreases in dopamine levels
in the limbic area of rat. The antagonistic effects of pseudoginsenoside-F11
on methamphetamine-induced behavioural and neurochemical toxicities
were studied in mice. Methamphetamine was administered intraperitone-
ally at a dose of 10.0 mg/kg bw four times at 2-hourly intervals, and pseudo-
ginsenoside-F11 was orally administered at doses of 4.0 and 8.0 mg/kg bw
twice at 4-hourly intervals, 60 min prior to methamphetamine administra-
tion. The results showed that pseudoginsenoside-F11 ameliorated the anxi-
ety-like behaviour induced by methamphetamine in the light–dark box
task, but the change was not statistically signiﬁcant. In the forced swim-
ming task, pseudoginsenoside-F11 also shortened the prolonged immobil-
ity time induced by methamphetamine. In the appetitive-motivated T-maze
task, pseudoginsenoside-F11 greatly shortened methamphetamine-induced
prolonged latency and decreased the error counts. Similar results were also
observed in the Morris water maze task, where administration of pseudo-
ginsenoside-F11 shortened the escape latency prolonged by metham-
phetamine. There were signiﬁcant decreases in the contents of dopamine,
3,4-dihydroxyphenacetic acid, homovanillic acid and 5-hydroxyindoacetic
acid in the brain of methamphetamine-treated mice (40).

Memory effects
The effect of an alcohol extract of the roots on memory was assessed in
the scopolamine-induced memory and performance deﬁcits in a spatial
learning task. Long-term oral administration of the extract protected
against scopolamine-induced amnesia and increased choline uptake in
synaptosomal preparations. Treatment with the extract did not alter brain
concentrations of norepinephrine, dopamine, 5-HT (serotonin), 3,4-hy-
droxyphenylacetic acid or 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid. The extract weak-
ly inhibited the activity of monoamine oxidase in vitro (41). Ginsenoside
Rb1, a saponin of the crude drug was found to exert beneﬁcial effects on
memory and learning, putatively through its actions on the cholinergic
system. In situ hybridization studies show that ginsenoside Rb1 increases

                                                                          235
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


the expression of choline acetyltransferase and trkA mRNAs in the basal
forebrain and nerve growth factor mRNA in the hippocampus (42).
   The effect of chronic treatment with ginsenoside Rb1 (5.0 mg/kg/day,
intraperitoneal administration for 4 days) was assessed in scopolamine-
induced amnesia. The results indicated that treatment with ginsenoside
Rb1 can partially attenuate scopolamine-induced amnesia without seda-
tive effects (43). In vitro studies show that ginsenoside Rb1 has no effect
on quinuclidinyl benzylate binding or on acetylcholinesterase activity, but
facilitates the release of acetylcholine from hippocampal slices. The in-
crease in acetylcholine release was associated with an increased uptake of
choline into nerve endings; however, calcium inﬂux was unaltered. Thus,
the ability of ginsenoside Rb1 to prevent memory deﬁcits may be related
to facilitation of acetylcholine metabolism in the central nervous system
(43). In situ hybridization studies show that ginsenoside Rb1 increases the
expression of choline acetyltransferase and trk mRNAs in the basal fore-
brain and nerve growth factor mRNA in the hippocampus (42).
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of ginsenosides A1, A2, B2 and C were studied in
rabbits in a one-component open model. Ginsenoside C (protopanaxa-
diol group ginseng saponin) had a signiﬁcantly longer half-life, greater
plasma protein binding, and lower metabolic and renal clearance than gin-
senosides A1, A2 and B2 (protopanaxatriol group ginseng saponins). All
ginsenosides except ginsenoside A1 were slowly absorbed after intraperi-
toneal administration. The ginsenosides were not found in rabbit plasma
or urine samples after oral administration. The observed differences in the
pharmacokinetics of the ginsenosides may be attributed to differences in
protein binding (44). Analysis of the ginsenosides and their sapogenins in
rabbit plasma and urine was performed. Linear relationships of peak
height ratio to weight ratio were obtained for ginsenosides (A1, 20–350 μg;
A2, 20–400 μg; B2, 20–300 μg; C, 20–500 μg), and sapogenins (panaxadiol
or panaxatriol, 10–200.0 μg) in 0.1 ml (44).
Toxicology
The effect of a standardized extract of the roots (4% ginsenosides w/w)
and individual ginsenosides (Rb1, Rb2, Rc, Rd, Re, Rf and Rg1) on CYP1
catalytic activities was assessed in vitro. The extract decreased human re-
combinant CYP1A1, CYP1A2 and CYP1B1 activities in a concentration-
dependent manner. The extract was 45-fold more potent than Panax gin-
seng in inhibiting CYP1A2. Rb1, Rb2, Rc, Rd, Re, Rf and Rg1, either
separately or as a mixture and at the levels reﬂecting those found in an
inhibitory concentration of 100.0 μg/ml of the extract, did not inﬂuence

236
                                                     Radix Panacis Quinquefolii


CYP1 activities. However, at a higher concentration of ginsenoside (50 μg/
ml), Rb1, Rb2, Rc, Rd and Rf inhibited these activities. Thus, extracts of
the root, which were not treated with calf serum or subjected to acid hy-
drolysis, inhibited CYP1 catalytic activity, but the effects were not due to
Rb1, Rb2, Rc, Rd, Re, Rf or Rg1 (45).
    Ginsenoside C was more toxic than ginsenoside A2 after intraperito-
neal administration to mice. Toxicity was not observed after oral admin-
istration of any of the ginsenosides. The genins, panaxadiol and panaxa-
triol, were more toxic and had larger volumes of distribution than the
ginsenosides (46).

Clinical pharmacology
Various extracts of the roots, with a speciﬁc ginsenoside proﬁle, are re-
ported to decrease postprandial glycaemia. An extract of the roots (con-
taining 1.66% total ginsenosides, 0.9% (20S)-protopanaxadiol ginseno-
sides and 0.75% (20S)-protopanaxatriol) was assessed on the glycaemic
index following a 75 g oral glucose tolerance test in a randomized, single-
blind study involving 12 normal volunteers. Each subject received 6 g of
the extract orally, or a placebo, 40 minutes before a 75 g oral glucose toler-
ance test. Venous blood samples were drawn at -40, 0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 90
and 120 min. Repeated measures analysis of variance demonstrated that
there was no signiﬁcant effect of the extract on incremental plasma glu-
cose or insulin or their areas under the curve; indices of insulin sensitivity
and release (PI30-0/PG30-0) calculated from the oral glucose tolerance
test were also unaffected (18).
   The effect of escalation of the dose and dosage interval of a root prod-
uct (500 mg powdered root per capsule) was assessed in individuals who
did not have diabetes to determine whether further improvements in glu-
cose tolerance (seen previously when 3 g of crude drug was taken 40 min-
utes before a 25.0 g glucose challenge) could be attained. Ten healthy vol-
unteers were randomly assigned to receive 0 (placebo), 3, 6 or 9 g of crude
drug prepared from the ground root at 40, 80 or 120 minutes before a
25.0 g oral glucose challenge. Capillary blood glucose was measured prior
to ingestion of the crude drug or placebo capsules and at 0, 15, 30, 45, 60
and 90 minutes from the start of the challenge. As compared with the
placebo, 3, 6 and 9 g of crude drug reduced postprandial incremental glu-
cose at 30, 45 and 60 minutes from the start of the challenge (p < 0.05); 3 g
and 9 g of the crude drug also did so at 90 minutes. All doses of the crude
drug reduced the area under the incremental glucose curve (3 g, 26.6%;
6 g, 29.3%; 9 g, 38.5%) (p < 0.05). The crude drug taken at different times
did not have any additional inﬂuence on postprandial glycaemia (19). In a
subsequent investigation, 10 patients with type 2 diabetes were randomly

                                                                          237
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


administered 0 g (placebo) or 3, 6 or 9 g of the ground crude drug in
capsules at 120, 80, 40 or 0 minutes before a 25 g oral glucose challenge.
Capillary blood glucose was measured before ingestion of the crude drug
or placebo and at 0, 15, 30, 45, 60, 90 and 120 minutes from the start of the
glucose challenge. Two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) demonstrated
that treatment (0, 3, 6 and 9 g crude drug), but not time of administration
(120, 80, 40 or 0 min before the challenge) signiﬁcantly affected post-
prandial glucose (p < 0.05), with signiﬁcant interaction for area under the
curve (p = 0.037). Pair-wise comparisons showed that compared with
administration of the placebo (0 g), doses of 3, 6 or 9 g of the crude drug
signiﬁcantly (p < 0.05) reduced the area under the curve (by 19.7, 15.3 and
15.9%, respectively) and incremental glycaemia at 30 minutes (16.3, 18.4
and 18.4%, respectively), 45 minutes (12.5, 14.3 and 14.3%, respectively),
and 120 minutes (59.1, 40.9 and 45.5%, respectively) (20).
    A preliminary short-term clinical study evaluated the efﬁcacy of the
powdered crude drug on postprandial glycaemia in humans. On four sep-
arate occasions, 10 subjects who did not have diabetes and nine subjects
who had type 2 diabetes mellitus were randomly allocated to receive 3.0 g
of the powdered root or placebo capsules, either 40 minutes before or
together with a 25.0 g oral glucose challenge. A capillary blood sample
was taken during fasting and then at 15, 30, 45, 60, 90 and 120 (only for
subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus) minutes after the glucose challenge.
The results of this study demonstrated that in subjects who did not have
diabetes, there were no differences in postprandial glycaemia between the
subjects who received the placebo and those who received ginseng when
administered together with a glucose challenge. When powdered roots
were administered 40 minutes prior to the glucose challenge, signiﬁcant
reductions were observed (p < 0.05). In subjects with type 2 diabetes mel-
litus, the same was true whether capsules were taken before or together
with the glucose challenge (p < 0.05). The reductions in the area under the
glycaemic curve were 18% ± 31% for subjects who did not have diabetes
and 19 ± 22% and 22 ± 17% for subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus
when capsules were administered before or together with the glucose
challenge, respectively (21).
    A randomized, cross-over study to assess whether a dose of the pow-
dered root of < 3.0 g, administered 40 minutes prior to an oral glucose chal-
lenge would reduce postprandial glycaemia in subjects without diabetes
was performed. Twelve healthy volunteers received treatment: 0 (placebo),
1, 2 or 3.0 g of the crude drug at 40, 20, 10 or 0 minutes prior to a 25.0 g oral
glucose challenge. Capillary blood was collected before administration and
at 0, 15, 30, 45, 60 and 90 minutes after the start of the glucose challenge.

238
                                                       Radix Panacis Quinquefolii


Two-way ANOVA showed that the main effects of treatment and admin-
istration time were signiﬁcant (p < 0.05). Glycaemia was lower over the last
45 minutes of the test after doses of 1, 2 or 3 g than after placebo (p < 0.05);
there were no signiﬁcant differences between the three doses. The reduc-
tions in the areas under the curve for these three doses were 14.4 ± 6.5%,
10.6 ± 4.0% and 9.1 ± 6%, respectively. Glycaemia in the last hour of the
test and area under the curve were lower when the crude drug was admin-
istered 40 minutes before the challenge than when it was administered 20,
10 or 0 minutes before the challenge (p < 0.05). Thus, doses of the crude
drug within the range of 1–3 g were equally effective (22).

Adverse reactions
No adverse reactions have been reported.

Contraindications
Radix Panacis Quinquefolii is contraindicated in cases of known allergy
or hypersensitivity to the plant material.

Warnings
No information available.

Precautions
Drug interactions
While no drug interactions have been reported, an extract of the root
(containing 10% ginsenosides) inhibited the activity of cytochrome
P450 isozymes CYP1A1, CYP1A2 and CYP1B1 in vitro in human liver
microsomes (45). Thus, there is a potential for interactions with other
drugs that are metabolized by these enzymes.
    Radix Panacis Quinquefolii and its preparations may lower blood sug-
ar levels. Interactions with antidiabetic drugs are possible, but this subject
has not been sufﬁciently investigated.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
At concentrations up to 36.0 mg/ml, neither an aqueous nor a butanol
extract of the crude drug was mutagenic in the Salmonella microsome as-
say using S. typhimurium strain TM677 in the presence or absence of a
metabolic activating mix S9 (47).

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Due to a lack of safety data, use of the crude drug during pregnancy is not
recommended.

                                                                            239
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Nursing mothers
Due to a lack of safety data, use of the crude drug during breastfeeding is
not recommended.

Paediatric use
Due to a lack of safety data, use of the crude drug in children under the
age of 12 years is not recommended.

Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug, extracts, tinctures and capsules.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Oral dose: 3–9 g daily in divided doses (2).

References
1. The United States Pharmacopeia. 29. Rockville, MD, United States Pharma-
   copeia Convention, 2005.
2. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Vol. I (English ed.). Bei-
   jing, Chemical Industry Press, 2005.
3. Farmacopea homeopática de los estados unidos mexicanos [Homeopathic
   pharmacopoeia of the United States of Mexico]. Mexico City, Secretaría de
   Salud, Comisión Permanente de la Farmacopea de los Estados Unidos Mexi-
   canos, 1998 [in Spanish].
4. Smith AC. Araliaceae. In: North American ﬂora. Vol. 28B. New York, New
   York Botanical Garden, 1944:3–41.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
   at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
   of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
   of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
6. Awang DVC. The neglected ginsenosides of North American ginseng (Pa-
   nax quinquefolius L.). Journal of Herbs, Spices and Medicinal Plants, 2000,
   7:103–109.
7. Bensky D, Gamble A. Chinese herbal medicine: materia medica. Rev. ed.
   Seattle, WA, Eastland Press, 1993.
8. Najera MT, Spegazzini ED. Standardisation des drogues végétales. Microgra-
   phie analytique de Panax ginseng Meyer et Panax quinquefolium L. Plantes
   médicinales et phytothérapie, 1987, 21:297–304 [in French].
9. Ngan F et al. Molecular authentication of Panax species. Phytochemistry,
   1999, 50:787–791.

240
                                                         Radix Panacis Quinquefolii


10. Dou DQ, Hou WB, Chen YJ. Studies on the characteristic constituents of
    Chinese ginseng and American ginseng. Planta Medica, 1998, 64:585–586.
11. Chan TWD et al. Differentiation and authentication of Panax ginseng, Panax
    quinquefolius, and ginseng products by using HPLC/MS. Analytical Chem-
    istry, 2000, 72:1281–1287.
12. Li WK, Fitzloff JF. HPLC analysis of ginsenosides in the roots of Asian gin-
    seng (Panax ginseng) and North American ginseng (Panax quinquefolius)
    with in-line photodiode array and evaporative light scattering detection. Jour-
    nal of Liquid Chromatography and Related Technologies, 2002, 25:29–41.
13. WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
14. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
15. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
16. Assinewe VA et al. Phytochemistry of wild populations of Panax quinque-
    folius L. (North American ginseng). Journal of Agricultural and Food
    Chemistry, 2003, 57:4549–4553.
17. Oshima Y, Sato K, Hikino H. Isolation and hypoglycemic activity of quin-
    quefolans A, B, and C, glycans of Panax quinquefolium roots. Journal of
    Natural Products, 1987, 50:188–190.
18. Sievenpiper JL et al. Variable effects of American ginseng: a batch of Ameri-
    can ginseng (Panax quinquefolius L.) with a depressed ginsenoside proﬁle
    does not affect postprandial glycemia. European Journal of Clinical Nutri-
    tion, 2003, 57:243–248.
19. Vuksan V et al. American ginseng improves glycemia in individuals with nor-
    mal glucose tolerance: effect of dose and time escalation. Journal of the
    American College of Nutrition, 2000, 19:738–744.
20. Vuksan V et al. Similar postprandial glycemic reductions with escalation of
    dose and administration time of American ginseng in type 2 diabetes. Diabe-
    tes Care, 2000, 23:1221–1226.
21. Vuksan V et al. American ginseng (Panax quinquefolius L) reduces postpran-
    dial glycemia in nondiabetic subjects and subjects with type 2 diabetes mel-
    litus. Archives of Internal Medicine, 2000, 160:1009–1013.
22. Vuksan V et al. American ginseng (Panax quinquefolius L.) attenuates post-
    prandial glycemia in a time-dependent but not dose-dependent manner in
    healthy individuals. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2001, 73:753–758.
23. Awang DVC. The anti-stress potential of North American ginseng (Panax
    quinquefolius L.). Journal of Herbs, Spices and Medicinal Plants, 1998, 6:87–91.
24. Assinewe VA et al. Extractable polysaccharides of Panax quinquefolius L.
    (North American ginseng) root stimulate TNFalpha production by alveolar
    macrophages. Phytomedicine, 2002, 9:398–404.
25. Kitts DD, Wijewickreme AN, Hu C. Antioxidant properties of a North
    American ginseng extract. Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, 2000,
    203:1–10.

                                                                               241
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


26. Hu C, Kitts DD. Free radical scavenging capacity as related to antioxidant
    activity and ginsenoside composition of Asian and North American ginseng
    extracts. Journal of the American Oil Chemists’ Society, 2001, 78:249–255.
27. Li J et al. Panax quinquefolium saponins protect low density lipoproteins
    from oxidation. Life Science, 1999, 64:53–62.
28. Li JP et al. Interactions between Panax quinquefolium saponins and vitamin C
    are observed in vitro. Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, 2000, 204:77–82.
29. Yuan CS et al. Panax quinquefolium L. inhibits thrombin-induced endothelin
    release in vitro. American Journal of Chinese Medicine, 1999, 27:331–338.
30. Liu J et al. Evaluation of estrogenic activity of plant extracts for the potential
    treatment of menopausal symptoms. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chem-
    istry, 2001, 49:2472 –2479.
31. Duda RB et al. American ginseng and breast cancer therapeutic agents sy-
    nergistically inhibit MCF-7 breast cancer cell growth. Journal of Surgical
    Oncology, 1999, 72:230–239.
32. Duda RB et al. pS2 expression induced by American ginseng in MCF-7 breast
    cancer cells. Annals of Surgical Oncology, 1996, 3:515–520.
33. Murphy LL et al. Effect of American ginseng (Panax quinquefolium) on male
    copulatory behavior in the rat. Physiology and Behavior, 1998, 64:445–450.
34. Tsai SC et al. Stimulation of the secretion of luteinizing hormone by ginseno-
    side-Rb1 in male rats. Chinese Journal of Physiology, 2003, 46:1–7.
35. Wang M et al. Immunomodulating activity of CVT-E002, a proprietary ex-
    tract from North American ginseng (Panax quinquefolium). Journal of Phar-
    macy and Pharmacology, 2001, 53:1515–1523.
36. Liu D et al. Voltage-dependent inhibition of brain Na+ channels by American
    ginseng. European Journal of Pharmacology, 2001, 413:47–54.
37. Yuan CS et al. Gut and brain effects of American ginseng root on brainstem
    neuronal activities in rats. American Journal of Chinese Medicine, 1998,
    26:47–55.
38. Yuan CS et al. Effects of Panax quinquefolius L. on brainstem neuronal ac-
    tivities: Comparison between Wisconsin-cultivated and Illinois-cultivated
    roots. Phytomedicine, 2001, 8:178–183.
39. Yang JC et al. Effect of American ginseng extract (Panax quinquefolius) on
    formalin-induced nociception in mice. American Journal of Chinese Medi-
    cine, 2001, 29:149–154.
40. Wu CF et al. Protective effects of pseudoginsenoside-F11 on methamphet-
    amine-induced neurotoxicity in mice. Pharmacology and Biochemistry Be-
    havior, 2003, 76:103–109.
41. Sloley BD et al. American ginseng extract reduces scopolamine-induced am-
    nesia in a spatial learning task. Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, 1999,
    24:442–452.
42. Salim KN, McEwen BS, Chao HM. Ginsenoside Rb1 regulates ChAT, NGF
    and trkA mRNA expression in the rat brain. Brain Research and Molecular
    Brain Research, 1997, 47:177–182.

242
                                                        Radix Panacis Quinquefolii


43. Benishin CG et al. Effects of ginsenoside Rb1 on central cholinergic metabo-
    lism. Pharmacology, 1991, 42:223–229.
44. Chen SE, Sawchuk RJ, Staba EJ. American ginseng. III. Pharmacokinetics of
    ginsenosides in the rabbit. European Journal of Drug Metabolism and Phar-
    macokinetics, 1980, 5:161–168.
45. Chang TKH, Chen J, Benetton SA. In vitro effect of standardized ginseng
    extracts and individual ginsenosides on the catalytic activity of human CY-
    P1A1, CYP1A2, and CYP1B1. Drug Metabolism and Disposition, 2002,
    30:378–384.
46. Chen SE, Staba EJ. American ginseng. II. Analysis of ginsenosides and their
    sapogenins in biological ﬂuids. Journal of Natural Products, 1980, 43:463–466.
47. Chang YS et al. Evaluation of the mutagenic potential of American ginseng
    (Panax quinquefolius). Planta Medica, 1986, 30:338–339.




                                                                              243
                  Cortex Phellodendron




Deﬁnition
Cortex Phellodendron consists of the dried bark of Phellodendron amu-
rense Rupr. or Phellodendron chinense Schneid. (Rutaceae) (1–4).

Synonyms
No information was found.

Selected vernacular names
Amur cork tree, amur oak, Amurkorkbaum, amurkortrae, amuuri kor-
gipuu, asiatisk kortrae, Chinese cork tree, cork tree, guan huang bo,
huang-bo, huangbai, huangbo, hwangbaek, kihada, korkowiec amurski,
obaku, oubaku, Siberian cork tree, sikerpe, sikerpe-ni, whang-byeuk-na-
moo (5–7).

Geographical distribution
Found in northern China, Japan, and the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea and the Republic of Korea (6–8).

Description
A deciduous tree, 10–15 m high, with grey, deeply ﬁssured, corky bark.
Leaves opposite, compound-imparipinnate, reaching a length of 30 cm;
leaﬂets 5–13, ovate to ovate-lanceolate, 5–11 cm long by 2.0–3.8 cm wide,
tip acuminate, base broadly cuneate rounded, margin obscurely serrate,
the underside grayish green, glabrous. Inﬂorescence terminal panicles, pu-
bescent 5–7 cm across. Flowers, unisexual, dioecious, 4 mm in diameter,
yellowish green, sepals, petals and stamens 5–6. Fruit an oval drupe, 1.0 cm
in diameter, becoming black when ripe and containing 5 seeds (6–8).

Plant material of interest: dried bark
General appearance
Flat or rolled semi-tubular pieces of bark, 2–6 mm thick. Outer surface
greyish yellow-brown to greyish brown, even or longitudinally furrowed,

244
                                                         Cortex Phellodendron


with numerous scars of lenticel. Smooth inner surface yellow to dark yel-
low-brown, with ﬁne vertical lines. Texture light and hard, fracture ﬁ-
brous and bright yellow (1−4).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: slight; taste: very bitter, mucilaginous and imparts a yellow colour
to the saliva on chewing (1–4).

Microscopic characteristics
Transverse section reveals a thin yellow outer cortex, scattered with stone
cells appearing as yellow-brown dots. The inner cortex is thick, with pri-
mary medullary rays expanding its width towards the outer end; the
phloem appears as a nearly triangular part between the medullary rays in
the secondary cortex, with many medullary rays radiating and gathering
at the tip of the triangle. Brown phloem ﬁbre bundles aligned in a tangen-
tial direction and crossing over the secondary medullary rays, forming a
latticework (2–4).

Powdered plant material
Bright yellowish to yellow powder, containing fragments of yellow, thick-
walled ﬁbrous bundles or isolated ﬁbres; often accompanied by rows of
crystal cells; some groups of stone cells together with idioblasts; fragments
of parenchyma cells containing starch grains and oil droplets; fragments of
medullary ray and phloem; mucilage cells and mucilage masses; numerous
solitary crystals of calcium oxalate, 7–20 Mm in diameter; starch grains;
simple grains (2–6 Mm in diameter) and 2–4 compound grains (2–4).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, microchemical tests, and
thin-layer chromatography (1–4).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (9).

Chemical
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Foreign organic matter
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

                                                                         245
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Total ash
Not more than 7.5% (2, 3).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 0.5% (2).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 12% (10).

Alcohol -soluble extractive
Not less than 14% (1).

Loss on drying
Not more than 9% (2, 4).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more
than 0.05 mg/kg (11). For other pesticides, see the European pharmaco-
poeia (11) and the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal med-
icines with reference to contaminants and residues (9) and pesticide
residues (12).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (9).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (9).

Chemical assay
Not less than 1.2% berberine by high-performance liquid chromato-
graphy (2, 3).

Major chemical constituents
The major constituents are isoquinoline alkaloids, principally berberine
(up to 4.75%). Other major alkaloids include magnoﬂorine (up to 1.1%),
palmatine (up to 1.2%), jatrorrhizine (0.5%), as well as phellodendrine
and candicine (5, 13, 14). Structures of berberine, palmatine, jatrorrhizine,
magnoﬂorine and phellodendrine are presented below.

246
                                                                       Cortex Phellodendron


Berberine              O       Jatrorrhizine R = OH         OCH3
                           O                                       R
                               Palmatine R = OCH3


                  N+                                  N+
H3CO                              H3CO
       OCH3                              OCH3


H3CO                           Phellodendrine          OH
                                                             OCH3
                  N+ CH3
  HO                                            H
            H      CH3          HO
  HO
                                                N+
                               H3CO
H3CO            Magnoflorine                    CH3



Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Used orally to treat abdominal pain, diarrhoea, gastroenteritis and uri-
nary tract infections (1, 15). While no clinical studies evaluating the safety
and efﬁcacy of the crude drug have been reported, clinical studies have
been performed to assess the effects of berberine, the major chemical con-
stituent of the crude drug, for the treatment of diarrhoea, ocular trachoma
and cutaneous leishmaniasis. Berberine has been shown to be effective for
the treatment of bacterially-induced diarrhoea (16–21), ocular trachoma
and cutaneous leishmaniasis (22–24).

Uses described in traditional medicine
Treatment of burns, cough, fever, jaundice, malaria, skin wounds and
sores (5).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
An overview of the pharmacological studies evaluating the efﬁcacy of the
crude drug and berberine, the major chemical constituent of the plant is
presented. The direct applicability of the pharmacological data for ber-
berine to the crude drug is uncertain and needs to be further investigated.
Antidiarrhoeal activity
The infectivity of rotavirus, a virus associated with the development of
diarrhoea, was inhibited in vitro by the addition of a decoction of the

                                                                                       247
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


crude drug to the culture medium at a concentration of 50.0 μg/ml (25).
In vitro studies have demonstrated that Vibrio cholerae grows in a medi-
um containing berberine, but fails to produce diarrhoea-inducing toxins
(26). It has been hypothesized that the antidysenteric activity of berberine
is due to localized effects on the intestinal tract and not due to bacteri-
cidal activity. The suggested mechanism by which berberine exerts its
antidiarrhoeal activity is through the activation of A2-adrenoceptors and
by reducing production of cyclic adenosine monophosphate through the
inhibition of the activity of adenylate cyclase (27), which in turn decreases
intestinal motility (28). Berberine inhibits in vivo and in vitro intestinal
secretions induced by cholera toxin (29–32).
    Berberine at a concentration of 10.0 mg/loop reduced intestinal secre-
tion stimulated by the heat-labile toxin of Escherichia coli in the rabbit
ligated intestinal loop model by 70% in situ, and inhibited the secretory
response of the heat stable toxin of E. coli in mice (33, 34). Berberine at
concentrations up to 500.0 μM stimulated ion transport responses in hu-
man colonic mucosa that were non-speciﬁc for calcium ions or cyclic ad-
enosine monophosphate-mediated signals. In cultured intestinal epithelial
monolayers, berberine inhibited calcium and cyclic adenosine monophos-
phate-mediated responses, indicating that the drug exerts a direct anti-
secretory effect on the epithelial cells through the inhibition of mucosal
chloride secretion (35).
Antihypertensive activity
Administration of a lyophilized aqueous extract of the crude drug in
drinking-water at a dose of 500.0 mg/kg body weight (bw) to rats for
20 days signiﬁcantly reduced hypertension induced by heat stress or the
administration of metyrapone (p < 0.01) (36, 37). Intragastric administra-
tion of a 70% ethanol extract of the crude drug at a dose of 600.0 mg/kg
bw to rats for 20 days reduced blood pressure (38).
Anti-inﬂammatory activity
A 50% ethanol extract of the crude drug reduced 12-O-tetradecanoylphor-
bol-13-acetate and acetic acid-induced oedema and inhibited oxazolone-
induced contact-delayed hypersensitivity ear oedema in mice after appli-
cation of 0.5 mg/ear (39). A 50% methanol extract (1:1) signiﬁcantly
decreased granulation tissues in chick embryo chorioallantoic membranes,
indicating anti-inﬂammatory activity (p < 0.05) (40). Intragastric admin-
istration of berberine to rats with trinitrobenzene sulfonic acid-induced
colitis at a dose of 7.5 or 15.0 mg/kg/day reduced histological lesions,
morphological damage and myeloperoxidase activity after 1 week of
treatment (41). Berberine also inhibited the production of the potent in-

248
                                                           Cortex Phellodendron


ﬂammatory cytokine, interleukin-8, in rectal mucosal cells in vitro at a
concentration of 10−5 M (41). Treatment of a human oesophageal squamous
cell carcinoma cell line (YES-2) with berberine (8.0–32.0 μM) for 24 hours
reduced the expression of messenger ribonucleic acid for the inﬂamma-
tory cytokine, interleukin-6 (42).
Antimicrobial and antitrypanosomal activities
A hot aqueous extract of the crude drug inhibited the growth of Escheri-
chia coli and Staphylococcus aureus (43); Streptococcus mutans (44); Can-
dida albicans, C. glabrata and C. tropicalis (45). Berberine inhibited the
growth of Helicobacter pylori in vitro. The median inhibitory concentra-
tion ranged from 0.625–40.00 μg/ml (46, 47). Berberine also inhibited the
growth of Staphylococcus aureus and Mycobacterium smegmatis, with a
minimum inhibitory concentration of 25.0–50.0 μg/ml (48, 49). Berberine
inhibited the growth of Bacillus subtilis and Salmonella enteritidis in vitro
at a concentration of 1.0 mg/ml and 0.5 mg/ml, respectively (50). Ber-
berine also inhibited the growth of Clostridium perfringens in vitro
(150.0 μg/ml), and at a concentration of 1.0 mg/ml signiﬁcantly inhibited
the growth of Entamoeba histolytica, Giardia lamblia and Trichomonas
vaginalis and induced morphological changes in the parasites (p < 0.001)
(51). At a concentration of 250.0 μg/ml, a methanol extract of the crude
drug inhibited the growth of Trypanosoma cruzi in vitro (52).
Antiulcer activity
Intragastric administration of a berberine-free fraction of a bark extract
(at a dose of 1.0 g/kg bw) reduced ulcer formation in rodents (15). The
fraction signiﬁcantly inhibited the formation of ulcers induced by ethanol
or aspirin, and of pylorus-ligated ulcer in rats, as well as that of stress ul-
cer in restrained and water-immersed mice (p < 0.05). In addition, secre-
tion of gastric acid in pylorus-ligated rats was signiﬁcantly reduced by the
fraction when administered subcutaneously or intraduodenally, but not
when it was administered orally (15).
    Subcutaneous administration of the same berberine-free fraction to
rats at a dose of 20.0 mg/kg bw prevented ethanol-induced ulcers and
those induced by pylorus-ligation (15). In rats, a hot aqueous extract of
the crude drug (dose 100.0 mg/kg bw) inhibited gastric secretion induced
by administration of pentagastrin (53).
Effects on smooth muscle
Berberine, at a concentration of 1.0 μM, induced relaxation of norepineph-
rine-precontracted isolated rat aorta (54). At a concentration of 10−5 M,
berberine induced relaxation in isolated precontracted rat mesenteric ar-

                                                                           249
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


teries (55, 56). At a concentration of 0.1 to 100.0 μM, berberine suppressed
basal tone and induced a concentration-dependent relaxation of phenyl-
ephrine-precontracted rabbit corpus cavernosum in vitro (57). Intra-
cavernous injection of berberine to anaesthetized rabbits at a dose of
5.0 mg/kg bw increased intracavernosal pressure from 12.7 to 63.4 mmHg,
and the duration of tumescence ranged from 11.5 to 43.7 minutes (57).
Immunological effects
The crude drug is reported to have a potent suppressive effect on the cel-
lular immune response. The compounds OB-1 and OB-5 were isolated as
the active constituents of a methanol extract of the crude drug, and shown
to suppress local graft versus host reactions in mice. OB-1 and OB-5 were
identiﬁed as the quaternary alkaloids magnoﬂorine and phellodendrine,
respectively. Both compounds suppressed the local graft versus host reac-
tion, when given by intraperitoneal injection to the host mice at a dose of
5.0–20.0 mg/kg bw for 8 consecutive days from the day of spleen cell
transfer to cause the reaction. Both OB-1 and OB-5 suppressed delayed-
type hypersensitivity induced by picryl chloride, when given by intra-
peritoneal injection to mice at a dose of 10.0 and 20.0 mg/kg bw for 5 con-
secutive days from the day of the sensitization, but did not suppress it
when given at the time of the challenge (58). Phellodendrine suppressed
local semisyngeneic graft versus host reactions and systemic allogenic
graft versus host reactions in X-ray irradiated mice. Phellodendrine also
suppressed the induction phase of delayed-type hypersensitivity induced
by sheep red blood cells in mice and tuberculin-induced delayed-type
hypersensitivity in guinea-pigs (59). Intraperitoneal administration of
berberine to mice, at a daily dose of 10.0 mg/kg bw for 3 days before the
induction of tubulointerstitial nephritis, signiﬁcantly reduced pathologi-
cal injury and improved renal function (p = 0.001), as well as decreasing
the number of CD3+, CD4+ and CD8+ T-lymphocytes as compared with
control animals (60).
Toxicology
The oral median lethal dose of berberine in mice was 329.0 mg/kg bw
(61). An oral dose of berberine (2.75 g) given to dogs produced severe
gastrointestinal irritation, profuse watery diarrhoea, salivation, muscular
tremors and paralysis. Respiration was not affected. Postmortem analysis
of the intestines found them to be contracted, inﬂamed, and empty or
containing mucus and watery ﬂuid. An oral dose of 25.0 mg/kg bw of
berberine sulfate induced depression lasting for 6–8 hours; 50.0 mg/kg bw
caused salivation and sporadic emesis. A dose of 100.0 mg/kg bw induced
persistent emesis and death of all animals 8–10 days later (62).

250
                                                          Cortex Phellodendron


Clinical pharmacology
While no clinical studies evaluating the safety and efﬁcacy of the crude
drug could be found, there have been numerous studies evaluating the ef-
ﬁcacy of berberine, the major chemical constituent of the plant. There-
fore, summaries of these clinical studies have been included in the mono-
graph. The direct applicability of these clinical data to the crude drug is
unknown and needs to be further investigated.
   In several clinical trials, berberine was effective in the treatment of se-
cretory diarrhoea (16–21). However, few trials have compared the efﬁcacy
of berberine with a positive control, such as tetracycline, in treating ﬂuid
loss caused by diarrhoea in patients with cholera or in those with non-
cholera diarrhoea (16, 17, 19, 61).
   A randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind clinical trial involving
400 patients with acute watery diarrhoea compared the antisecretory and
vibriostatic effects of berberine and tetracycline (16). Of 185 patients with
cholera, those given tetracycline or tetracycline and berberine had a re-
duced volume and frequency of stools, and duration of diarrhoea. In the
group treated with berberine, following oral administration of 100.0 mg
four times a day, stool volume was reduced and the concentration of cyclic
adenosine monophosphate in the stools was reduced by 77%. Neither
berberine nor tetracycline exhibited any beneﬁt over placebo in patients
with non-cholera diarrhoea of unspeciﬁed etiologies (16).
   A randomized comparison-controlled trial of 165 patients assessed
the antisecretory activity of a 400.0-mg single-bolus dose of berberine
sulfate for enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli-induced diarrhoea, and either
400.0 mg as a single oral dose or 1200.0 mg of berberine sulfate (400.0 mg
every 8 hours) for the treatment of cholera (19). In patients with Es-
cherichia coli-induced diarrhoea who received a single oral dose of ber-
berine, the mean stool volumes were signiﬁcantly less than those of con-
trols during three consecutive 8-hour periods after treatment (p < 0.05).
At 24 hours after treatment, patients with Escherichia coli-induced diar-
rhoea, who were treated with berberine, had a lower stool volume and
frequency than patients in the control group (42% versus 20%, p < 0.05).
Patients with cholera, who received 400.0 mg of berberine, also had a
reduction in stool volume, while those treated with 1200.0 mg of ber-
berine plus tetracycline did not. No adverse effects were observed in the
patients receiving berberine. The results of this study indicated that ber-
berine was an effective and safe antisecretory drug for treatment of Es-
cherichia coli-induced diarrhoea, but had only a modest antisecretory
effect in cholera patients, in whom the activity of tetracycline alone was
superior (19).

                                                                          251
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


    Berberine has been used therapeutically for the treatment of cutaneous
leishmaniasis, commonly referred to as “oriental sore”. It is administered
by subcutaneous injection near the site of the lesion (22–24). In patients
with leishmaniasis caused by Leishmania tropica, injection of a prepara-
tion containing 2% berberine into the lesions was effective in the treat-
ment of cutaneous leishmaniasis (22, 23).

Adverse reactions
Berberine is well tolerated in humans in therapeutic daily doses of 0.5 g (61).

Contraindications
Cortex Phellodendron is contraindicated in cases of hypersensitivity or
allergy to the plant material.

Warnings
No information was found.

Precautions
General
No information was found.

Drug interactions
None reported. However, berberine, the major isoquinoline alkaloid oc-
curring in the crude drug, is reported to up-regulate the expression of the
human multidrug resistance gene coding for multidrug resistance trans-
porter (pgp-170), thus the treatment of tumours with berberine may re-
sult in reduced retention of chemotherapeutic agents such as paclitaxel
(62, 63). In a randomized controlled clinical trial, 52 renal transplant re-
cipients were treated with ciclosporin A and 0.2 g berberine three times
daily for 3 months, while another 52 subjects received ciclosporin A
alone (64). For a pharmacokinetic study, six renal transplant recipients
were given a 3-mg/kg dosage of ciclosporin A twice daily before and af-
ter oral co-administration of 0.2 g berberine three times daily (i.e. ber-
berine was given every 8 hours and cyclosporine every 12 hours) for
12 days. The results of this study showed that the trough blood concen-
trations and the ratios of concentration:dose of ciclosporin A in the ber-
berine-treated group increased by 88.9% and 98.4%, respectively, com-
pared with those at baseline (p < 0.05). Thus, berberine can markedly
elevate the blood concentration of ciclosporin A in renal transplant re-
cipients in both clinical and pharmacokinetic studies. This combination
may allow a reduction of the dosage of ciclosporin A (64).

252
                                                         Cortex Phellodendron


   Furthermore, an ethanol extract of the crude drug inhibited the activ-
ity of cytochrome P450 in vitro, with an IC50 of < 1% (65). Thus, con-
comitant administration of the crude drug with a drug metabolized via
cytochrome P450 may affect drug metabolism (65).

Drug and laboratory test interactions
None reported.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
A hot aqueous or methanol extract of the crude drug was not mutagenic at
a concentration of 100.0 mg/ml in the Ames test in Salmonella typhi-
murium strains TA98 and TA100, or in Bacillus subtilis H-17 (Rec+) (66).
   Berberine was not genotoxic in Saccharomyces cerevisiae assessed in
the SOS chromotest (67). No genotoxic activity was observed with or
without metabolic activation, and no cytotoxic or mutagenic effects were
seen under non-growth conditions. However, in dividing cells, the alka-
loid induced cytotoxic and cytostatic effects in proﬁcient and repair-deﬁ-
cient Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In dividing cells, the induction of frame-
shift and mitochondrial mutations, as well as crossing over, showed that
the compound is not a potent mutagen (67).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
Intragastric administration of a 70% methanol extract of the dried bark to
pregnant rats, at a dose of 500.0 mg/kg bw daily from day 13 to the time
of delivery did not produce teratogenic effects in the offspring (68).

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Intragastric administration of a 70% methanol extract of the dried bark to
pregnant rats, at a dose of 500.0 mg/kg bw daily from day 13 to the time
of delivery, did not induce abortion or miscarriage (68).

Nursing mothers
Owing to the lack of safety data, the use of Cortex Phellodendron by
breastfeeding mothers is not recommended.

Paediatric use
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug and dried extracts, ﬂuidextracts and tinctures. Store in a tight-
ly sealed container away from heat and light (3).

                                                                         253
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dose: 3–10 g daily (1).

References
1. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Beijing, Chemical Indus-
    try Press, 2005.
2. The Japanese pharmacopoeia, 14th ed. (English ed.). Tokyo, Ministry of
    Health and Welfare, 2001 (available at: http://jpdb.nihs.go.jp/jp14e/).
3. The Korean Pharmacopoeia, 8th ed. (English ed.). Seoul, Korea Food and
    Drug Administration, 2004.
4. Asian crude drugs, their preparations and speciﬁcations. Asian pharmacopoe-
    ia, 1st ed. Manila, Federation of Asian Pharmaceutical Associations, 1978.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 2005.
6. Medicinal plants in the Republic of Korea. Manila, World Health Organiza-
    tion Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc, 1998 (WHO Regional Publica-
    tions, Western Paciﬁc Series, No. 21).
7. Medicinal plants in China. Manila, World Health Organization Regional
    Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc, 1989 (WHO Regional Publications, Western
    Paciﬁc Series, No. 2).
8. Keys JD. Chinese herbs: their botany, chemistry, and pharmacodynamics.
    Rutland, VT, Charles E. Tuttle, 1976.
9. WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
10. British herbal pharmacopoeia, Vol. 1. Exeter, British Herbal Medicine Asso-
    ciation, 1996.
11. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
12. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
13. Han DR et al. [Modern pharmacognosy.] Seoul, Hakchang, 1989 [in Korean].
14. Kim IH et al. [Medicinal Botany.] Seoul, Hakchang, 1988 [in Korean].
15. Uchiyama T, Kamikawa H, Ogita Z. [Anti-ulcer effect of extract from phel-
    lodendri cortex.] Yakugaku Zasshi, 1989, 109:672–676 [in Japanese].
16. Khin-Maung-U et al. Clinical trial of berberine in acute watery diarrhoea.
    British Medical Journal, 1985, 291:1601–1605.
17. Lahiri SC, Dutta NK. Berberine and chloramphenicol in the treatment of
    cholera and severe diarrhoea. Journal of the Indian Medical Association, 1967,
    48:1–11.
18. Chauhan RKS, Jain AM, Bhandari B. Berberine in the treatment of child-
    hood diarrhoea. Indian Journal of Pediatrics, 1970, 37:577–579.

254
                                                               Cortex Phellodendron


19. Rabbani GH et al. Randomized controlled trial of berberine sulfate therapy
    for diarrhea due to enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli and Vibrio cholerae. Jour-
    nal of Infectious Diseases, 1987, 155:979–984.
20. Sharda DC. Berberine in the treatment of diarrhoea in infancy and child-
    hood. Journal of the Indian Medical Association, 1970, 54:22–24.
21. Sharma R, Joshi CK, Goyal RK. Berberine tannate in acute diarrhoea. Indian
    Pediatrics, 1970, 7:496–501.
22. Das Gupta BM. The treatment of oriental sore with berberine acid sulfate.
    Indian Medical Gazette, 1930, 65:683–685.
23. Das Gupta BM, Dikshit BB. Berberine in the treatment of Oriental boil. In-
    dian Medical Gazette, 1929, 67:70.
24. Devi AL. Berberine sulfate in oriental sore. Indian Medical Gazette, 1929,
    64:139–140.
25. Kim DH et al. Inhibitory effect of herbal medicines on rotavirus infectivity.
    Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 2000, 23:356–358.
26. Hahn FE, Ciak J. Berberine. Antibiotics, 1975, 3:577–584.
27. Uebaba K et al. Adenylate cyclase inhibitory activity of berberine. III. Japa-
    nese Journal of Pharmacology, 1984, 36 (Suppl 1):352P.
28. Hui KK et al. Interaction of berberine with human platelet adrenoceptors.
    Life Sciences, 1991, 49:315–324.
29. Gaitondé BB, Marker PH, Rao NR. Effect of drugs on cholera toxin induced
    ﬂuid in adult rabbit ileal loop. Progress in Drug Research, 1975, 19:519–526.
30. Sabir M, Akhter MH, Bhide NK. Antagonism of cholera toxin by berberine
    in the gastrointestinal tract of adult rats. Indian Journal of Medical Research,
    1977, 65:305–313.
31. Sack RB, Froehlich JL. Berberine inhibits intestinal secretory response of
    Vibrio cholerae and Escherichia coli enterotoxins. Infection and Immunity,
    1982, 35:471–475.
32. Swabb EA, Tai YH, Jordan L. Reversal of cholera toxin-induced secretion in
    rat ileum by luminal berberine. American Journal of Physiology, 1981,
    241:G248–G252.
33. Guandalini S et al. Berberine effects on ion transport in rabbit ileum. Pediat-
    ric Research, 1983, 17:423.
34. Tai YH et al. Antisecretory effects of berberine in rat ileum. American Jour-
    nal of Physiology, 1981, 241:G253–G258.
35. Taylor CT et al. Berberine inhibits ion transport in human colonic epithelia.
    European Journal of Pharmacology, 1999, 368:111–118.
36. Arakawa K, Otsuka Y, Cyong JC. Inhibition of the metyrapone and heat-
    stress induced hypertension by the Phellodendri cortex on rats. Shoyaku-
    gaku Zasshi, 1985, 39:162–164.
37. Arakawa K, Cyong JC, Otsuka Y. Extract of Phellodendri cortex antago-
    nizes the hypertensive response induced by heat stress in rats. Japanese Jour-
    nal of Pharmacology, 1984, 36(Suppl): 102.
38. Chang IM et al. Antihypertensive activity of Korean medicinal plants against
    okamoto-SHR (I). [Korean Journal of Pharmacognosy], 1981, 12:55–57.

                                                                               255
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


39. Cuéllar MJ et al. Topical anti-inﬂammatory activity of some Asian medicinal
    plants used in dermatological disorders. Fitoterapia, 2001, 72:221–229.
40. Otsuka H et al. Studies on anti-inﬂammatory agents. II. Anti-inﬂammatory
    constituents from rhizome of Coptis japonica Makino. Yakugaku Zasshi,
    1981, 101:883–890.
41. Zhou H, Mineshita S. The effect of berberine chloride on experimental colitis
    in rats in vivo and in vitro. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Ther-
    apeutics, 2000, 294:822–829.
42. Iizuka N et al. Inhibitory effect of Coptidis Rhizoma and berberine on the
    proliferation of human esophageal cancer cell lines. Cancer Letters, 2000,
    148:19–25.
43. Yang HC, Chang HH, Weng TC. Inﬂuence of several Chinese drugs on the
    growth of some pathologic organisms: preliminary report. Journal of the
    Formosan Medical Association, 1953, 52:109–112.
44. Namba T et al. Studies on dental caries prevention by traditional Chinese
    medicines (Part 1). Screening of crude drugs for antibacterial action against
    Streptococcus mutans. Shoyakugaku Zasshi, 1981, 35:295–302.
45. Nakamoto K, Sadamori S, Hamada T. Effects of crude drugs and berberine
    hydrochloride on the activities of fungi. Journal of Prosthetic Dentistry, 1990,
    64:691–694.
46. Mahady GB et al. In vitro susceptibility of Helicobacter pylori to isoquino-
    line alkaloids from Sanguinaria canadensis and Hydrastis canadensis. Phyto-
    therapy Research, 2003, 17:217–221.
47. Bae EA et al. Anti-Helicobacter pylori activity of herbal medicines. Biological
    and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1998, 21:990–992.
48. Chi HJ, Woo YS, Lee YJ. [Effect of berberine and some antibiotics on the
    growth of microorganisms.] [Korean Journal of Pharmacognosy], 1991,
    22:45–50 [in Korean].
49. Gentry EJ et al. Antitubercular natural products: berberine from the roots
    of commercial Hydrastis canadensis powder. Isolation of inactive 8-oxo-
    tetrahydrothalifendine, canadine, B-hydrastine, and two new quinic acid
    esters, hycandinic acid esters-1 and -2. Journal of Natural Products, 1998,
    61:1187–1193.
50. Iwasa K et al. Structure-activity relationships of protoberberines having
    antimicrobial activity. Planta Medica, 1998, 64:748–751.
51. Kaneda Y et al. In vitro effects of berberine sulfate on the growth and struc-
    ture of Entamoeba histolytica, Giardia lamblia, and Trichomonas vaginalis.
    Annals of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology, 1991, 85:417–425.
52. Schinella GR et al. Inhibition of Trypanosoma cruzi growth by medicinal
    plant extracts. Fitoterapia, 2002, 73:569–575.
53. Takase H et al. Features of the anti-ulcer effects of Oren-Gedoku-to (a Tra-
    ditional Chinese Medicine) and its component herb drugs. Japanese Journal
    of Pharmacology, 1989, 49:301–308.
54. Wong KK. Mechanism of the aorta relaxation induced by low concentrations
    of berberine. Planta Medica, 1998, 64:756–757.

256
                                                               Cortex Phellodendron


55. Chiou WF, Yen MH, Chen CF. Mechanism of vasodilatory effect of ber-
    berine in rat mesenteric artery. European Journal of Pharmacology, 1991,
    204:35–40.
56. Ko WH et al. Vasorelaxant and antiproliferative effects of berberine. Euro-
    pean Journal of Pharmacology, 2000, 399:187–196.
57. Chiou WF, Chen J, Chen CF. Relaxation of corpus cavernosum and raised
    intracavernous pressure by berberine in rabbit. British Journal of Pharmacol-
    ogy, 1998, 125:1677–1684.
58. Mori H et al. Principle of the bark of Phellodendron amurense to suppress
    the cellular immune response. Planta Medica, 1994, 60:445–449.
59. Mori H et al. Principle of the bark of Phellodendron amurense to suppress
    the cellular immune response: effect of phellodendrine on cellular and hu-
    moral immune responses. Planta Medica, 1995, 61:45–49.
60. Marinova EK et al. Suppression of experimental autoimmune tubulointer-
    stitial nephritis in BALB/c mice by berberine. Immunopharmacology, 2000,
    48:9–16.
61. Lampe KF. Berberine. In: De Smet PA et al. eds. Adverse effects of herbal
    drugs. Vol. 1. Berlin, Springer-Verlag, 1992:97–104.
62. Lin HL et al. Up-regulation of multidrug resistance transporter expression
    by berberine in human and murine hepatoma cells. Cancer, 1999, 85:1937–
    1942.
63. Lin HL et al. Berberine modulates expression of mdr1 gene products and the
    responses of digestive tract cancer cells to Paclitaxel. British Journal of Can-
    cer, 1999, 81:416–422.
64. Wu XC, et al. Effects of berberine on the blood concentration of cyclosporin
    A in renal transplant recipients: clinical and pharmacokinetic study. Euro-
    pean Journal of Clinical Pharmacology, 2005, 61:567–572.
65. Budzinski JW et al. An in vitro evaluation of human cytochrome P450 3A4
    inhibition by selected commercial herbal extracts and tinctures. Phytomedi-
    cine, 2000, 7:273–282.
66. Morimoto I et al. Mutagenicity screening of crude drugs with Bacillus subtil-
    lus rec-assay and Salmonella/microsome reversion assay. Mutation Research,
    1982, 97:81–102.
67. Pasqual MS et al. Genotoxicity of the isoquinoline alkaloid berberine in
    prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. Mutation Research, 1993, 286:243–252.
68. Lee EB. [Teratogenicity of the extracts of crude drugs.] [Korean Journal of
    Pharmacognosy], 1982, 13:116–121 [in Korean].




                                                                               257
                   Rhizoma Picrorhizae




Deﬁnition
Rhizoma Picrorhizae consists of the dried rhizome with root of Picrorhi-
za kurrooa Royle (1) or of Neopicrorhiza scrophulariiﬂora Hong [syn.
Picrorhiza scrophulariiﬂora Pennell] (Scrophulariaceae) (2).

Synonyms
Picrorhiza kurrooa Royle: Picrorhiza kurroa Benth., P. kurroa Royle ex
Benth.
    In the formularies and most references, the species is known as
Picrorhiza kurroa Benth. or Picrorhiza kurroa Royle ex Benth. (Scrophu-
lariaceae), but according to the International Code of Botanical Nomen-
clature article 42, the correct name of the species should be Picrorhiza
kurrooa Royle (3).
Neopicrorhiza scrophulariiﬂora Hong: Picrorhiza scrophulariiﬂora Pennell.
    The rhizomes of Neopicrorhiza scrophulariiﬂora Hong [syn. Picrorhi-
za scrophulariiﬂora Pennell] are taxonomically similar and have been used
in traditional medicine for the same purposes and traded under the same
vernacular names (3).

Selected vernacular names
Balakadu len, hohwangryun, honglen, hunglen, honkadu, hú huáng lián,
kadu, kadugurohini, kalikutki, karu picrorhiza, karru, katki, katu, katuka,
katukaa, katuká, katuka rohini, katukarogani, katukarohini, katuki, katu-
ko, katuku rohini, katurohini, katvi, kaur, khanekhaswael, kharbaqe-hin-
di, kot kaan phraao, koouren, kot kaanphraao, kour, kurri, kuru, kutaki,
kutki, kutta, rohini, sutiktaka, tiktarohini, xi zanghu huang lian (1, 4–9).

Geographical distribution
Picrorhiza kurrooa Royle: native to the north-western Himalayas from
Kashmir to Sikkim (1, 3, 4, 6).
Neopicrorhiza scrophulariiﬂora Hong: found in the eastern Himalayas to
the mountains of Yunan (3, 9).

258
                                                          Rhizoma Picrorhizae


Description
A perennial herb with a long rhizome. The leaves are basal and alternate,
approximately 5–10 cm long. Spikes terminal. Calyx nearly equally in
5 segments. The corolla has 4 or 5 lobes, bilobiate with lobes more or less
spreading or nearly actinomorphic. Stamens 4, inserted on corolla tube,
slightly didynamous, as long as corolla or strongly exerted. Stigma capi-
tate. Fruit an acute capsule, tapered at top, dehiscing ﬁrst septicidally and
then loculicidally into 4 valves, 12 mm long. Seeds numerous, ellipsoid:
seed coat very thick, transparent and alveolate. Pollen grains spheroidal,
3-colpate, with partial or perforate tectum, the partial tectum microretic-
ulate, colpus membrane smooth or sparsely granular (3, 10).
    The corolla of Picrorhiza kurrooa Royle is 4–5 mm long and 5-lobed,
whereas the corolla of Neopicrorhiza scrophulariiﬂora is 9–10 mm long
and 4-lobed (3).

Plant material of interest: dried rhizome with root
General appearance
Rhizome: 2.5–12.0 cm long and 0.3–1.0 cm thick, subcylindrical, straight
or slightly curved, externally greyish-brown, surface rough due to longi-
tudinal wrinkles, circular scars of roots and bud scales and sometimes
roots attached, tip ends in a growing bud surrounded by a tufted crown
of leaves, in places cork exfoliates exposing dark cortex; fracture, short.
Root: thin, cylindrical, 5–10 cm long and 0.5–1.0 mm in diameter, straight
or slightly curved with a few longitudinal wrinkles and dotted scars,
mostly attached with rhizomes, dusty grey, fracture short, inner surface
black with whitish xylem (1, 2, 4).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: pleasant; taste: bitter (1).

Microscopic characteristics
The rhizome portion shows 20–25 layers of cork consisting of tangen-
tially elongated, suberized cells; cork cambium 1–2-layered; cortex single-
layered or absent, primary cortex persists in some cases, 1 or 2 small vas-
cular bundles present in the cortex. Vascular bundles surrounded by
ﬁbrous bundle sheath. Secondary phloem composed of parenchyma cells
and a few scattered ﬁbres. Cambium 2–4-layered. Secondary xylem con-
sists of vessels, tracheids, ﬁbres and parenchyma cells. Vessels vary in size
and shape, have transverse oblique articulation; tracheids long, thick-
walled, ligniﬁed, more or less cylindrical with blunt tapering ends. Starch
grains abundant, 25–105 μm in diameter. Root portion, when young,

                                                                         259
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


shows 1-layered epidermis, some epidermal cells elongate forming unicel-
lular hairs. Hypodermis single-layered. Cortex 8–14 layered, consisting
of oval to polygonal, thick-walled parenchymatous cells. Primary stele,
tetrarch to heptarch, enclosed by a single-layered pericycle and single-
layered thick-walled cells of endodermis. Mature roots show 4–15 layers
of cork, 1–2 layers of cork cambium. Vessels vary in size and shape, some
cylindrical with tail-like, tapering ends; some drum shaped with perfora-
tion on end walls or lateral walls. Tracheids cylindrical with tapering
pointed ends (1).

Powdered plant material
Dusty grey in colour. Groups of cork cell fragments, thick-walled paren-
chyma, pitted vessels and aseptate ﬁbres. Simple round to oval starch
grains, 25–105 μm in diameter (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations, microchemical tests and
thin-layer chromatography (1, 2), and high-performance liquid chroma-
tography–mass spectrometry (11).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (12).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2% (1).

Total ash
Not more than 7% (1, 2).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 3% (2).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 20% (1).

Alcohol-soluble extractive
Not less than 30% (2).

Loss on drying
Contains not more than 13% water (2).

260
                                                         Rhizoma Picrorhizae


Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (13). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (13)
and the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (12) and pesticide residues (14).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (12).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (12).

Other purity tests
Chemical tests to be established in accordance with national require-
ments.

Chemical assays
Total picrosides I and II not less than 9% by high-performance liquid
chromatography (2).

Major chemical constituents
The major biologically active constituents are iridoid glycosides, cucur-
bitacin triterpenes and simple phenols. The iridoid glycosides of interest
include kutkoside, picrosides I–III, and aucubin, among others. Cucur-
bitacins B, D, E, F, I and R are among the relevant major triterpenes, and
apocynin is a bioactive phenolic constituent of this plant material (3, 5,
7, 15, 16). Structures of representative major constituents are presented
below.

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well-established documents
Used orally to treat fever, immune disorders and skin diseases (1, 2). While
two studies have suggested a possible role of the rhizome for the treat-
ment of bronchial asthma (17, 18) and viral hepatitis (19), no randomized
controlled clinical trials have been performed.

                                                                        261
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


                                                    HO
 HO
                                                                     O                                      HO
                              CH3               Glc =        OH
H3CO
                      O                             HO                                   HMB        =     H3CO              C
                                                                     OH                                                     O
         Apocynin
                                            -D-glucopyranosyl 4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzoyl

              Glc                                                             Glc
                                                                 O
HO           O H                                         R                   O H              Kutkoside R = HMB, R' = H
                                                                 O
                     O                                                                   O
                 H                                           H                   H
                                                        R'
                                                                                             Picroside II        R = H, R' = HMB
 HO                                                              O
         H
             H       Aucubin                                         H
                                                                             H


R2

                                   O
R1
                              O              O O                                         Picroside I        R1 = R2 = H
                                       OH
                                  HO              HO
                                                                         H
                                             OH O                                     Picroside III R1 = OCH3, R2 = OH
                                                                         O
                                                                     H
                                                 H
                                                 HO              H
                                                         H

                                            O                                                                           O
                               H3C OH                   R                                                   H3C OH                R
                               CH3                       O                                                  CH3                   O
                 O                      H                                                      O                    H
                                                             CH3                                                                      CH3
     H           H        H                 H    H3 C                                          H        H               H   H3C
                                                                                 HO
HO                                      OH                                                                          OH
                     CH3       CH3                                                                  CH3     CH3
 O                                                                               O
     H3C     CH3      Cucurbitacin B R = CO-CH3                                       H3 C    CH3       Cucurbitacin E          R = CO-CH3

                      Cucurbitacin D R = H                                                              Cucurbitacin I          R=H

                                            O                                                                           O
                               H3C OH                                                                       H3C OH
                               CH3                       OH                                                 CH3                   OH
                 O                      H                                                      O                    H
                                                             CH3                                                                      CH3
     H           H        H              H       H3 C                                H         H        H            H      H3C
HO                                      OH                                   HO                                     OH
                     CH3       CH3                                                                  CH3     CH3
HO
                                                                                 O
     H
     H3C     CH3                  Cucurbitacin F                                      H3 C    CH3           Cucurbitacin R


Uses described in traditional medicine
Used orally to treat anaemia, asthma, diarrhoea, dyspepsia, fever, head-
aches, obesity, malaria and stomach ache. Also used as an anti-inﬂamma-
tory agent, a cathartic, a cholagogue and an emmenagogue (5).

262
                                                           Rhizoma Picrorhizae


Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Anti-allergic and anti-asthma activity
Intragastric administration of a dose of 25.0 mg/kg body weight (bw) of a
standardized iridoid glycoside fraction from an ethanol extract of the rhi-
zome, inhibited passive cutaneous anaphylaxis in mice (82%) and rats
(50–85%) and protected mast cells from degranulation (60–80%) in a
concentration-dependent manner. Its effect was also studied in a sensi-
tized guinea-pig ileum preparation in vitro and in normal guinea-pigs in
vivo. The Schultz-Dale response was inhibited in sensitized guinea-pig
ileum, but histamine-induced bronchospasm was not antagonized or pre-
vented by the fraction, indicating the absence of a direct postsynaptic his-
tamine receptor-blocking activity (20).
    A dried chloroform (0.1 mg/ml) or dried ethyl acetate extract of the
rhizome (0.01 mg/ml) inhibited histamine release in human polymorpho-
nuclear leukocytes treated with rabbit antihuman IgE antibody, or the cal-
cium ionophores A12387 or C5A in vitro (21). Intragastric administration
of a dried ethyl acetate extract of the crude drug to guinea-pigs at a dose of
10.0 mg/kg bw 1 hour prior to challenge with platelet-activating factor or
administration of ovalbumin reduced bronchial obstruction (21).

Antidiabetic activity
Intragastric administration of a dried 75% methanol extract of the rhi-
zome (10:1) to rats at a dose of 75.0 mg/kg bw reduced alloxan- or glu-
cose-induced hyperglycaemia (22). When administered at a dose of
75.0 mg/kg or 150.0 mg/kg bw, the extract also inhibited the development
of alloxan-induced diabetes, and reduced serum peroxide levels and blood
urea nitrogen concentration (22).

Antihepatotoxic activity
A standardized iridoid glycoside fraction from the rhizome exhibited sig-
niﬁcant in vitro activity against toxicity induced by thioacetamide (200 μg/
ml), galactosamine (400 μg/ml), and carbon tetrachloride (3 μl/ml) in pri-
mary cultured rat hepatocytes (p < 0.01). Incubation of damaged hepato-
cytes with the fraction exhibited a concentration-dependent (1–100 μg/ml)
curative effect in restoring altered viability parameters (23). Intragastric
administration of a 95% ethanol extract of the crude drug to rats at a dose
of 0.75–6.0 mg/kg bw for 7 days reduced the levels of glutamate oxalo-
acetate transaminase, glutamate pyruvate transaminase, acid phosphatase,
glutamate dehydrogenase and bilirubin in animals with paracetamol- or
galactosamine-induced hepatotoxicity (24, 25). The level of glycogen in

                                                                          263
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


the liver was also increased in animals treated with the rhizome extract.
Intragastric administration of a methanol extract of the crude drug to mice,
at a dose of 670.0 mg/kg bw, suppressed carbon tetrachloride-induced
hepatotoxicity (26).
    Induction of liver injury in 16 mice by injection of carbon tetrachlo-
ride (CCl4) for 9 weeks was reduced by the rhizome. Eight animals were
fed the crude drug extract (12.0 mg/kg bw) daily, for 10 days before CCl4
injection. Control mice (n = 6) were injected with olive oil for the same
period. Serum markers of liver injury and histology of liver tissues were
studied. Hepatic glutathione, total thiol, glucose-6-phosphate dehydro-
genase, catalase, lipid peroxidation and plasma membrane-bound Na+/K+
ATPase were also assessed. Feeding the crude drug extract to CCl4-treat-
ed mice reduced serum alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotrans-
ferase, liver glutathione, catalase and membrane-bound Na+/K+ ATPase.
Histological lesions of liver and lipid peroxidation were also signiﬁcantly
fewer in these animals (27).
    Intragastric administration of a dried 75% methanol extract of the
powdered rhizomes, at a dose of 150.0 mg/kg bw inhibited the induction
of N-nitrosodiethylamine-induced hepatocarcinogenesis and prevented
lipid peroxide formation as well as reducing the levels of aniline hydrase
and G-glutamyl transpeptidase (28). Intragastric administration of a 95%
ethanol extract of the crude drug at a dose of 12.0–25.0 mg/kg bw for
7 days reduced galactosamine and monocrotaline-induced hepatotoxicity
(29, 30). The effect of an iridoid glycoside containing an extract of the rhi-
zome on the carcinogenic response and on hepatic and renal antioxidant
enzymes of rats treated with 1,2-dimethylhydrazine hydrochloride was
investigated (15). 1,2-dimethylhydrazine hydrochloride-induced hepatic
carcinogenic response and necrosis were inhibited by oral administration
of the extract at doses of 40.0 and 200.0 mg/kg bw. Liver G-glutamyl trans-
peptidase was reduced to 0.22 ± 0.04 and 0.18 ± 0.03 nmol/mg protein,
respectively, by the treatment. Depletion of hepatic and renal antioxidant
enzymes such as catalase and superoxide dismutase levels induced by 1,2-
dimethylhydrazine hydrochloride was reversed by the treatment, and el-
evated lipid peroxidation in liver, kidney and serum was reduced. Renal
glutathione S-transferase and hepatic glutathione levels which had been
depleted by 1,2-dimethylhydrazine hydrochloride were also increased.
Oral administration of a standardized iridoid glycoside fraction of the
crude drug (25.0 mg/kg bw daily for 15 days), signiﬁcantly reduced the
increases in the activities of tau-glutamyl transpeptidase, 5´-nucleotidase,
acid phosphatase and acid ribonuclease, and decreased the activities of suc-
cinate dehydrogenase and glucose-6-phosphatase in liver, and the level of

264
                                                           Rhizoma Picrorhizae


transaminases, sorbitol dehydrogenase, glutamate dehydrogenase, lactate
dehydrogenase, acid phosphatase, alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin in
the serum of aﬂatoxin B1-treated rats (31).
   The mechanism of action of an iridoid glycoside extract of the rhizome
on hepatocellular injury and redox status was investigated in a haemor-
rhage-resuscitation injury in adult rats (32). Anaesthetized rats were sub-
jected to haemorrhagic shock by bleeding 30 ml/kg bw. After 60 minutes
of shock, rats were resuscitated with twice the shed blood volume of lac-
tated Ringer’s solution and were killed 2 hours after resuscitation. Pre-
treatment with the extract (12 mg/kg bw), given orally for 7 days, resulted
in a signiﬁcant decrease in serum aspartate transaminase and G-glutamyl
transpeptidase levels. The extract also inhibited the lipid peroxidation and
nitric oxide release that occurred after haemorrhage-resuscitation and al-
tered the activity of glutathione reductase in a favourable manner. The
extract down-regulated the stress-sensitive transcription factor activator
protein 1 and decreased the level of c-fos mRNA as well as c-jun and c-fos
proteins in liver tissue, indicating that its actions could be mediated
through AP1 and associated signal transduction pathways (32).
Anti-inﬂammatory activity
Intragastric administration of a 95% ethanol extract of the rhizome to
rats, at a dose of 100.0 mg/kg bw for 3 days, reduced carrageenan-induced
pedal oedema (32, 33). Co-administration of the anti-inﬂammatory an-
tagonists, propranolol or timolol with the 95% ethanol extract of the rhi-
zome reduced its effects.
Choleretic activity
Intragastric administration of a glycoside mixture (picroside-1 and kut-
koside 1:1.5, isolated from the rhizome) to guinea-pigs, at a dose of
1.5 mg/kg bw, reduced paracetamol-induced cholestasis by 59.2%; at
3 mg/kg bw, treatment reduced ethynylestradiol-induced cholestasis by
77%. At a dose of 6.0 mg/kg bw the same mixture increased bile ﬂow by
120% (34). Intragastric administration of an extract of the crude drug at a
dose of 2.0 mg/kg bw increased bile secretion (35). Intragastric adminis-
tration of an unspeciﬁed extract (no further details available) of the rhi-
zome to guinea-pigs at a dose of 6.0 mg/kg bw for 7 days prior to thi-
acetamide administration prevented cholestasis and hepatotoxicity (37).
Diuretic activity
Intraperitoneal administration of an aqueous ethanol extract (1:1) of the rhi-
zome to rats at a dose of 250.0 mg/kg bw increased the amount of urine pro-
duced over a 4-hour period, in animals preloaded with saline solution (38).

                                                                          265
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Immune stimulatory effects
A dried diethyl ether extract of the rhizome inhibited the classical path-
way of complement (median inhibitory concentration (IC50) 1.9 μg/ml).
Aqueous, petroleum ether, methanol or ethyl acetate extracts of the crude
drug had inhibitory concentrations of 13, 17, 38 and 55 μg/ml, respec-
tively (3). The diethyl ether extract of the crude drug also had moderate
inhibitory activity against the activation of polymorphonuclear cells (IC50
53 μg/ml) in vitro, and reduced mitogen-induced proliferation of T lym-
phocytes (IC50 13 μg/ml) (3). Two cucurbitacins, picracin and deacetyl-
picracin, isolated from the rhizomes of the crude drug were responsible
for the inhibition of mitogen-induced human T-lymphocyte proliferation
(39). Incubation of picracin and deacetylpicracin with peripheral blood
lymphocytes inhibited interleukin-2 release by phytohaemagglutinin-
activated T cells. The IC50s were 5 and 16 μM, respectively. Both picracin
and cucurbitacin E also inhibited the release of interleukin 1B and tumour
necrosis factor A from monocytes (IC50s were 15 and 3 μM, respectively).
Deacetylpicracin was not active at concentrations up to 100 μM (40).
Intraperitoneal injection of picracin or deacetylpicracin, 1 hour prior to
induction of delayed-type hypersensitivity signiﬁcantly (p < 0.001) in-
hibited the delayed-type hypersensitivity response at doses of 100.0 mg/
kg and 30.0 mg/kg bw in mice (41).
Toxicology
An aqueous ethanol extract of the rhizome administered intraperitoneally
to mice had a median lethal dose of 1.09 g/kg bw, indicating low toxicity
(38). A 70% methanol extract of the crude drug administered intragastri-
cally to mice exhibited a median lethal dose at > 2 g/kg bw (41). An aque-
ous extract of the rhizome did not stimulate cell proliferation in melano-
cyte cells in vitro at a concentration of 1 mg/ml (42). The median lethal
dose of cucurbitacin B was 0.5 mg/kg bw in rabbits after intravenous ad-
ministration and 340 mg/kg bw of cucurbitacin E in mice after oral admin-
istration (3). Oral administration of 200 mg/kg bw of an ethanol or diethyl
ether extract of the crude drug for 3 or 6 weeks did not increase the weight
of the thymus, spleen, liver or mesenterial lymph nodes in mice (3).

Clinical pharmacology
In one therapeutic observational study, 20 patients with bronchial asthma
were treated with a crude extract of the drug (300 mg three times daily)
for 1 year. Outcomes measured included clinical improvement, reduction
in the use of bronchodilators and pulmonary function tests. Of the 20 pa-
tients treated, 10 showed varying degrees of clinical improvement, includ-
ing an improvement in pulmonary function tests (17).

266
                                                         Rhizoma Picrorhizae


    A preliminary clinical trial involving 36 patients with bronchial asthma
assessed the efﬁcacy of an extract of the crude drug. Powdered crude drug
at a dose of 75 mg twice daily was administered for 2 weeks. The study
reported that 53% of patients had no attacks or chest symptoms, 25%
had occasional attacks, which were reduced in severity after treatment.
Treatment did not improve the condition of patients who smoked or reg-
ularly drank alcohol, and was not effective for acute attacks (18).
    In a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled trial involving pa-
tients diagnosed with acute viral hepatitis (hepatitis B surface antigen-
negative), a powder of the crude drug was administered orally (375 mg
three times a day) for 2 weeks (n = 15) or a matching placebo was given
(n = 18). The difference in values of bilirubin, serum glutamic oxaloacetic
transaminase and serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase between the group
that received the placebo and the group that received the treatment with
the crude drug was signiﬁcant. The time in days required for total serum
bilirubin to drop to an average value of 2.5 mg% was 75.9 days in patients
who received the placebo versus 27.4 days in the treatment group (19).

Adverse reactions
No information was found.

Contraindications
No information was found.

Warnings
No information was found.

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
No information was found.

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
Intragastric administration of a dried 70% methanol extract of the rhi-
zome was not teratogenic in pregnant rats when administered from day 13
of pregnancy onwards at doses of 250.0–500.0 mg/kg bw (41).

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Intragastric administration of a dried 70% methanol extract of the rhi-
zome did not induce abortion in pregnant rats when administered from
day 13 of pregnancy onwards at doses of 250–500.0 mg/kg bw (41).

                                                                        267
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug, extracts, tablets and tinctures.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Oral daily dose: 1–3 g of the powdered crude drug (1).

References
1. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India. Part I, Vol. II, 1st ed. New Delhi,
    Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Department of Indian System of Med-
    icine and Homoeopathy, 1999.
2. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Beijing, Chemical Indus-
    try Press, 2005.
3. Smit HF. Picrorhiza scrophulariiﬂora, from traditional use to immunomodu-
    latory activity. Utrecht, University of Utrecht, Faculty of Pharmacy, 2000.
4. Medicinal plants of India. Vol. 2. New Delhi, Indian Council of Medical Re-
    search, 1987.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
6. Nadkarni AK. Dr. K.M. Nadkarni’s Indian materia medica. Bombay, Popu-
    lar Prakashan, 1976.
7. Rajeshkumar NV, Kuttan R. Modulation of carcinogenic response and anti-
    oxidant enzymes of rats administered with 1,2-dimethylhydrazine by Picro-
    liv. Cancer Letters, 2003, 191:137–143.
8. Han DR et al. Modern pharmacognosy. Seoul, Hakchang, 1989 [in Korean].
9. Bensky D, Gamble A. Chinese herbal medicine. Materia medica, revised ed.
    Seattle, WA, Eastland Press, 1993.
10. Keys JD. Chinese herbs: their botany, chemistry, and pharmacodynamics.
    Tokyo, Charles E. Tuttle, 1976.
11. Sturm S, Stuppner H. Analysis of iridoid glycosides from Picrorhiza kurroa
    by capillary electrophoresis and high performance liquid chromatography-
    mass spectrometry. Chromatographia, 2001, 53:612–618.
12. WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
13. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
14. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).

268
                                                                Rhizoma Picrorhizae


15. Rajeshkumar NV, Kuttan R. Protective effect of picroliv, the active constitu-
    ent of Picrorhiza kurroa, against chemical carcinogenesis in mice. Teratogen-
    esis, Carcinogenesis, and Mutagenesis, 2001, 21:303–313.
16. Kim IH et al. Medicinal botany. Seoul, Hakchang, 1988 [in Korean].
17. Yegnenarayan R et al. Study of Picrorrhiza kurrooa (PK 300) in cases of
    bronchial asthma. Bombay Hospital Journal, 1982, 24:15–18.
18. Rajaram D. A preliminary clinical trial of Picrorhiza kurroa in bronchial
    asthma. Bombay Hospital Journal, 1976, 18:14–17.
19. Vaidya AB et al. Picrorhiza kurroa (Kutaki) Royle ex Benth as a hepatopro-
    tective agent – experimental & clinical studies. Journal of Postgraduate Med-
    icine, 1996, 42:105–108.
20. Baruah CC et al. Anti-allergic and anti-anaphylactic activity of picroliv – a
    standardised iridoid glycoside fraction of Picrorhiza kurroa. Pharmacology
    Research, 1998, 38:487–492.
21. Dorsch W et al. Antiasthmatic effects of Picrorhiza kurroa: Androsin pre-
    vents allergen- and PAF-induced bronchial obstruction in guinea pigs. Inter-
    national Archives of Allergy and Applied Immunology, 1991, 95:128–133.
22. Joy KL et al. Effect of Picrorrhiza kurroa extract on transplanted tumours
    and chemical carcinogenesis in mice. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2000,
    71:261–266.
23. Visen PK, Saraswat B, Dhawan BN. Curative effect of picroliv on primary
    cultured rat hepatocytes against different hepatotoxins: an in vitro study.
    Journal of Pharmacology and Toxicology Methods, 1998, 40:173–179.
24. Ansari RA et al. Antihepatotoxicity properties of Picroliv: an active fraction
    from rhizomes of Picrorhiza kurroa. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1991,
    34:61–68.
25. Dwivedi Y et al. Prevention of paracetamol-induced hepatic damage in rats
    by Picroliv, the standardized active fraction from Picrorhiza kurroa. Phyto-
    therapy Research, 1991, 5:115–119.
26. Chang IM, Yun HS. Plants with liver-protective activities: pharmacology and
    toxicology of aucubin. In: Chang HM et al. eds. Advances in Chinese me-
    dicinal materials research. Singapore, World Scientiﬁc Publishing, 1985.
27. Santra A et al. Prevention of carbon tetrachloride-induced hepatic injury in
    mice by Picrorhiza kurroa. Indian Journal of Gastroenterology, 1998, 17:6–9.
28. Joy KL, Kuttan R. Anti-diabetic activity of Picrorrhiza kurroa extract. Jour-
    nal of Ethnopharmacology, 1999, 167:143–148.
29. Dwivedi Y et al. Picroliv and its components kutkoside and picroside I pro-
    tect liver against galactosamine-induced damage in rats. Pharmacology &
    Toxicology, 1992, 71:383–387.
30. Dwivedi Y et al. Picroliv protects against monocrotaline-induced hepatic
    damage in rats. Pharmacological Research, 1991, 23:399–407.
31. Rastogi R et al. Hepatocurative effect of picroliv and silymarin against aﬂa-
    toxin B1 induced hepatotoxicity in rats. Planta Medica, 2000, 66:709–713.
32. Seth P et al. Picroliv modulates antioxidant status and down-regulates AP1 tran-
    scription factor after hemorrhage and resuscitation. Shock, 2003, 19:169–175.

                                                                               269
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


33. Pandey BL, Das PK. Immunopharmacological studies on Picrorhiza kurroa
    Royle-Ex Benth Part V: Anti-inﬂammatory action: Relation with cell types
    involved in inﬂammation. Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology,
    1988, 32:289–292.
34. Pandey BL, Das PK. Immunopharmacological studies on Picrorhiza kurroa
    Royle-ex Benth Part IV: cellular mechanisms of anti-inﬂammatory action.
    Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology, 1989, 33:28–30.
35. Dwivedi Y et al. Picroliv affords protection against thioacetamide-induced
    hepatic damage in rats. Planta Medica, 1991, 57:25–28.
36. Saraswat B et al. Ex vivo and in vivo investigations of picroliv from Picrorhi-
    za kurroa in an alcohol intoxication model in rats. Journal of Ethnopharma-
    cology, 1999, 66:263–269.
37. Shukla B et al. Reversal of thioacetamide induced cholestasis by Picroliv in
    rodents. Phytotherapy Research, 1992, 6:53–55.
38. Dhar ML et al. Screening of Indian plants for biological activity. Part IV.
    Indian Journal of Experimental Biology, 1973, 11:43–54.
39. Smit HF et al. Inhibition of T-lymphocyte proliferation by cucurbitacins
    from Picrorhiza scrophulariaeﬂora. Journal of Natural Products, 2000,
    63:1300–1302.
40. Smit HF et al. Immunomodulatory and anti-inﬂammatory activity of Picrorhi-
    za scrophulariaeﬂora. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2000, 73:101–109.
41. Lee EB. Teratogenicity of the extracts of crude drugs. Korean Journal of
    Pharmacognosy, 1982, 13:116–121.
42. Lin ZX, Hoult JRS, Raman A. Sulphorhodamine B assay for measuring pro-
    liferation of a pigmented melanocyte cell line and its application to the evalu-
    ation of crude drugs used in the treatment of vitiligo. Journal of Ethnophar-
    macology, 1999, 66:141–150.




270
                              Oleum Ricini




Deﬁnition
Oleum Ricini is the ﬁxed oil obtained by cold expression from the seeds
of Ricinus communis L. (Euphorbiaceae) (1–5).

Synonyms
Ricinus speciosus Burm., R. viridis Willd. (6).

Vernacular names
Aamudamu, aamudamu chettu, aavanak, African coffee tree, agaliva, amanakku,
amidamu, amudam, amudamu, andela, ander, andi, angan-tangan, arand, aranda,
arash, aril, arundi, audla, avend, awriwra, ayrunkukri, balambaal olyo, balamball,
bedanjir, bele ni vavalagi, bherenda, bimázi, bofareira, botareira, carapate, carra-
pateira, caster bean plant, caster oil bush, castor, castor-oil plant, castor-oil tree,
Cemeiner Wunderbaum, chittmani, ‘dan kwasare, diveli, djarak, djarak djeetoon,
djarak kaleeki, endaru, endi, eramudapu, erand, eranda, erendi, eri, erund, fam-
pinonoana, franda, gab, gandharva hasthah, harwaa, heran, higuera, higuereta,
higuerilla, higuerilla blanca, higuerillo, higuerillo blanco, higuerillo rojo, higuero,
himashiyu, himasiyu, ilara, ilarun, jar, kaleeki, kalèkè, karchak, kastalan qajne,
kerwa, kesusi, kharwa, kherwa, khirva, khirwa, krapata, kula, kula kula, lahung,
lapa-lapa-adete, lara, legezabwende, lepo, lepohina, lepokula, libono, lupono,
mahona, masketi, mbono, Mexico weed, mupfure, muriki, noronda, ntoo qaib
lab, nyonyo, odagwa, palma Christi, palma de cristo, panchangulam, pei-ma,
pomaskwiti, ra’ a kau, red chicken tree, red eagle foot, redh, redhi, ricin, ricini
oleum virginale, ricino, ricinus, Rizinus, sadabherenda, tangantangan oil plant,
tel-enderu, tobsha, tochem-I-bed-anjir, tomontigi, toto ni vavalagi, ttchakkma,
txiv taw dlaav laab, udukaju, unapalan, utouto, vatari, verenda, wetapela’celik,
wonder tree, wonderboom, zeitel-kharwaa, zurma (6–16).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to tropical regions of Africa, probably native to Ethiopia, but
has been adapted and cultivated in subtropical to temperate areas of the
world (6, 8, 14, 17).

                                                                                  271
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Description
The castor-oil plant is either cultivated or is found growing wild in most
tropical and warm temperate countries. It varies from an annual, mono-
ecious herb in temperate regions to a tree attaining a height of 15 m in some
tropical areas. There are hundreds of forms of the plant which vary in size,
colour of stem and leaves, leaf markings, branching, size, colour and mark-
ings of seeds. Shoots and panicles glaucous. Leaves are large, alternate,
petiolate, peltate, palmate, 5–12 lobed, the lobes serrate or dentate, green or
reddish. The inﬂorescence is a raceme of staminate and pistillate ﬂowers,
often 30–60 cm high, the pistillate ﬂowers occurring above the staminate
ones on the ﬂoral axis. The fruit is a 3-celled capsule generally covered with
soft spines and dehiscing into 3 cocci, each containing an ovoid albuminous
seed. Seeds oblong, smooth, mottled and poisonous (8, 12).

Plant material of interest: ﬁxed oil
General appearance
A colourless or pale yellow, clear, viscous oil, miscible with dehydrated
ethanol or ether. It is only partly soluble in hexane (a distinction from
most other ﬁxed oils). When cooled to 0 °C, it becomes more viscous, and
turbidity is gradually formed (1–5).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: slight, characteristic; taste: initially bland, with a slightly acrid
aftertaste (3, 4).

General identity tests
Physicochemical properties (2–4), chemical tests (3, 4), and gas chroma-
tography analysis of fatty acids (1).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (18).

Foreign organic matter
To be established according to national requirements.

Total ash
Not applicable.

272
                                                               Oleum Ricini


Acid-insoluble ash
Not applicable.

Water-soluble extractive
Not applicable.

Water
Not more than 0.3% according to the method of Karl-Fischer (1).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (1). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (1)
and the WHO quality control methods for medicinal plant materials (18)
and pesticide residues (19).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (18).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (18).

Other purity tests
Speciﬁc gravity d2525: 0.953–0.965 (1, 3, 4).
Saponiﬁcation value: 176–187 (3–5).
Acid value: not more than 1.5 (3, 4).
Hydroxyl value: 155–177 (3, 4).
Iodine value: 80–90 (1, 3).
Peroxide value: not less than 150 (1).
Optical rotation: +3.5 to +6.0 (1).
Refractive index: 1.478–1.480 (5).


Chemical assays
Fatty acid content: palmitic (2% maximum), stearic (2.5% maximum),
oleic and isomers (2.5–6.0%), linoleic (2.5–7.0%), linolenic (2.5% maxi-
mum), eicosenoic (1.0% maximum), ricinoleic acid (85–92%) and other
fatty acids (maximum) determined by gas chromatography (1).

                                                                       273
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Major chemical constituents
The major chemical constituents of the oil are triacyl glycerols containing
an unsaturated and hydroxylated C18 fatty acid: (R)-(+)-12-hydroxy-Z-
octadec-9-enoic acid, also known as ricinoleic acid (85–92%) (1, 17). It
should be noted that ricinoleic acid occurs primarily as its precursor tri-
glyceride, ricinolein (70–77% of the oil) (20). Other fatty acids found are:
palmitic (2% maximum), stearic (2.5% maximum), oleic and isomers
(2.5–6.0%), linoleic (2.5–7.0%), linolenic (2.5% maximum), eicosenoic
(1.0% maximum), other acids (1.0% maximum) (1). The structure of rici-
noleic acid is presented below.

                                H OH
Ricinoleic acid   H3 C                                     CO2H




Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Short-term treatment (3–5 days) for acute constipation when other di-
etary methods or bulk-forming laxatives have not provided adequate re-
lief. As a cathartic for use in bowel evacuation prior to surgery (21). Used
externally for topical dermatoses and dermatitis (5, 6).

Uses described in traditional medicine
Used as an emmenagogue, to induce labour, for the treatment of burns,
bronchitis, diarrhoea, itching, earache, haemorrhoids, pneumonia, rheu-
matism and sprains (6, 22, 23).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Anti-inﬂammatory activity
Pharmacological studies suggest that ricinoleic acid has a similar activity to
that of capsaicin, and further suggest a potential interaction of ricinoleic
acid with sensory neuropeptide-mediated neurogenic inﬂammation (24).
   The pro-inﬂammatory and anti-inﬂammatory effects of ricinoleic acid
were assessed in an experimental model of blepharitis induced by intra-
dermal injection of carrageenan in guinea-pig eyelids. Topical treatment
with ricinoleic acid (10–100.0 mg/guinea-pig) or capsaicin (1–10 mg/guin-
ea-pig) caused eyelid reddening and oedema. At lower doses both drugs

274
                                                                Oleum Ricini


(ricinoleic acid 0.3–3 mg/guinea-pig and capsaicin 0.009–0.09 mg/guinea-
pig) signiﬁcantly potentiated the eyelid oedema induced by carrageenan.
The tachykinin NK1 receptor antagonist FK 888 (0.59 mg/kg subcutane-
ously) reduced carrageenan-induced eyelid oedema induced by either rici-
noleic acid or capsaicin. Intravenous administration of the neutral endo-
peptidase inhibitor, thiorphan (1.3 mg/kg body weight (bw)) signiﬁcantly
enhanced carrageenan-induced eyelid oedema produced by ricinoleic acid.
However, repeated topical application of ricinoleic acid (0.9 mg/guinea-
pig) or capsaicin (0.09 mg/guinea-pig) for 8 days inhibited carrageenan-
induced eyelid oedema. This anti-inﬂammatory effect was accompanied
by a reduction in the tachykinin content of the eyelids, as determined by
radioimmunoassay. Ricinoleic acid, like capsaicin, appears to possess dual
pro-inﬂammatory and anti-inﬂammatory properties; these are observed
upon acute and repeated application, respectively (24).
    A study comparing the anti-inﬂammatory activities of ricinoleic acid
with those of capsaicin in several models of acute and subchronic inﬂam-
mation was performed. Acute inﬂammation was induced by intradermal
injection of carrageenan in mice or by histamine in the guinea-pig eyelid.
Subchronic oedema was induced by injection of complete Freund’s adju-
vant into the right ventral paw of mice. Tissue substance P was measured
in the carrageenan experiments by radioimmunoassay. Acute topical ap-
plication of ricinoleic acid (0.9 mg/mouse) or capsaicin (0.09 mg/mouse)
signiﬁcantly increased the mouse paw oedema induced by carrageenan,
while repeated topical treatment with the same doses of both compounds
for 8 days resulted in a marked inhibition of carrageenan-induced paw oe-
dema matched by a reduction in levels of substance P in tissue. Similar ef-
fects were found against histamine-induced eyelid oedema in guinea-pigs
after acute or repeated application of ricinoleic acid or capsaicin. Ricino-
leic acid and capsaicin given for 1–3 weeks reduced the established oedema
induced by Freund’s adjuvant, a sub-chronic model of inﬂammation (25).
Induction of labour
An investigation exploring the effect of a diet including castor oil on the
initiation of labour of pregnant rats was performed. The time of the ini-
tiation of labour and course of delivery were observed in rats that received
castor oil by gavage on days 18, 19 and 20 of gestation. The diet contain-
ing castor oil induced the initiation of labour and shortened the course of
the delivery in rats. Ricinoleic acid was the active component of castor oil
in this study (26).
    The effects of a diet containing castor oil on the synthesis of prosta-
glandin E2 and the mechanism of labour induction were investigated in
pregnant rats fed a diet containing castor oil on days 18 and 19 of gesta-

                                                                        275
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


tion. At the time of death (day 20), blood from portal and peripheral veins,
and samples from intestinal mucosa, amnion, amniotic cells and placenta
were collected, and the tissues were cultured in the presence of ricinoleic
acid or indometacin. The concentrations of prostaglandin E2 in the media
or blood were measured by radioimmunoassay methods. The prostaglan-
din E2 levels in the portal vein increased; the prostaglandin E2 levels in
peripheral blood showed no signiﬁcant changes; the prostaglandin E2 lev-
els in the tissues of the intestinal mucosa, placenta, amnion and amniotic
cells were increased. Ricinoleic acid stimulated the synthesis of prosta-
glandin E2 in the tissues in vitro (27).
Toxicology
Toxicity studies on castor oil have been performed by incorporating the
oil into feed rations at concentrations as high as 10% of the diet. Animals,
F344/N rats and B6C3F1 mice, of both sexes were fed the diet for
13 weeks. Exposure to castor oil at dietary concentrations as high as 10%
in 13-week studies did not affect survival or body weight gains of rats or
mice (10 per sex and dose). No biologically signiﬁcant effects were noted
in haematological analyses in rats. Small increases in total bile acids and in
serum alkaline phosphatase were noted at various times during the studies
in rats receiving the higher dietary concentrations of castor oil. Liver
weights were increased in male rats receiving the 10% dietary concentra-
tion and in male and female mice receiving diets containing 5% or 10%
castor oil. However, no histopathological lesions were associated with
these liver changes, nor were there any compound-related morphological
changes in any organ in rats or mice. Thus, no signiﬁcant adverse effects
of castor oil administration were noted (28).
    Epithelial cells, isolated from small intestine of hamsters, were used to
measure in vitro cytotoxicity of the crude drug. The cytotoxicity of rici-
noleic acid (castor oil) was assessed by:
       — exclusion of trypan blue;
       — release of intracellular (prelabelled) 51Cr; and
       — inhibition of cellular uptake of 3-O-methylglucose.
   Ricinoleate produced weak but dose-dependent (0.1–2.0 mM) cyto-
toxicity as assessed by all three methods (29).
   In an in vivo study, segments of rabbit ileum were examined by scan-
ning electron microscopy after exposure to various compounds known to
stimulate ﬂuid secretion in the small intestine. After perfusion with rici-
noleate (castor oil) at a concentration of 10 mM, striking changes were
observed at villus tips and on the apicolateral surfaces of villi; erosions of
the tips were conﬁrmed by light microscopy of the same pieces of tissue

276
                                                                  Oleum Ricini


examined by scanning electron microscopy. The changes that appeared
after treatment with ricinoleate were partially reversed during perfusion
with control buffer for 2 hours (30).

Clinical pharmacology
Laxative effect
Castor oil is an anionic surfactant laxative. Its mechanism of action is pri-
marily as a stool-wetting and stool-softening agent that allows the mixing
of water, lipids and other faecal material by altering intestinal permeabil-
ity and increasing net water and electrolyte secretions. The triglyceride of
ricinoleic acid in castor oil is hydrolysed within the small intestine by
pancreatic lipases to ricinoleic acid and glycerol. Ricinoleate acts as a local
irritant that increases production of cyclic adenosine monophosphate re-
sulting in extensive electrolyte secretion in the small intestine by reducing
net absorption of ﬂuid and electrolytes, which ultimately stimulates in-
testinal peristalsis. Because ricinoleate acts in the small intestine, accumu-
lation of ﬂuid and evacuation takes place rapidly within 1–6 hours, and it
continues until the compound is excreted via the colon. Colonic empty-
ing is so complete that several days may elapse before a normal bowel
movement occurs (21).
    To examine the effects of oleic acid and ricinoleic acid on jejunal ab-
sorption, steady-state jejunal perfusions were done in healthy volunteers.
Taurocholate, used to solubilize the fatty acids, did not inﬂuence absorp-
tion. Both fatty acids, at a concentration of 10 mM, reversed electrolyte
and water net movement and induced reversible ﬂuid secretion. Ricino-
leic acid (the active principle of castor oil) was the more potent compound.
However, ricinoleic acid was absorbed more slowly than oleic acid, and
was associated with higher intraluminal concentrations (31).
    A retrospective study was performed in patients who underwent elec-
tive surgery for colorectal carcinomas. The patients were divided into
two groups according to the method of colonic cleansing that was used.
Group 1 (n = 154) used the traditional bowel preparation which included
30.0 ml castor oil given orally on the day before the operation, in addi-
tion to three soap enemas. Patients in group 2 (n = 36) were given 500 ml
10% mannitol on the day before the operation. Infections due to wounds
developed in 26 patients from group 1 versus 13 patients from group 2.
The difference was statistically signiﬁcant (16.9% versus 36.1%, p < 0.01).
The differences in the incidence of anastomotic leaks and mortality rate
between the two groups were not statistically signiﬁcant. Castor-oil
treatment reduced the number of postoperative infectious wound com-
plications (32).

                                                                           277
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Induction of labour
Castor oil has been widely used as a traditional method of initiating la-
bour in midwifery practice. Its role in the initiation of labour is poorly
understood and data examining its clinical efﬁcacy are severely limited.
The effects of castor oil administered orally or in enemas for third trimes-
ter cervical ripening or induction of labour in comparison with other
methods of cervical ripening or induction of labour have been reviewed.
    One prospective study of 100 women compared a single dose of castor
oil with no treatment. The pregnant women had intact membranes at 40–
42 weeks of gestation and were referred for antepartum testing. Inclusion
criteria included cervical examination, a Bishop score of 4 or less, and no
evidence of regular uterine contractions. Patients were alternately as-
signed to one of two study groups. One group received a single oral dose
of castor oil (60 ml), and the other, no treatment. Castor oil treatment was
considered successful if labour began within 24 hours after administra-
tion. Groups were compared for onset of labour within 24 hours, method
of delivery, presence of meconium-stained amniotic ﬂuid, and Apgar
score and birth weight of the infant. Fifty-two women received castor oil
and 48 no treatment. Following administration of castor oil, 30 of 52 wom-
en (57.7%) began active labour compared to 2 of 48 (4.2%) who had re-
ceived no treatment. Of the women in whom castor-oil treatment was
successful, 83.3% (25/30) of the women delivered vaginally. No differ-
ence was found between rates of caesarean section (relative risk (RR) 2.31;
95% conﬁdence intervals (CI) 0.77–6.87). No data were presented on
neonatal or maternal mortality or morbidity. There was no difference be-
tween either the rate of meconium-stained liquor (RR 0.77; 95% CI 0.25–
2.36) or Apgar score < 7 at 5 minutes (RR 0.92; 95% CI 0.02–45.71) be-
tween the two groups. The number of participants was small, hence only
large differences in outcomes could have been detected. The primary side-
effect was nausea. In general, because the trial was small and of poor
methodological quality, there is insufﬁcient evidence to support the safety
and efﬁcacy of the oil for the induction of labour (33, 34).
Wound-healing effects
Skin graft donor sites are partial-thickness wounds that are commonly
managed with gauze-type dressings, which often cause more pain and dif-
ﬁculty in healing than the graft-recipient site. A retrospective study was
conducted to ascertain the effects of using a castor oil-balsam of Peru-
trypsin-containing ointment on skin graft donor sites in 36 consecutive
patients (16 female, 20 male). All donor sites were epithelialized after
11 days (range 6–11 days, mean 8 days) and no wound complications were
observed (35).

278
                                                                  Oleum Ricini


Adverse reactions
Exanthema may occur. In this case, treatment with the oil should be dis-
continued and should not be used again. Furthermore, castor oil may
cause stomach upset, and at higher doses nausea, vomiting, painful ab-
dominal cramps and severe diarrhoea with loss of water and electrolytes.
In this case it is necessary to reduce the dosage or to discontinue use of the
oil. Continuous use and misuse may increase ﬂuid and electrolyte loss,
requiring intravenous rehydration and replacement of electrolytes. Ex-
cessive potassium loss may lead to disorders of heart function and muscle
weakness (21).
    A 26-year-old woman, who had had recurrent vulvo-vaginitis for
1 year, was treated with a topical pessary of meclocycline sulfosalicylate.
After a 7-day treatment period, the following symptoms appeared: oede-
ma of the labia, widespread irregular abdominal dermatitis in the right
iliac fossa and numerous generalized small weals. These symptoms were
treated with dexchlorpheniramine maleate without results and it was nec-
essary to prescribe prednisone tablets. Patch tests at 4, 12, 24, 48 and 96 h
found a positive response to hydrogenated castor oil, with associated ery-
thema, inﬁltration and papules after 48 h.
    There have been several reports of allergy to castor beans from which
castor oil is derived. Cases of asthma have been reported not only in
employees in the oil industry, but also in seamen and laboratory work-
ers exposed to the beans. Three important allergens from the crude drug
have been identiﬁed: a 2S storage albumin of 11 kDa, a 11S crystalloid
protein with bands at 50 kDa and a protein doublet of 47 and 51 kDa.
These allergens have been named Ric c 1, Ric c 2 and allergen 3. Castor
oil extractors, fertilizer workers and farmers may acquire occupational
dermatitis from handling plants or beans. Castor oil may be used in cos-
metics, particularly lipsticks, because of its superior moisturizing char-
acteristics, and may rarely produce allergic contact dermatitis. Sporadic
case-reports of allergy have implicated ricinoleic acid as the causative
agent (36).
    A woman at 39 weeks gestation who had had a previous cesarean de-
livery had severe abdominal pains and rupture of the membranes shortly
after ingesting 5 ml of castor oil. Forty-ﬁve minutes later, repetitive vari-
able decelerations prompted a cesarean delivery. During surgery, a por-
tion of the umbilical cord was found to be protruding from a 2-cm rup-
ture of the lower transverse scar (37).
    Contact dermatitis and a number of cases of chelitis have also been
reported following exposure of patients to the crude drug (38, 39).

                                                                          279
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Contraindications
Oleum Ricini should not be used as a laxative during pregnancy or while
breastfeeding (5, 13), or in children under the age of 12 years.
    Due to stimulation of bile ﬂow, the oil should not be used by patients
with biliary tract obstructions or other biliary disorders.
    Oleum Ricini is contraindicated in patients with hypersensitivity or
allergy to the oil, appendicitis, chronic inﬂammatory bowel disorders,
undiagnosed abdominal pain or severe dehydration associated with the
loss of salt and water.
    It should not be used in cases of intestinal blockage and ileus.

Warnings
Induction of labour: use of the crude drug in pregnancy (after 40 weeks of
gestation) requires the supervision of a physician, midwife or other expe-
rienced health care professional.
As a cathartic: intake of cathartic drugs for more than a few days may lead
to a worsening of intestinal hypomotility. Do not take for more than
3–5 days without consulting a health care professional. Overdose may
lead to nausea, vomiting, painful abdominal cramps and severe diarrhoea
with loss of water and electrolytes. In case of overdose, a health care pro-
fessional should be consulted regarding possible replacement of ﬂuid and
electrolytes.

Precautions
Drug interactions
Concomitant use of castor oil with cardiac glycosides, antiarrhythmic
drugs, diuretics, cortisol, liquorice, antihistamines and fat-soluble vita-
mins may reduce the efﬁcacy of these drugs or, in the case of cardiac gly-
cosides, may increase the risk of adverse events due to ﬂuid and electro-
lyte losses.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
Genetic toxicity studies were negative for induction of mutations in the
Ames test using Salmonella typhimurium for induction of sister chroma-
tid exchanges or chromosomal aberrations in Chinese hamster ovary cells,
and for induction of micronuclei in the peripheral blood erythrocytes of
mice fed a diet containing 10% seed oil for 13 weeks (28). No signiﬁcant
changes were noted in a screening study for male reproductive end-points,
including sperm count and motility, and no changes were observed in the

280
                                                                 Oleum Ricini


length of estrous cycles of rats or mice given diets containing castor oil at
a concentration of up to 10% (28).

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Oleum Ricini as a laxative is contraindicated in pregnancy before 40 weeks
of gestation, due to potential induction of labour.

Nursing mothers
Oleum Ricini is contraindicated in breastfeeding mothers. Ricinoleic acid
is absorbed into the bloodstream and is excreted into human breast milk.
In suckling infants it has a purgative effect (13).

Paediatric use
See Contraindications.

Other precautions
No information was found.


Dosage forms
Fixed oil, capsules (8).


Storage
Preserve in well-closed containers, protected from light.


Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
As a laxative: single daily dose of 1–10 ml (40). Dose for induction of la-
bour: under medical supervision, maximum single dose of 4–60 ml (33,
34). Topical use: ﬁxed oil (5).


References
1. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
   Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
2. The United States pharmacopeia, 25th rev. Rockville, MD, United States
   Pharmacopeia Convention, 2005.
3. The Japanese pharmacopoeia, 14th ed. (English ed.). Tokyo, Ministry of
   Health and Welfare, 2001 (available at: http://jpdb.nihs.go.jp/jp14e/).
4. The Korean Pharmacopoeia, 8th ed. (English ed.). Seoul, Korea Food and
   Drug Administration, 2004.

                                                                         281
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


5. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Vol. 1 (English ed). Guang-
    zhou, Guangdong Science and Technology Press, 2005.
6. Iwu MM. Handbook of African medicinal plants. Boca Raton, FL, CRC
    Press, 1993.
7. African pharmacopoeia. Vol. 1, 1st ed. Lagos, Nigeria, Organization of Afri-
    can Unity, Scientiﬁc Technical & Research Commission, 1985.
8. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blak-
    iston, 1950.
9. Medicinal plants in Thailand. Vol. I. Bangkok, Department of Pharmaceuti-
    cal Botany, Faculty of Pharmacy, Mahidol University, 1996.
10. Ochse JJ, van den Brink RCB. Vegetables of the Dutch East Indies (English
    ed.). Amsterdam, A. Asher, 1977.
11. Medicinal plants in the South Paciﬁc. Manila, World Health Organization
    Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc, 1998 (WHO Regional Publications,
    Western Paciﬁc Series, No. 19).
12. Medicinal plants in China. Manila, World Health Organization Regional Of-
    ﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc, 1989 (WHO Regional Publications, Western Pa-
    ciﬁc Series, No. 2).
13. Nadkarni AK, ed. Dr. K.M. Nadkarni’s Indian materia medica. Vol. 1. Bom-
    bay, Popular Prakshan, 1976.
14. Kariyone T, Koiso R. Atlas of medicinal plants. Osaka, Nihon Rinshosha,
    1973.
15. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
16. Anonymous. The review of natural products. 2nd ed. St. Louis, Facts and
    Comparisons, 2002.
17. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisi-
    er, 1995.
18. WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
19. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
20. Hagers Handbuch der Drogen (CD ROM). Heidelberg, Springer Verlag,
    2003 [in German].
21. Molinoff PB et al., eds. Goodman & Gilman’s The pharmacological basis of
    therapeutics, 9th ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1996.
22. Neuwinger HD. Ricinus communis L. (Euphorbiaceae) in der Afrikanischen
    traditionellen Medizin. Drogenreport, 2003, 30:89–92.
23. Scarpa A, Guerci A. Various uses of the castor oil plant (Ricinus communis
    L.). A review. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1982, 5:117–137.
24. Vieira C et al. Pro- and anti-inﬂammatory actions of ricinoleic acid: similari-
    ties and differences with capsaicin. Naunyn-Schmiedeberg’s Archives of
    Pharmacology, 2001, 364:87–95.
25. Vieira C et al. Effect of ricinoleic acid in acute and subchronic experimental
    models of inﬂammation. Mediators of Inﬂammation, 2000, 9:223–228.

282
                                                                          Oleum Ricini


26. Gao J et al. [Effect of castor oil-diet on the initiation of labor of pregnant rat.]
    Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao, 1998, 20:367–370 [in Chinese].
27. Gao J, Sun N, Wang F. [Effects of castor oil-diet on the synthesis of prosta-
    glandin E2 in pregnant rats.] Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi, 1999, 34:147–
    149 [in Chinese].
28. Irwin R. NTP technical report on the toxicity studies of castor oil (CAS No.
    8001-79-4) in F344/N rats and B6C3F1 mice (dosed feed studies). Toxic Re-
    port Series, 1982, 12:1-B5.
29. Gaginella TS et al. Cytotoxicity of ricinoleic acid (castor oil) and other intes-
    tinal secretagogues on isolated intestinal epithelial cells. Journal of Pharma-
    cology and Experimental Therapeutics, 1977, 201:259–266.
30. Gaginella TS, Lewis JC, Phillips SF. Rabbit ileal mucosa exposed to fatty
    acids, bile acids, and other secretagogues. Scanning electron microscopic ap-
    pearances. American Journal of Digestive Diseases, 1977, 22:781–790.
31. Ammon HV, Thomas PJ, Phillips SF. Effects of oleic and ricinoleic acids on
    net jejunal water and electrolyte movement. Perfusion studies in man. Jour-
    nal of Clinical Investigation, 1974, 53:374–379.
32. Todorov AT, Mantchev ID, Atanasov TB. Traditional bowel preparation ver-
    sus osmotic agent mannitol for preoperative colonic cleansing in elective
    colorectal surgery. Folia Medica (Plovdiv), 2002, 44:36–39.
33. Garry D et al. Use of castor oil in pregnancies at term. Alternative Therapies
    in Health & Medicine, 2000, 6:77–79.
34. Kelly AJ, Kavanagh J, Thomas J. Castor oil, bath and/or enema for cervical
    priming and induction of labour. Cochrane Database Systematic Review,
    2001, 2:CD003099.
35. Carson SN et al. Using a castor oil-balsam of Peru-trypsin ointment to assist in
    healing skin graft donor sites. Ostomy Wound Management, 2003, 49:60–64.
36. Di Berardino L, Della Torre F. Side effects to castor oil. Allergy, 2003,
    58:826.
37. Sicuranza GB, Figueroa R. Uterine rupture associated with castor oil inges-
    tion. Journal of Maternal, Fetal and Neonatal Medicine, 2003, 13:133–134.
38. le Coz CJ, Ball C. Recurrent allergic contact dermatitis and cheilitis due to
    castor oil. Contact Dermatitis, 2000, 42:114–115.
39. Fisher AA. Allergic cheilitis due to castor oil in lipstick. Cutis, 1991, 47:389–
    390.
40. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs.
    Austin, TX, American Botanical Council, 1998.




                                                                                   283
                 Aetheroleum Rosmarini




Deﬁnition
Aetheroleum Rosmarini consists of the essential oil, obtained by steam
distillation, from the ﬂowering aerial parts of Rosmarinus ofﬁcinalis L.
(Lamiaceae) (1).

Synonyms
No information was found.

Selected vernacular names
Alecrim, azir, biberine, biberye, boithran, common rosemary, echter Ros-
marin, encensier, garden rosemary, gusmarino, hasalban, hatsa louban,
hhassâ lubân, iklil, iklil el jabal, iklil kuhi, kusdilli, mannenrou, old man,
romani, romarin, romero, romero blanco, rosmariin, rosmarina, Ros-
marin, rosmarini, rosmarino, rosemary, tresmarino (2–4).

Geographical distribution
Native to Mediterranean region of Europe, and cultivated worldwide (4–7).

Description
A bushy, low, much branched, perennial sub-shrub attaining a height of
about 1 m. Leaves leathery with fringed margin, 1.0–2.5 cm long, aro-
matic, evergreen, opposite, sessile, linear and coriaceous. Old branches
brown in colour. Spiciform inﬂorescences of pale blue or light lilac ﬂow-
ers spotted with purple, with the two stamens projecting far beyond the
corolla (4, 5, 7).

Plant material of interest: essential oil
General appearance
Clear, mobile, colourless to pale yellow liquid (1).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: characteristic (1).

284
                                                      Aetheroleum Rosmarini


Microscopic characteristics
Not applicable.

Powdered plant material
Not applicable.

General identity tests
Physicochemical properties, thin-layer and gas chromatography (1).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Not applicable.

Foreign organic matter
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Total ash
Not applicable.

Acid-insoluble ash
Not applicable.

Water-soluble extractive
Not applicable.

Loss on drying
Not applicable.

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (1). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (1)
and the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (8) and pesticide residues (9).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (8).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (8).

                                                                       285
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Other purity tests
Relative density: 0.895–0.920 (1).
Refractive index: 1.464–1.473 (1).
Optical rotation: -5° to + 8° (1).
Acid value: not more than 1.0 (1).

Chemical assays
Gas chromatographic analysis of Spanish type rosemary oil: A-pinene
(18–26%), camphene (8–12%), B-pinene (2.0–6.0%), B-myrcene (1.5–
5.0%), limonene (2.5–5.0%), 1,8-cineol (16.0–25.0%), p-cymene (1.0–
2.2%), camphor (13.0–21.0%), bornyl acetate (0.5–2.5%), A-terpineol
(1.0–3.5%), borneol (2.0–4.5%) and verbenone (0.7–2.5%) (1).
   The oil of rosemary from Morocco and Tunisia contains: A-pinene
(9–14%), camphene (2.5–6.0%), B-pinene (4.0–9.0%), B-myrcene (1.0–
2.0%), limonene (1.5–4.0%), 1,8-cineol (38.0–55.0%), p-cymene (0.8–
2.5%), camphor (5.0–15.0%), bornyl acetate (0.1–1.5%), A-terpineol
(1.0–2.6%), borneol (1.5–5.0%) and verbenone (0.4%) (1).

Major chemical constituents
The chief constituents of rosemary oil are camphor (5–31%), 1,8-cineol
(15–55%), A-pinene (9–26%), borneol (1.5–5.0%), camphene (2.5–12.0%),
B-pinene (2.0–9.0%), limonene (1.5–5.0%), verbenone (2.2–11.1%),
B-caryophyllene (1.8–5.1%) and myrcene (0.9–4.5%) (1, 10, 11). The
structures of 1,8-cineole, borneol and camphor are presented below.

      CH3                                   CH3
            H                                                            CH3
                                                  O
H3C             OH                    H3C
                     and enantiomer                   and enantiomer       O
H3C                                   H3C
                                                                                CH3
      H                                     H                                  CH3

            Borneol                             Camphor                1,8-Cineole


Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Used orally for the treatment of dyspeptic complaints, and in external ap-
plications for supportive management of rheumatic complaints and circu-
latory disorders (12, 13). Although one pilot study has indicated that the

286
                                                         Aetheroleum Rosmarini


crude drug may enhance cognition (13), further data from randomized
controlled clinical trials are required before any therapeutic recommen-
dations can be made.

Uses described in traditional medicine
Used as a cholagogue, diaphoretic, digestant, diuretic, emmenagogue,
laxative and a tonic (3, 5, 6). Also used in the management of headache,
menstrual disorders, nervous menstrual complaints, tiredness, defective
memory, sprains and bruises (14).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antihepatotoxic activity
The hepatoprotective and antimutagenic effects of the essential oil were
compared to those of ethanol leaf extracts in vivo using carbon tetra-
chloride (CCl4) and cyclophosphamide as the hepatotoxic and mutagenic
compounds. The results of the study showed that intragastric administra-
tion of 1.5 g/kg body weight (bw) of the essential oil or the leaf extract to
rats for 3 weeks protected the animals against CCl4-induced hepatotoxic-
ity. The results were similar to those obtained using the control com-
pound, silymarin (15). The results showed amelioration of most of the
serum and liver parameters studied, and were conﬁrmed by histopatho-
logical examination of the liver tissue. The hepatoprotectant activity of
essential oil was not as great as that of the leaf extract. However, intragas-
tric pretreatment of mice for 7 days with the essential oil (1.1 mg/g bw),
reduced cyclophosphamide-induced mitodepression in bone marrow
cells (15).

Antimicrobial activity
The essential oil weakly inhibited the growth of Acinetobacter iwofﬁ, Ba-
cillus subtilis, Erwinia carotovora, Shigella ﬂexneri, Staphylococcus aureus,
Streptococcus pyogenes and Yersinia enterocolitica when added undiluted
or in a 1:1 dilution to the agar medium (16).
Antispasmodic effects
The essential oil inhibited electrically stimulated muscular contractions in
isolated guinea-pig ileum, but the effect of the lowest spasmolytic dose is
preceded by an initial increase in the electrically stimulated contractile
response. Pinene, which had weak spasmogenic properties, was consid-
ered to be the active constituent (17). In guinea-pig ileum, addition of the
essential oil to the bath medium inhibited acetyl choline-induced contrac-

                                                                          287
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


tions, with a median inhibitory concentration (IC50) of 465 nl/ml of the
oil and 41 nl/ml of 1,8-cineole (18).
Osteoclastic effects
The essential oil, and its individual constituents, camphor, borneol, thy-
mol, A-pinene, B-pinene and bornyl acetate, inhibited bone resorption
when added to the food of rats. The monoterpenes borneol, thymol and
camphor, were directly inhibitory in the osteoclast resorption pit assay.
Within 30 minutes, borneol inhibited the formation of actin rings, a char-
acteristic of resorbing osteoclasts indicating cell polarization. Both the in
vitro and the in vivo effects of borneol were reversible (19).

Enzyme induction
Modulation of cytochrome P450 isozymes and detoxiﬁcation enzymes
was compared after oral administration of the dried leaves, a dried dichlo-
romethane leaf extract or the essential oil to rats. The animals received the
leaves, extracts or essential oil in their rations at a concentration of 0.5%
(w/w) for 2 weeks. The effects of the treatments were evaluated in assays
for cytochrome P450 isozymes 1A, 2B, 2E1, glutathione S-transferase,
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NAD(P)H), quinone re-
ductase and uridine diphosphate (UDP)-glucuronosyltransferase activi-
ties and on protein levels (immunoblot analyses). The results demonstrat-
ed that the essential oil selectively induced cytochrome P450, particularly
isozyme 2B. The leaf extract enhanced both cytochrome P450 and de-
toxiﬁcation enzymes. A dichloromethane extract of the leaves acted as a
monofunctional inducer, inducing glutathione S-transferase, quinone re-
ductase and UDP-glucuronosyltransferase, in particular UDP-glucuro-
nosyltransferase 1A6 (20).

Toxicology
The embryotoxic effects of d-camphor were investigated in rats and rab-
bits after intragastric administration for the treatment of hypotonic circu-
latory dysregulations. No evidence of teratogenicity was observed when
d-camphor was administered orally to pregnant rats during the fetal peri-
od of organogenesis, at doses up to 1 g/kg bw per day, and to pregnant
rabbits at doses up to 681 mg/kg bw per day. For rats, the no-observed-
effect level for the fetal organism was above 1 mg/kg bw, and for rabbits,
above 681 mg/kg bw. In rat dams a dose-dependent reduction in food in-
take and salivation was noted at doses of 464 mg/kg bw and higher. The
high dose of 1 mg/kg bw per day resulted in pronounced signs of toxicity
such as clonic convulsion, pilo-erection, reduced motility and body weight
gain. In rabbit dams, intragastric administration of a high dose (681 mg/kg

288
                                                          Aetheroleum Rosmarini


bw per day) resulted in reduced body weight gain and food consumption.
No increased incidence of variations, retardations or malformations was
observed in any of the offspring at any of the doses, not even at the highest
dose tested (rat: 1000 mg/kg bw per day; rabbit: 681 mg/kg bw per day).
The daily maximum dose of camphor for human therapeutic use is ap-
proximately 1.43 mg/kg bw. Hence, under the present test conditions the
therapeutic ratio is above 450 for the end-point of embryotoxicity, reﬂect-
ing a wide margin of safety (21). Since d-camphor is only one of the chem-
ical constituents of the essential oil, the relevance of these data to the toxi-
cology of the essential oil needs to be investigated.

Clinical pharmacology
A clinical study to assess the olfactory impact of the essential oils of laven-
der (Lavandula angustifolia) and rosemary (Rosmarinus ofﬁcinalis) on
cognitive performance and mood in healthy volunteers was performed
(13). One hundred and forty-four participants were randomly assigned to
one of three independent groups. Each of the subjects was asked to take the
Cognitive Drug Research (CDR) computerized cognitive assessment bat-
tery in a cubicle containing one of the two odours or no odour (control).
Visual analogue mood questionnaires were completed before exposure to
the odour and after completion of the test battery. The participants were
misled as to the genuine aim of the study until the completion of testing to
prevent expectancy effects from possibly inﬂuencing the data. The out-
come variables from the nine tasks that constitute the CDR core battery
feed into six factors that represent different aspects of cognitive function-
ing. Analysis of performance revealed that lavender produced a signiﬁcant
decrement in performance of working memory, and impaired reaction
times for both memory and attention-based tasks compared to the perfor-
mance of the controls. In contrast, rosemary produced a signiﬁcant en-
hancement of performance for overall quality of memory and secondary
memory factors, but also impaired speed of memory compared to controls.
With regard to mood, comparisons of the change in ratings from baseline
to post-test revealed that following the completion of the cognitive assess-
ment battery, both the control group and the group exposed to lavender
were signiﬁcantly less alert than the subjects exposed to rosemary; how-
ever, subjects in the control group were signiﬁcantly less content than sub-
jects who received the rosemary and lavender treatments (13).
   Frontal electroencephalogram asymmetry shifting from baseline was
examined in adults and infants exposed to lavender and rosemary oils by
re-analysing previously published data from two studies. The results from
39 adults revealed signiﬁcant electroencephalogram shifting in the laven-
der-treated group, with greater relative left frontal electroencephalogram

                                                                            289
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


activation (associated with greater approach behaviour and less depressed
affect). The participants in the two groups exposed to the two aromas
were further grouped by those with greater baseline, relative to left fron-
tal electroencephalogram activation versus those with a greater baseline
relative to right frontal activation. Collapsing across aroma groups, those
with greater baseline, relative to right frontal activation, shifted left dur-
ing exposure to the aroma. Those with greater baseline relative to left
frontal activation did not change. In the group subjected to the rosemary
aroma, those with greater baseline relative to right frontal electro-
encephalogram activation shifted left during exposure to the aroma, while
those with greater baselines relative to left frontal electroencephalogram
activation shifted right. The second study, involving 27 full-term new-
borns revealed no signiﬁcant shifts in asymmetry in response to either
aroma. However, when the aroma groups were collapsed, the right frontal
electroencephalogram group exhibited signiﬁcant shifting relative to
left frontal electroencephalogram activation. This ﬁnding was similar to
the ﬁndings in adults, suggesting that both lavender and rosemary may
induce left frontal electroencephalogram shifting in adults and infants
who show greater baselines relative to right frontal electroencephalogram
activation (22).
    The effects of lavender and rosemary oils on electroencephalogram ac-
tivity, alertness and mood were assessed in 40 adults given 3 minutes of
aromatherapy. Participants were also given simple mathematical compu-
tations to do before and after the therapy. The lavender-treated group
showed increased beta power, suggesting increased drowsiness; they also
had less depressed mood and reported feeling more relaxed and performed
the mathematical computations faster and more accurately following aro-
matherapy. The rosemary-treated group, on the other hand, showed de-
creased frontal alpha and beta power, suggesting increased alertness. They
also had lower anxiety scores, reported feeling more relaxed and alert and
they were only faster, not more accurate, at completing the mathematical
computations after the aromatherapy session (23).

Adverse reactions
Following oral use gastrointestinal complaints and hypersensitivity reac-
tions may occur rarely. Inhalation can occasionally cause irritation and
very rarely laryngospasm (24).
   External use may worsen bronchospasm. Rarely hypersensitivity reac-
tions of the skin may occur. Photoaggravated allergic contact dermatitis
(25, 26) and cheilitis (27) have been reported.

290
                                                       Aetheroleum Rosmarini


Contraindications
Aetheroleum Rosmarini is contraindicated in cases of hypersensitivity or
allergy to the plant material. It should not be used in patients suffering
from bronchial asthma or bronchitis or on damaged skin, such as in cases
of burns, lesions or skin rashes.

Warnings
Due to its irritant properties, the essential oil should not be used on the
face or mucosa, and contact with the eyes should be avoided. After ap-
plication of the essential oil, wash hands to avoid accidental contact with
the face and eyes. As with all essential oils, do not exceed the recom-
mended dose.
   If there is persistence or worsening of rheumatic symptoms, e.g. in
cases of redness, swelling or over-heating of joints, patients should seek
advice from a health care practitioner.

Precautions
Drug interactions
Although drug interactions have not been reported, cineole, the main con-
stituent of the oil is known to induce liver metabolic enzymes in animals.
Therefore, the oil may interact with other prescription medications.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
The crude drug is anti-mutagenic in rats treated with cyclophosph-
amide (15).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
See Toxicology.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Toxicology.

Nursing mothers
Due to the lack of safety data, the use of the crude drug during breastfeed-
ing is not recommended.

Paediatric use
Due to the lack of safety data, administration of the crude drug to chil-
dren under the age of 12 years is not recommended.

Other precautions
No information was found.

                                                                        291
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Dosage forms
Essential oil for oral and external use (24) and aromatherapy (13, 22).
Store in a cool place in an airtight container, protected from light (28).


Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Daily dosage for oral administration: 1 ml of essential oil (24).
External use: 6–10% essential oil in semi-solid and liquid preparations (24).


References
1. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed, Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
2. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
3. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
4. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blak-
    iston, 1950.
5. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisi-
    er, 1995.
6. Perry LM, Metzger J. Medicinal plants of east and southeast Asia: Attributed
    properties and uses. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1980.
7. Wichtl M, eds. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals, English ed. (transl
    Bisset NR). Boca Raton, FL, Medpharm, 1994.
8. WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
9. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
10. Salido S et al. Chemical composition and seasonal variations of rosemary oil
    from southern Spain. Journal of Essential Oil Research, 2003, 15:10–14.
11. Domokos J et al. Essential oil of rosemary (Rosmarinus ofﬁcinalis L.) of
    Hungarian origin. Journal of Essential Oil Research, 1997, 9:41–45.
12. Blumenthal M, Goldberg A, Brinckmann J, eds. Herbal medicine: Expanded
    Commission E monographs. Austin, TX, American Botanical Council, 2000.
13. Moss M et al. Aromas of rosemary and lavender essential oils differentially
    affect cognition and mood in healthy adults. International Journal of Neuro-
    science, 2003, 113:15–38.
14. Hagers Handbuch der Drogen (CD ROM). Heidelberg, Springer Verlag,
    2003 [in German].

292
                                                             Aetheroleum Rosmarini


15. Fahim FA et al. Allied studies on the effect of Rosmarinus ofﬁcinalis L. on
    experimental hepatotoxicity and mutagenesis. International Journal of Food
    Sciences and Nutrition, 1999, 50:413–427.
16. Mangena T, Muyima NYO. Comparative evaluation of the antimicrobial ac-
    tivities of essential oils of Artemisia afra, Pteronia incana and Rosmarinus
    ofﬁcinalis on selected bacteria and yeast strains. Letters in Applied Microbiol-
    ogy, 1999, 28:291–296.
17. Lis-Balchin M et al. Comparison of the pharmacological and antimicrobial
    actions of commercial plant essential oils. Journal of Herbs, Spices and Me-
    dicinal Plants, 1996, 4:69–82.
18. Hof S, Ammon PT. Negative inotropic action of rosemary oil, 1,8-cineol,
    and bornyl acetate. Planta Medica, 1989, 55:106–107.
19. Mühlbauer RC et al. Common herbs, essential oils, and monoterpenes po-
    tently modulate bone metabolism. Bone, 2003, 32:372–380.
20. Debersac P et al. Induction of cytochrome P450 and/or detoxication en-
    zymes by various extracts of rosemary: description of speciﬁc patterns. Food
    and Chemical Toxicology, 2001, 39:907–918.
21. Leuschner J. Reproductive toxicity studies of D-camphor in rats and rabbits.
    Arzneimittelforschung, 1997, 47:124–128.
22. Sanders C et al. EEG asymmetry responses to lavender and rosemary aromas
    in adults and infants. International Journal of Neuroscience, 2002, 112:1305–
    1320.
23. Diego MA et al. Aromatherapy positively affects mood, EEG patterns of
    alertness and math computations. International Journal of Neuroscience,
    1998, 96:217–224.
24. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs:
    Therapeutic guide to herbal medicines. Austin, TX, American Botanical
    Council, 1998.
25. Armisén M, Rodríguez V, Vidal C. Photoaggravated allergic contact derma-
    titis due to Rosmarinus ofﬁcinalis cross-reactive with Thymus vulgaris. Con-
    tact Dermatitis, 2003, 48:52–53.
26. Fernandez L et al. Allergic contact dermatitis from rosemary (Rosmarinus
    ofﬁcinalis L.). Contact Dermatitis, 1997, 37:248–249.
27. Guin JD. Rosemary cheilitis: one to remember. Contact Dermatitis, 2001,
    45:63.
28. Reynolds JEF ed. Martindale: The extra pharmacopoeia, 13th ed. London,
    Pharmaceutical Press, 1999.




                                                                               293
                      Folium Rosmarini




Deﬁnition
Folium Rosmarini consists of the whole dried leaves of Rosmarinus ofﬁ-
cinalis L. (Lamiaceae) (1).

Synonyms
No information was found.

Selected vernacular names
Alecrim, azir, biberine, biberye, boithran, common rosemary, echter Ros-
marin, encensier, garden rosemary, gusmarino, hasalban, hatsa louban,
hhassâ lubân, iklil, iklil el jabal, iklil kuhi, kusdilli, mannenrou, old man,
romani, romarin, romero, romero blanco, rosmariin, Rosmarin, rosmari-
na, rosmarini, rosmarino, rosemary, tresmarino (2–4).

Geographical distribution
Native to the Mediterranean region of Europe, and cultivated world-
wide (4–7).

Description
A bushy, low, much branched, perennial sub-shrub attaining a height of
about 1 m. Leaves leathery with fringed margin, 1.0–2.5 cm long, aro-
matic, evergreen, opposite, sessile, linear and coriaceous. Old branches
brown in colour. Spiciform inﬂorescences of pale blue or light lilac ﬂow-
ers spotted with purple, with the two stamens projecting far beyond the
corolla (4, 5, 7, 8).

Plant material of interest: dried leaves
General appearance
Leaves linear to linear-lanceolate, curved, 1–4 cm long, 2–4 mm wide; co-
riaceous, greyish-green or occasionally brownish; margins entire and
strongly revolute, apex obtuse, base tapering and non-petiolate; upper

294
                                                              Folium Rosmarini


surface dark green, reticulately pitted, lower surface tomentose. Occa-
sional pieces of stems up to 4 cm long, 1–2 mm wide, dark brown to
greenish, tomentose or woody with numerous opposite and decussate
leaf scars (1).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: strongly aromatic; taste: pungently aromatic, camphoraceous and
bitter (1).

Microscopic characteristics
Leaf dorsiventral; upper epidermal cells polygonal with slightly thick-
ened walls and occasional pits; lower epidermal cells sinuous; numerous
diacytic stomata on the lower surface only; very abundant uniseriate,
multicellular, much-branched covering trichomes on the lower epidermis,
also glandular trichomes with a unicellular stalk and unicellular, bicellular
or multicellular head occurring on both epidermises; hypodermis under-
lying the upper epidermis composed of large, ovoid cells with thickened
and beaded anticlinal walls; these cells extending across the lamina at in-
tervals, separating the two-layered palisade into large, crescent-shaped
areas, each with a group of spongy mesophyll (9).

Powdered plant material
Greyish-green to yellowish-green. Shows fragments of lower epidermis
with straight to sinuous-walled cells and numerous diacytic stomata; frag-
ments of the upper epidermis with straight-walled cells, slightly thick-
ened and pitted, and an underlying hypodermis composed of large, ir-
regular cells with thickened and beaded anticlinal walls; fragments in
sectional view showing the hypodermal cells extending across the lamina
at intervals, separating the one or two-layered palisade into large, cres-
cent-shaped areas; numerous multicellular, extensively branched, cover-
ing trichomes of the lower epidermis and rare conical covering trichomes
of the upper epidermis; glandular trichomes of 2 types, the majority with
a short, unicellular stalk and a radiate head composed of 8 cells, others,
less abundant, with a unicellular stalk and a spherical, unicellular or bicel-
lular head. Occasional cork fragments, ﬁbres, vascular tissue and ligniﬁed
parenchyma from the stems (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1), thin-layer chromatog-
raphy (1), and high-performance liquid chromatography for phenolic
acids (10).

                                                                          295
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (11).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 5% of stem, and not more than 2.0% other foreign matter (1).

Total ash
Not more than 9.0% (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 1.5% (9).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 15.0% (9).

Water content
Not more than 10% (1).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (1). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (1)
and the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (11) and pesticide residues (12).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (11).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (11).

Chemical assays
Not less than 1.2% (v/w) of essential oil and not less than 3% total hy-
droxycinnamic acid derivatives expressed as rosmarinic acid (1).

Major chemical constituents
Contains up to 2.5% of essential oil, the chief constituents of which are cam-
phor (5–21%), 1,8-cineole (15–55%), A-pinene (9–26%), borneol (1.5–5.0%),

296
                                                                                           Folium Rosmarini


camphene (2.5–12.0%), B-pinene (2.0–9.0%) and limonene (1.5–5.0%). Phe-
nolic compounds are represented by ﬂavonoids with a methylated aglycone
(e.g. genkwanin) and by phenolic acids (> 3%), particularly by rosmarinic,
chlorogenic and caffeic acids. Also present are tricyclic diterpenes such as
rosmaridiphenol, carnosol, carnosic acid and rosmanol, and diterpenes, in-
cluding seco-hinokiol (1, 3, 5, 7, 13, 14). The structures of rosmarinic acid,
1,8-cineole, borneol, camphor, genkwanin and carnosol are presented below.

                                OH                                                    OH
                                                                   CO2H                        OH
H3CO               O
                                                           H
                                                               O
                                             HO
                                                    OH             O
            OH     O
                       Genkwanin                         Rosmarinic acid

        CH3                     CH3                                                        OH       CH3
              H                             CH3
                                      O                                          HO
H3C               OH     H3C                                                                          CH3
                                              O                                            O
H3C                      H3C
                                                   CH3
                                                                             H
        H                       H                 CH3                                 O
                                                                                                H
 and enantiomer          and enantiomer
                                                                       H3C       CH3

      Borneol             Camphor         1,8-Cineole                             Carnosol


Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Orally as a carminative and spasmolytic to treat dyspepsia (9). Externally
for supportive therapy of rheumatism and circulatory disorders (13).
Uses described in traditional medicine
Orally as a cholagogue, diaphoretic, diuretic, emmenagogue and as a ton-
ic (3, 6, 7). Also used in the management of headache, menstrual disor-
ders, nervous menstrual complaints, tiredness and defective memory.
Used externally for treatment of spraining and bruising (15).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antihepatotoxic activity
Intragastric administration of 200.0 mg/kg body weight (bw) of a stan-
dardized methanol extract of the leaves (corresponding to 6.04 mg/kg bw

                                                                                                            297
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


of carnosol) to rats, 1 hour after treatment of the animals with carbon
tetrachloride (CCl4), fully prevented CCl4-induced lipid peroxidation in
the liver. The CCl4-induced increase in plasma bilirubin concentrations
and alanine aminotransferase activity was completely normalized after
treatment with the extract. The treatment also resulted in a signiﬁcant
recovery from CCl4-induced decrease in liver glycogen content. The ex-
tract also increased liver cytosolic reduced glutathione activity and pro-
duced an additional increase in plasma glutathione activity in rats treated
with CCl4. Histological evaluation showed that the extract partially pre-
vented CCl4-induced inﬂammation, necrosis and vacuolation (16).
    The hepatoprotective and antimutagenic effects of an ethanol extract
of the leaves were investigated using CCl4 and cyclophosphamide as the
hepatotoxic and mutagenic compounds. The results indicated that intra-
gastric administration of the ethanol extract (1.5 g/kg bw) to rats for
3 weeks produced a pronounced hepatoprotective effect as compared
with silymarin (reference compound) due to the amelioration of most of
the serum and liver parameters studied and conﬁrmed by histopathologi-
cal examination of the liver tissue. Pretreatment of mice for 7 days with
the essential oil (1.1 mg/g bw) followed by intraperitoneal administration
of cyclophosphamide signiﬁcantly reduced the induced mitodepression
in the bone marrow cells of the animals (17).
Anti-inﬂammatory activity
Treatment of mouse macrophage RAW 264.7 cells with carnosol mark-
edly reduced lipopolysaccharide-stimulated nitric oxide production in a
concentration-related manner with an IC50 of 9.4 μM. Western blot, re-
verse transcription–polymerase chain reaction, and northern blot analy-
ses demonstrated that carnosol decreased lipopolysaccharide-induced
inducible nitric oxide synthase mRNA and protein expression. Carnosol
treatment reduced the translocation of nuclear factor-kappa B subunits
and the binding activity of nuclear factor-B DNA in activated mac-
rophages. Carnosol also inhibited inducible nitric oxide synthase and
nuclear factor-B promoter activity in a transient transfection assay. These
activities were due to down-regulation of inhibitor B kinase activity by
carnosol (5 μM), which in turn inhibited lipopolysaccharide-induced
phosphorylation as well as degradation of inhibitor B. Carnosol also in-
hibited lipopolysaccharide-induced p38 and p44/42 mitogen-activated
protein kinase activation at a higher concentration (20 μM). These results
suggest that carnosol suppresses production of nitric oxide and inducible
nitric oxide synthase gene expression by inhibiting activation of nuclear
factor-B, and provide possible mechanisms for its anti-inﬂammatory
activity (18).

298
                                                              Folium Rosmarini


Antioxidant activity
Oxidative damage to DNA, RNA, proteins and cell membranes occurs
when the cellular concentration of reactive oxygen species exceeds the ca-
pacity of the cell to eliminate them. The crude drug and its constituents
have been shown to have both antioxidant and pro-oxidant properties
both in vitro and in vivo (19–21). The antioxidant activity of six extracts of
the leaves, with different compositions of six polyphenolic compounds
(carnosic acid, carnosol, 12-O-methylcarnosic acid, rosmarinic acid,
isoscutellarein 7-O-glucoside and genkwanin), were tested in aqueous
(malonyldialdehyde formation) and lipid systems (Rancimat method). The
results demonstrate that the extracts were excellent antioxidants in both
systems at a concentration of 500 ppm (22). The ability of the phenolic
diterpenes, carnosol, rosmanol and epirosmanol, to prevent oxidization of
low-density lipoprotein in human blood and their ability to scavenge free
radicals and superoxide anions was assessed in vitro. The antioxidant ac-
tivities were evaluated by the thiobarbituric acid reactive substances
(TBARS) assay and electron spin resonance method. The inhibition of the
Cu2+-mediated oxidization of apo B formation in low-density lipoprotein
was investigated by ﬂuorescence spectroscopy. The results demonstrated
that carnosol, rosmanol and epirosmanol inhibited lipid peroxidation and
oxidized apo B formation in low-density lipoprotein in human blood. The
median inhibitory concentration range was 7–10 μM (23). Supplementa-
tion of the diet of mice with a dried hexane extract of the leaves (1% w/w
of diet) for 1 week reduced the level of phospholipid hydroperoxides in
the plasma, red blood cells (65–74% of the levels of non-supplemented
control mice) and liver of the animals (24).
    The antioxidant activities of carnosol and other compounds extracted
from rosemary were compared. Carnosol showed potent antioxidative
activity, and scavenged 1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl free radicals, as
well as protecting DNA in the Fenton reaction (18).
    An alcohol extract of the crude drug was assessed in vitro and in vivo
for its ability to protect against free radical-induced skin damage. The
extract inhibited oxidative alterations to skin surface lipids (25). The pro-
tective effect of a 96% ethanol extract of the crude drug against oxidative
DNA damage induced by hydrogen peroxide and visible light-excited
methylene blue in colon cancer cells (CaCo-2) and hamster lung cells
(V79) was investigated. The level of DNA damage (DNA strand-breaks)
was measured using the comet assay. The extract reduced the genotoxic
activity of both agents after long-term (24 h; 0.3 μg/ml) or short-term
(2 h; 30.0 μg/ml) pre-incubation of cells, demonstrating that the extract

                                                                          299
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


has a protective effect against oxidative damage to DNA as a consequence
of scavenging of both hydroxyl radicals and singlet oxygen (26).
Antimicrobial activity
A commercial extract of the leaves (no further details of extract given),
dissolved in ethanol (100.0 mg/ml) was tested against foodborne micro-
organisms. In the Gram-positive bacteria, the minimum inhibitory concen-
tration of the ethanolic solution was 1% for Leuconostoc mesenteroides,
0.5% for Listeria monocytogenes, 0.5% for Staphylococcus aureus, 0.13%
for Streptococcus mutans and 0.06% for Bacillus cereus. It was fungistatic
in Penicillium roquefortii and Botrytis cinerea. Up to 1% of the ethanolic
solution had no activity against the Gram-negative bacteria Escherichia
coli, Salmonella enteritidis and Erwinia carotovora and on the yeasts Rho-
dotorula glutinis and Cryptococcus laurentii. The antibacterial activity
was associated with phenolic diterpenoids in the hexane extract of the
leaves (27).
    An extract of the leaves inhibited the growth of Shigella ﬂexneri and
S. sonnei with a minimum inhibitory concentration ranging from 0.5 to
1% (w/v) depending on the Shigella strain used (28).
Antinephrotoxic activity
The effects of rosmarinic acid on the suppression of mesangioprolifera-
tive glomerulonephritis, induced by intravenous injection of rabbit anti-
rat thymocyte serum to rats was assessed. Intragastric administration of
rosmarinic acid to the rats at a dose of 100.0 mg/kg bw per day for 8 days
decreased the quantity of proliferating cell nuclear antigen, ﬁbronectin,
type IV collagen and ﬁbrin in the glomerulus. Superoxide dismutase ac-
tivity of renal cortex homogenate was also signiﬁcantly augmented in
animals treated with rosmarinic acid (29).
Antitrypanosomal activity
A methanol extract of the leaves at a concentration of 2.0 mg/ml inhibited
the motility of cultured epimastigotes of Trypanosoma cruzi after 2 h of
incubation. Two triterpene acids, oleanolic and ursolic acids, isolated from
the extract were responsible for the activity. Ursolic acid stopped the
movement of all T. cruzi epimastigotes at the minimum inhibitory con-
centration of 40.0 μg/ml (88.0 μM) after 48 h of incubation. Oleanolic
acid was less active, with a minimum inhibitory concentration of 250.0 μg/
ml (550.0 μM) (30).
Antitumour activity
The effect of dietary intake of an extract of the leaves on 7,12-
dimethylbenz[a]anthracene-induced mammary tumorigenesis and on the

300
                                                           Folium Rosmarini


in vivo formation of mammary 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene-DNA
adducts was evaluated. Supplementation of a semi-puriﬁed diet with 1.0%
by weight of the rosemary extract resulted in a signiﬁcant (47%, p < 0.01)
decrease in incidence of mammary tumours compared to controls. In sub-
sequent studies, dietary supplementation with 0.5% and 1.0% rosemary
extract inhibited total in vivo binding of 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene
to mammary epithelial cell DNA by an average of 42%. This decrease in
total binding was not due to a uniform decrease in the formation of all
mammary 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene-DNA adducts (31).
Antiulcer activity
An ethanol (70%) extract was evaluated for antiulcerogenic activity in
vivo. Intragastric administration of 100.0 mg/kg bw per day to 1.0 g/kg
bw per day of the extract decreased the ulcerative lesion index produced
by ethanol and reserpine in rats. No antisecretory activity was observed
in the pyloric ligation model. Prior administration of L-NAME (N[G]-
nitro L-arginine methyl ester), a nitric oxide-synthase inhibitor, did not
reduce the antiulcerogenic activity of the extract in the ethanol-induced
ulcer model, suggesting that the pharmacological mechanism has no rela-
tionship with nitric oxide. When the animal groups were treated with in-
domethacin using the same experimental model, the extract did not re-
duce the antiulcerogenic activity, suggesting that the pharmacological
mechanism has no relationship with prostaglandins. The previous treat-
ment with N-ethylmaleimide, a thiol blocker, including mucosal nonpro-
tein sulfhydryl groups, reduced the antiulcerogenic activity of the extract
in the ethanol-induced ulcer model. This result suggests that the ethanol
extract has active substances that increase the content of mucosal nonpro-
tein sulfhydryl groups (32).
Diuretic effects
The effects of aqueous extracts of the crude drug on the treatment of kid-
ney function and diuresis in rats were determined. Outcomes assessed
included urinary volume and the excretion of sodium, potassium and
chloride. The concentration of electrolytes and urea in plasma and creati-
nine clearance were also measured. Daily intragastric administration of
the aqueous extracts of the leaves, at a dose of 10 ml/kg bw of an 8% or
16% extract in distilled water for 1 week, signiﬁcantly enhanced diuresis
in rats compared to the control group from the ﬁfth day of treatment
(p < 0.001). At a dose of 8%, the peak of urinary excretion of sodium,
potassium and chloride was reached after 6 days of treatment (p < 0.001).
A dose of 16% did not signiﬁcantly affect the excretion of water and elec-
trolytes over a similar period but signiﬁcantly increased the urinary ex-

                                                                       301
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


cretion of sodium and chloride on the seventh day and of potassium on
the sixth day (p < 0.05). No change was observed in plasma electrolytes
and urea in any group, except for a decrease in sodium and chloride con-
centration in the group treated with the 16% extract of the crude drug. A
decrease in creatinine clearance was observed after treatment with a daily
dose of the 8% extract (33).
Enzyme induction
The effects of an aqueous extract of the leaves and of rosmarinic acid were
investigated on xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes in rat liver after dietary
administration (0.5% daily rations) for 2 weeks. The modulation of phase
I enzymes such as cytochrome P450 1A, 2B, 2E1, 3A and phase II en-
zymes such as glutathione S-transferase, quinone reductase and uridine
diphosphate (UDP)-glucuronosyltransferase was evaluated by measuring
enzyme activities with speciﬁc substrates. The aqueous extract enhanced
cytochrome P450 1A1, 2B1/2, 2E1 and glutathione S-transferase (espe-
cially recombinant glutathione S-transferase A3/A5, M1 and M2), qui-
none reductase and UDP-glucuronosyltransferase. No modiﬁcation of
xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes was observed in response to treatment
with rosmarinic acid, indicating that other constituents of the leaves are
responsible for this activity (34).
    The ability of the leaves to modulate cytochrome P450 and detoxiﬁca-
tion enzymes in rat liver was evaluated by comparing the effects of dried
leaves and leaf extracts with those of the essential oil. Rats received the
powdered leaves or extracts of the leaves in their diet at 0.5% (w/w) for
2 weeks. The effects of such treatments were evaluated for cytochrome
P450 isozymes 1A, 2B, 2E1, glutathione S-transferase, NAD(P)H, qui-
none reductase and UDP-glucuronosyltransferase activities and on pro-
tein levels (immunoblot analyses). The results demonstrated that essen-
tial oil selectively induced cytochrome P450, particularly cytochrome
P450 2B. The leaf extract enhanced both cytochrome P450 and detoxiﬁ-
cation enzymes. A dichloromethane extract of the leaves acted as a mono-
functional inducer, inducing glutathione S-transferase, quinone reductase
and UDP-glucuronosyltransferase, in particular UDP-glucuronosyl-
transferase 1A6 (35).
    An extract of the crude drug was fed to female mice at concentrations
of 0.3% and 0.6% (by weight) for 4 weeks prior to determination of the
activities of the detoxiﬁcation enzymes glutathione-S-transferase and
NAD(P)H, and quinone reductase in lung, liver and stomach. Liver ac-
tivities of glutathione S-transferase and quinone reductase, and stomach
glutathione S-transferase activity, were signiﬁcantly increased in animals
fed diets containing the extract. However, diets supplemented with the

302
                                                            Folium Rosmarini


extract did not affect lung glutathione S-transferase and quinone reductase
activities (36).
Estrogenic effects
The effects of a methanol extract of the leaves on the metabolism and ac-
tion of estradiol and estrone were assessed in vivo. Treatment of female
mice with 2% rosemary in an American Institute of Nutrition (AIN)-76A
diet for 3 weeks increased the liver microsomal 2-hydroxylation of estra-
diol and estrone by approximately 150%, increased their 6-hydroxylation
by approximately 30% and inhibited the 16A-hydroxylation of estradiol
by approximately 50%. Treatment of female CD-1 mice with 2% rose-
mary in the diet for 3 weeks also stimulated the liver microsomal glucuroni-
dation of estradiol and estrone by 54–67% and 37–56%, respectively. In
further studies, feeding 2% rosemary in the diet to ovariectomized
CD-1 mice for 3 weeks inhibited the uterotropic action of estradiol and
estrone by 35–50% compared with animals fed a control diet (37).
Immune stimulant activity
The effect of an ethanol extract of the leaves on splenic mononuclear cell
proliferation was determined in vivo. Rats were fed diets containing 0,
100, 200 or 400 ppm leaf extract or 400 ppm butylated hydroxytoluene in
combination with 10 or 20% casein-enriched diets for 8 weeks. Splenic
mononuclear cells were isolated from these animals and the mitogenic
response to concanavalin A, phytohaemagglutinin and lipopolysaccha-
ride was determined. Concanavalin A- and phytohaemagglutinin-stimu-
lated proliferation of spleen cells in rats fed 10% casein and 200 ppm leaf
extract was signiﬁcantly higher than that of cells from the corresponding
control animals. Other concentrations of the extract were not active, sug-
gesting that the leaf extract does not have a generalized immune-enhanc-
ing effect (38).
    Rosmarinic acid induced apoptosis in a p56(lck) (Lck)-dependent
manner. Lck(+) Jurkat T cells underwent apoptosis in response to treat-
ment with rosmarinic acid , whereas Lck(-) Jurkat subclone J.CaM1.6 cells
did not. J.CaM1.6 cells with various Lck mutants indicated that Lck
SH2 domain, but not Lck kinase activity, was required for rosmarinic
acid-induced apoptosis. Rosmarinic acid-mediated apoptosis involved a
mitochondrial pathway as indicated by cytochrome c release and the
complete blockage of apoptosis by an inhibitor of mitochondrial mem-
brane depolarization. Both caspase-3 and caspase-8 were involved in ros-
marinic acid-induced apoptosis and work downstream of mitochondria
and caspase-9 in the order of caspase-9/caspase-3/caspase-8. In freshly
isolated human peripheral blood mononuclear cells, rosmarinic acid

                                                                        303
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


speciﬁcally induced apoptosis of Lck(+) subsets such as T and NK cells,
but not Lck-deﬁcient cells, including B cells and monocytes. Moreover,
the ability of rosmarinic acid to kill T and NK cells was restricted to ac-
tively proliferating cells, and was not seen in resting cells (39).
Toxicology
To ﬁnd out whether the crude drug induces abortion and/or interferes
with the normal development of the concepts, doses of 26 mg of a 30%
(w/v) aqueous extract (13 mg solids/ml) made with leaves, ﬂowers and
stem, were administered daily to rats by gavage during two different pe-
riods of pregnancy. One group of animals (n = 12) received the extract
from days 1 to 6 of pregnancy (pre-implantation period) and another
group (n = 14) received the same extract from days 6 to 15 of pregnancy
(organogenic period). Control groups (n = 12) received saline solution at
the same volume and during the same periods as the comparable experi-
mental groups. The animals were killed at term. The treatment of the
dams during either the pre-implantation or the organogenic period did
not cause signiﬁcant changes in the post-implantation loss or in the num-
ber of anomalies or malformations of the term fetuses, which also showed
a similar degree of development to that of the control animals. The per-
centage of pre-implantation loss in the group treated before embryo im-
plantation increased compared to the control group, although the differ-
ence was not statistically signiﬁcant. This result suggests that rosemary
extract may have an anti-implantation effect without interfering with the
normal development of the concept after implantation (40).

Clinical pharmacology
One of the postulated mechanisms of action of phenolic compounds as
antioxidants is chelation of pro-oxidant metals, such as iron. Although
the antioxidant activity is viewed as a positive effect, this activity may
impair the utilization of dietary iron. A small clinical study assessed the
effect of phenolic-rich extracts obtained from green tea or the crude drug
on nonhaem-iron absorption. Twenty-four female volunteers consumed
test meals on four separate occasions. The meals were identical except for
the absence (meal A) or presence (meal B) of a phenolic-rich extract from
green tea (study 1; n = 10) or rosemary (study 2; n = 14). The extracts
(0.1 mM) were added to the meat component of the test meals. The meals
were labelled with either 55Fe or 59Fe and were consumed on four consecu-
tive days in the order ABBA or BAAB. Iron absorption was determined
by measuring whole-body retention of 59Fe and the ratio of 55Fe or 59Fe
activity in blood samples. The results demonstrated that the presence of
phenolic-rich extracts resulted in decreased non-haem-iron absorption.

304
                                                           Folium Rosmarini


Mean (± standard deviation) iron absorption decreased from 12.1 ± 4.5%
to 8.9 ± 5.2% (p < 0.01) in the presence of green tea extract and from
7.5 ± 4.0% to 6.4 ± 4.7% (p < 0.05) in the presence of the rosemary ex-
tract (41).

Adverse reactions
There is a single case-report of photoaggravated allergic contact dermati-
tis, in which a patient developed contact dermatitis after handling the
leaves of the plant on a sunny day (42–44). One case of cheilitis has been
reported (45). A 56-year-old man developed occupational contact derma-
titis of his hands, forearms, and face after coming into contact with an
extract of the leaves. He reacted to carnosol, the main constituent of the
extract (44).

Contraindications
Folium Rosmarini is contraindicated in cases of hypersensitivity or aller-
gy to the plant material.

Warnings
No information was found.

Precautions
Drug interactions
While no drug interactions have been reported, an aqueous extract of the
crude drug enhanced the activity of cytochrome P450 1A1, 2B1/2, 2E1
and glutathione S-transferase (especially recombinant glutathione S-
transferase A3/A5, M1 and M2), quinone reductase and UDP-glucurono-
syltransferase (34). Thus, drugs metabolized through these cytochrome
P450 isozymes may be affected.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
An ethanol extract of the leaves was not mutagenic in the Hist revertant
Salmonella typhimurium TA 1530 strain at a concentration of 5 Mg/ml
(46). See also the study by Lemonica (40) under Toxicology.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Toxicology.

Other precautions
No information was found.

                                                                       305
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Dosage forms
Crude drug for infusions, dry extracts, ﬂuidextract and other Galenical
preparations for internal and external use (47).

Posology
(Unless otherwise speciﬁed)
Daily dosage: for oral use 4–6 g of herb. Infusion: 2–4 g in 150 ml water
three times daily. Fluidextract (1:1, 45% ethanol w/w) 1.5–3.0 ml daily.
Tincture (1:5, 70% ethanol) 3–8.5 ml daily. Dry extract (4.5–5.5:1 w/w)
0.36–0.44 g, three times daily. External use: boil 50 g of herb in 1 l of wa-
ter, add to one full bath (47).

References
1. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
2. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
3. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
4. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blak-
    iston, 1950.
5. Bisset NR, Wichtl M, eds. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals, English
    ed. Boca Raton, FL, Medpharm, 1994.
6. Perry LM, Metzger J. Medicinal plants of east and southeast Asia: Attributed
    properties and uses. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1980.
7. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisi-
    er, 1995.
8. Boulos L. Medicinal plants of North Africa. Algonac, Michigan, Reference
    Publications, 1983.
9. British herbal pharmacopoeia. Exeter, British Herbal Medicine Association,
    1996.
10. Ziaková A, Brandsteterová E. Validation of HPLC determination of pheno-
    lic acids present in some Lamiaceae family plants. Journal of Liquid Chroma-
    tography and Related Technologies, 2003, 26:443–453.
11. WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
12. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
13. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs:
    Therapeutic guide to herbal medicines. Austin, TX, American Botanical
    Council, 1998.

306
                                                                  Folium Rosmarini


14. Cantrell CL et al. Seco-hinokiol, a new abietane diterpenoid from Rosmari-
    nus ofﬁcinalis. Journal of Natural Products, 2005, 68:98–100.
15. Hagers Handbuch der Drogen (CD ROM). Heidelberg, Springer Verlag,
    2003 [in German].
16. Sotelo-Félix JI et al. Evaluation of the effectiveness of Rosmarinus ofﬁcinalis
    (Lamiaceae) in the alleviation of carbon tetrachloride-induced acute hepato-
    toxicity in the rat. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2002, 81:145–154.
17. Fahim FA et al. Allied studies on the effect of Rosmarinus ofﬁcinalis L. on
    experimental hepatotoxicity and mutagenesis. International Journal of Food
    Sciences and Nutrition, 1999, 50:413–427.
18. Lo AH et al. Carnosol, an antioxidant in rosemary, suppresses inducible ni-
    tric oxide synthase through down-regulating nuclear factor-KB in mouse
    macrophages. Carcinogenesis, 2002, 23:983–991.
19. Aruoma OI et al. Antioxidant and pro-oxidant properties of active rosemary
    constituents: carnosol and carnosic acid. Xenobiotica, 1992, 22:257–268.
20. Fuhrman B et al. Lycopene synergistically inhibits LDL oxidation in combi-
    nation with vitamin E, glabridin, rosmarinic acid, carnosic acid, or garlic.
    Antioxidant and Redox Signaling, 2000, 2:491–506.
21. Gutiérrez ME et al. Interaction of tocopherols and phenolic compounds
    with membrane lipid components: Evaluation of their antioxidant activity in
    a liposomal model system. Life Science, 2003, 72:2337–2360.
22. Del Baño MJ et al. Phenolic diterpenes, ﬂavones, and rosmarinic acid distri-
    bution during the development of leaves, ﬂowers, stems, and roots of Ros-
    marinus ofﬁcinalis: antioxidant activity. Journal of Agricultural and Food
    Chemistry, 2003, 51:4247–4253.
23. Zeng HH et al. Antioxidant properties of phenolic diterpenes from Rosmari-
    nus ofﬁcinalis. Acta Pharmacologia Sinica, 2001, 22:1094–1098.
24. Asai A, Nakagawa K, Miyazawa T. Antioxidative effects of turmeric, rose-
    mary and capsicum extracts on membrane phospholipid peroxidation and
    liver lipid metabolism in mice. Bioscience, Biotechnology and Biochemistry,
    1999, 63:2118–2122.
25. Calabrese V et al. Biochemical studies of a natural antioxidant isolated from
    rosemary and its application in cosmetic dermatology. International Journal
    of Tissue Reactions, 2000, 22:5–13.
26. Slameňová D et al. Rosemary-stimulated reduction of DNA strand breaks
    and FPG-sensitive sites in mammalian cells treated with H2O2 or visible
    light-excited methylene blue. Cancer Letters, 2002, 177:145–153.
27. Del Campo J, Amiot MJ, Nguyen-TC. Antimicrobial effect of rosemary ex-
    tracts. Journal of Food Protection, 2000, 63:1359–1368.
28. Bagamboula CF, Uyttendaele M, Debevere J. Antimicrobial effect of spices
    and herbs on Shigella sonnei and Shigella ﬂexneri. Journal of Food Protection,
    2003, 66:668–673.
29. Makino T et al. Suppressive effects of rosmarinic acid on mesangioprolifera-
    tive glomerulonephritis in rats. Nephron, 2002, 92:898–904.

                                                                              307
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


30. Abe F et al. Ursolic acid as a trypanocidal constituent in rosemary. Biological
    and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 2002, 25:1485–1487.
31. Singletary KW, Nelshoppen JM. Inhibition of 7,12-dimethylbenz[c]anthracene
    (DMBA)-induced mammary tumorigenesis and of in vivo formation of mammary
    DMBA-DNA adducts by rosemary extract. Cancer Letters, 1991, 60:169–175.
32. Dias PC et al. Antiulcerogenic activity of crude hydroalcoholic extract of
    Rosmarinus ofﬁcinalis L. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2000, 69:57–62.
33. Haloui M et al. Experimental diuretic effects of Rosmarinus ofﬁcinalis and
    Centaurium erythraea. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2000, 71:465–472.
34. Debersac P et al. Effects of a water-soluble extract of rosemary and its puri-
    ﬁed component rosmarinic acid on xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes in rat
    liver. Food and Chemical Toxicology, 2001, 39:109–117.
35. Debersac P et al. Induction of cytochrome P450 and/or detoxication en-
    zymes by various extracts of rosemary: description of speciﬁc patterns. Food
    and Chemical Toxicology, 2001, 39:907–918.
36. Singletary KW, Rokusek JT. Tissue-speciﬁc enhancement of xenobiotic de-
    toxiﬁcation enzymes in mice by dietary rosemary extract. Plant Foods for
    Human Nutrition, 1997, 50:47–53.
37. Zhu BT et al. Dietary administration of an extract from rosemary leaves en-
    hances the liver microsomal metabolism of endogenous estrogens and decreas-
    es their uterotropic action in CD-1 mice. Carcinogenesis, 1998, 19:1821–1827.
38. Babu US, Wiesenfeld PL, Jenkins MY. Effect of dietary rosemary extract on
    cell-mediated immunity of young rats. Plant Foods for Human Nutrition,
    1999, 53:169–174.
39. Hur YG, Yun Y, Won J. Rosmarinic acid induces p56lck-dependent apoptosis
    in Jurkat and peripheral T cells via mitochondrial pathway independent from
    Fas/Fas ligand interaction. Journal of Immunology, 2004, 172:79–87.
40. Lemonica IP, Damasceno DC, di-Stasi LC. Study of the embryotoxic effects
    of an extract of rosemary (Rosmarinus ofﬁcinalis L.). Brazilian Journal of
    Medical and Biological Research, 1996, 29:223–227.
41. Samman S et al. Green tea or rosemary extract added to foods reduces nonheme-
    iron absorption. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 2001, 73:607–612.
42. Armisén M, Rodríguez V, Vidal C. Photoaggravated allergic contact derma-
    titis due to Rosmarinus ofﬁcinalis cross-reactive with Thymus vulgaris. Con-
    tact Dermatitis, 2003, 48:52–53.
43. Fernandez L et al. Allergic contact dermatitis from rosemary (Rosmarinus
    ofﬁcinalis L.). Contact Dermatitis, 1997, 37:248–249.
44. Hjorther AB et al. Occupational allergic contact dermatitis from carnosol, a natural-
    ly-occurring compound present in rosemary. Contact Dermatitis, 1997, 37:99–100.
45. Guin JD. Rosemary cheilitis: one to remember. Contact Dermatitis, 2001,
    45:63.
46. Alkofahi A et al. Biological activity of some Jordanian medicinal plant ex-
    tracts. Part II. Fitoterapia, 1997, 68:163–168.
47. Blumenthal M, Goldberg A, Brinckmann J, eds. Herbal medicine: Expanded
    Commission E monographs. Austin, TX, American Botanical Council, 2000.

308
                           Cortex Salicis




Deﬁnition
Cortex Salicis consists of the whole or fragmented dried bark from young
branches of Salix alba L., S. daphnoides Vill., S. fragilis L., S. purpurea L.,
and other appropriate Salix species (Salicaceae) (1–4).

Synonyms
No information was found.

Selected vernacular names
Salix alba L.: Ak sõyüd ag, basket willow, bela vrba, beli, bid-e-maamou-
li, caporniolo, derakht-e-bid, European willow, hopeapaju, hvid pil, is-
bîdâr, kvitpil, osier blanc, paju, remmelgas, salcio bianco, salicastro, salcio
da forche, salece, salgueiro-de-casa-roxa, saligastro, sargatillo, saule blanc,
sauce blanco, Silberweide, sogut, solvpil, sufsaf abiad, tortiello, swallow
tailed willow, vitpil, white willow (3, 5–10).
Salix daphnoides Vill.: Daphne willow, Reiweide, salicio nero, saule à bois
glauque, saule faux daphné, saule noir, Schimmel Weide, vi, violet willow,
wierzba wawrzynkolistna (3, 10).
Salix fragilis L.: Bid-khesht, brittle willow, Bruckweide, common crack
willow, crack willow, Éva-fuz, hrökkvíòir, krhka vrba, Krackweide,
kraakwilg, piilipuu, rabe remmelgas, salice, saliva, saule fragile, skjorpil,
skörpil, sufsaf, törékeny fuz (3, 5, 8, 10).
Salix purpurea L.: Bidsorkh, morvár, osier rouge, purple osier, purple wil-
low, purpur pil, Pupurweide, salcio da vimini, salcio rosso, sorkhbid,
sauce Colorado, saule pourpre, wierzba purpurowa (3, 5, 10).

Geographical distribution
Native to Europe and Asia, and naturalized in North America (6, 11).

Description
Salix species are woody trees, up to 25 m in height. Leaves are deciduous,
generally petiolate and stipulate, simple, alternate to subopposite, linear

                                                                           309
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


to widely obovate, margins entire to serrulate. Leaf underside is generally
hairy or glaucous, rarely glabrous. Inﬂorescence consists of small uni-
sexual catkins emerging, depending on species, either before, at the same
time as, or after the leaves emerge; individual ﬂowers inconspicuous,
apetalous, subtended by a single fringed or hairy bract; sepals replaced by
nectaries. Stamens 1–8, often 2 in staminate ﬂower, and in pistillate ﬂow-
ers, the ovary is superior, bicarpellate, unilocular; style 1; stigmas 2, each
0–2-lobed. Fruit capsule, two-valved. Seeds many, comose (1). Salix alba
is a large tree with a short trunk, yellowish-brown branches and elliptic-
lanceolate, acuminate and serrulate, ash-grey, sericious leaves. The fruit is
a capsule dehiscent by 2 valves and contains numerous seeds, on each of
which is a basal tuft of hair (11).

Plant material of interest: dried branch bark
General appearance
The bark is 1–2 cm wide and 1–2 mm thick and occurs in ﬂexible, elongat-
ed, quilled or curved pieces. The outer surface is smooth or slightly wrin-
kled longitudinally and greenish-yellow in the younger bark to brownish-
grey in the older bark. The inner surface is smooth or ﬁnely striated
longitudinally and white, pale yellow or reddish-brown, depending on the
species. The fracture is short in the outer part and coarsely ﬁbrous in the
inner region, and is easily split longitudinally. The diameter of current year
twigs is not more than 10 mm. The wood is white or pale yellow (2, 4).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: slight; taste: astringent and bitter (1, 2, 4).

Microscopic characteristics
Two or three rows of poorly developed cork cells with thickened outer
walls; cortex of collenchymatous and parenchymatous cells. The latter
contain cluster crystals of calcium oxalate, 20–25 μm in diameter and oc-
casionally tannin. Phloem is characterized by tangential groups of ligni-
ﬁed ﬁbres associated with a crystal sheath containing prismatic crystals of
calcium oxalate. Simple, rounded starch granules 6–8 μm in diameter in
the parenchymatous cells of the phloem and medullary rays (2).

Powdered plant material
Pale yellow, greenish-yellow or light brown. Microscopically, bundles of
narrow ﬁbres, up to about 600 μm long, with very thick walls, ligniﬁed,
and surrounded by a crystal sheath containing prism crystals of calcium
oxalate; parenchyma of the cortex with thick, pitted and deeply beaded
walls, and containing large cluster crystals of calcium oxalate; uniseriate

310
                                                               Cortex Salicis


medullary rays; thickened and suberized cork cells. Groups of brownish
collenchyma from the bud may be present. Twigs show, additionally, frag-
ments of ligniﬁed ﬁbres and vessels from the xylem (2, 4).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations and thin-layer chromatogra-
phy (1, 2, 4).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (12).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 3% of twigs with a diameter greater than 10 mm, and not
more than 2% other foreign matter (1, 2, 4).

Total ash
Not more than 10% (1, 2, 4).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 3% (1, 2).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 10% (1, 2).

Alcohol-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Loss on drying
Not more than 11% (4).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (4). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (4)
and the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (12) and pesticide residues (13).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (12).

                                                                        311
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (12).

Chemical assays
Not less than 1.5% of total salicylate derivatives expressed as salicin by
high-performance liquid chromatography (4).

Major chemical constituents
The major biologically active constituents are the phenolic glycosides in-
cluding salicin (approximately 1%), salicortin (up to 4.0%), 2´-O-
acetylsalicortin (up to 10%), 2´-O-acetylsalicin (= fragilin, up to 4%), trem-
ulacin (0.12–2%), 3´- and 4´-acetylsalicortin, populin and salireposide, which
have collectively been designated as “salicylates” (6). Triandrin, vimalin, pi-
cein and grandidentatin are non-saligenin structure-based phenolic com-
pounds. Other signiﬁcant constituents are ﬂavonoids and tannins (1, 5, 6).
   Total salicin content (after hydrolysis) varies according to species.
Species rich in total salicin include S. daphnoides (2–10%), S. purpurea
(4–8.5%), S. fragilis (2–10%) and S. alba (0.5–1%) (1, 6).
   The structures of salicin, salicortin, 2´-O-acetylsalicortin and 6´-O-
acetylsalicin (= fragilin) are presented below.

     O               OH
R
                                                    HO
              O O          HO                   O        *
                                                                 Salicortin
         OH                                                         R=H
                                     O O            O        O
    HO
              OH
                                OH                               2'-O-Acetylsalicortin
                           HO                                       R = CO-CH3
     Salicin R = H                   O
                                         R   and epimer at C*
    Fragilin R = CO-CH3


Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
Used orally for the symptomatic treatment of fever and pain, and symp-
tomatic treatment of mild rheumatic conditions (14–20).

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Used orally for the treatment of the common cold (1).

Uses described in traditional medicine
Used orally for the treatment of constipation and urinary incontinence.
Used externally for the treatment of warts (5).

312
                                                                   Cortex Salicis


Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Anti-inﬂammatory activity
Similar to salicylates, such as acetylsalicylic acid, extracts of the crude drug
are thought to act by inhibiting the activity of cyclooxygenase and thereby
inhibiting the synthesis of prostaglandins, which play a role in inﬂamma-
tion, fever and pain. Acetylsalicylic acid inhibits the synthesis of prosta-
glandins through the acetylation of the enzyme cyclooxygenase. Salicylic
acid, and the salicylates that lack an acetyl group, reduce prostaglandin
synthesis via inhibition of the activity of cyclooxygenase II (1, 21).
   Intragastric administration of 100.0 mg/kg body weight (bw) of trem-
ulacin, a constituent of the bark, signiﬁcantly inhibited carrageenan-
induced hind paw oedema in rats (p < 0.001) (22). Intragastric administra-
tion of 0.5 ml/kg bw of a 30% ethanol extract of the bark to rats reduced
carrageenan-induced hind paw oedema, but was not effective in the adju-
vant-induced arthritis or dextran-induced pedal oedema models (23).

Antipyretic activity
Intragastric administration of 0.8 ml/kg bw of a 30% ethanol extract to
rats, suppressed yeast-induced pyrexia (23). The antipyretic effects of
salicin, saligenin (an aglycone of salicin) and salicylic acid (an active me-
tabolite of salicin) were assessed in rats (24). After intragastric administra-
tion of salicin to rats, the metabolite salicylic acid appeared slowly in the
plasma and concentrations increased gradually, in contrast to the rapid
appearance observed after oral administration of sodium salicylate or sali-
genin. At a dose of 5 mM/kg bw, orally administered salicin did not affect
the rectal temperature of afebrile rats while at the same dose, sodium sali-
cylate and saligenin lowered body temperature signiﬁcantly. However,
salicin signiﬁcantly reduced yeast-induced fever (p < 0.01), producing a
normal body temperature, and completely prevented fever when admin-
istered simultaneously with yeast. Salicin did not induce gastric lesions
even at a dose of 5 mM/kg bw; conversely, sodium salicylate and saligenin
induced severe gastric lesions in a dose-dependent manner when adminis-
tered at doses of 1, 2.5 and 5 mM/kg bw (24).

Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of salicin, saligenin (an aglycone of salicin) and
salicylic acid (an active metabolite of salicin) were determined in rats (24).
Poor absorption of salicin and rapid absorption of salicylic acid and sali-
genin were conﬁrmed in this animal model. Only small amounts of sali-
cylic acid and saligenin were detected in the intestinal tracts of rats 1 h

                                                                            313
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


after oral administration. More than 50% of a salicin dose was recovered
as salicin and saligenin from the intestinal tracts 1 h after treatment and
15.8% of the dose was still present as saligenin 4 h after administration.
When given to germ-free rats, 19.8% of the salicin dose was recovered
intact, mainly from the cecum, and no saligenin was detected even at 4 h
after treatment. These results indicate that salicin is a pro-drug that is
gradually transported to the lower part of the intestine, hydrolysed to
saligenin by intestinal bacteria, and converted to salicylic acid after ab-
sorption. It thus produces an antipyretic action without causing gastric
injury (25).

Toxicology
Intragastric administration of a 40% ethanol extract of the bark to rats at
a dose of 1.6 ml/kg bw for 13 weeks had no effect on kidney function,
haematological parameters, liver function or cholesterol levels (26). His-
tological evaluation of the animals after killing showed no pathological
changes in the brain, heart, lungs, bone, kidneys, liver, reproductive or-
gans, mammary tissue, stomach or intestines (26).
   The median lethal dose range of a 30% ethanol extract of the bark was
28.0–42.0 ml/kg bw in mice (both sexes) (26).

Clinical pharmacology
Anticoagulant activity
A study was performed to investigate the anticoagulant activity of a bark
extract used in the treatment of 51 patients with chronic back pain. Thir-
ty-ﬁve patients suffering from acute exacerbations of chronic low back
pain received randomly and double-blind either the extract (correspond-
ing to 240 mg salicin/day; n = 19) or a placebo (n = 16). A further 16 pa-
tients with stable chronic ischaemic heart disease were given 100 mg ac-
etylsalicylate per day. Platelet aggregation was studied after drawing blood
from the treated patients using an aggregometer. Arachidonic acid (500 μg/
ml), adenosine diphosphate (2 × 10−5 M) and collagen (0.18 μg/ml) were
used as aggregating agents. The mean maximal arachidonic acid-induced
platelet aggregation was 61%, 78% and 13% for the groups treated with
extract, placebo and acetylsalicylate, respectively. Acetylsalicylate had a
signiﬁcant inhibitory effect on platelet aggregation compared to the ex-
tract (p = 0.001) and placebo (p = 0.001). There was also a signiﬁcant dif-
ference between the placebo and the extract-treated groups in the maxi-
mal platelet aggregation induced by arachidonic acid (p = 0.04) and ADP
(p = 0.01). No statistical difference was found between platelet aggrega-
tion in the three groups when collagen was added to the human platelets.

314
                                                                 Cortex Salicis


Daily consumption of the extract with 240.0 mg salicin per day affected
platelet aggregation to a lesser extent than acetylsalicylate (27).
Chronic lower back pain
Standardized extracts of the bark exhibited analgesic effects similar to
those of higher doses of acetylsalicylic acid. A daily dose of 1572.0 mg of
an extract of the crude drug (standardized to 15.2% salicin or 240.0 mg
salicin per day) was superior to placebo in the treatment of pain in pa-
tients with osteoarthritis of the hip and the knee, and in patients with
exacerbations of chronic low back pain. In two open studies, unspeciﬁed
extracts of the crude drug exhibited similar efﬁcacy to the normal treat-
ment regime of nonsteroidal antirheumatic drugs and the efﬁcacy was
similar to that of refecoxib (18).
    A randomized placebo-controlled clinical study evaluated the efﬁcacy
of a willow bark extract in 210 patients with chronic lower back pain. The
patients were assigned to receive an orally administered willow bark ex-
tract with either 120.0 mg (low dose) or 240.0 mg (high dose) of salicin, or
a placebo, with tramadol as the sole rescue medication, in the 4-week trial.
The principal outcome measure was the proportion of patients who were
pain-free without tramadol for at least 5 days during the ﬁnal week of the
study. A total of 191 patients completed the study. The number of pain-
free patients in the last week of treatment was 27 (39%) of 65 in the group
receiving high-dose extract, 15 (21%) of 67 in the group receiving low-
dose extract, and 4 (6%) of 59 in the group treated with placebo (p < 0.001).
The response in the group treated with the high dose was evident after
only 1 week of treatment. Signiﬁcantly more patients in the group receiv-
ing the placebo required tramadol during each week of the study
(p < 0.001). One patient in the treatment group suffered a severe allergic
reaction (14).
    An open, non-randomized study (postmarketing surveillance) assessed
the efﬁcacy of an extract of the crude drug in three groups of patients aged
18–80 years presenting over an 18-month period with acute exacerbations
of low back pain. The ﬁrst group of 115 patients was prescribed a daily
dose of the extract containing 120.0 mg of salicin. A second group of
112 patients was prescribed the extract equivalent to 240.0 mg salicin per
day. A third “control” or “comparator” group of 224 patients received
conventional therapy. In the patients who had received conventional ther-
apy, the exacerbations had been shorter but the pain was more intense as
judged by Arhus Index and Total Pain Index. After 4 weeks of treatment,
about 40% of patients in the group treated with the extract equivalent to
240 mg salicin per day were free of pain. In the group treated with extract
containing 120.0 mg of salicin, as a whole, about 19% of patients were

                                                                          315
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


pain-free at 4 weeks, but only 8% of those who did not resort to supple-
mentary treatment. In the group receiving conventional therapy, 18% of
patients were pain-free. Better pain relief in the group treated with the
equivalent of 240.0 mg salicin was accompanied by a reduction in the use
of supplementary conventional treatments (15).
Migraine
A placebo-controlled double-blind clinical trial involving 54 patients as-
sessed the efﬁcacy of a topical medication containing salicin for the treat-
ment of either migraines and/or tension-type headaches. All the patients
had headaches consistent with the International Classiﬁcation of Head-
ache Disorders (HIS) criteria for migraines and/or tension-type head-
aches, and had suffered from headaches for at least 1 year up to approxi-
mately 40 years. The patients were divided into two groups. One group
received a placebo topical medication. The other group received a topical
medication containing salicin. Neither preparation induced any stinging
sensation. The patients were instructed to apply the medication, which
was in a roll-on form, to the frontal region at the onset of a headache, take
their usual oral or parenteral medications, apply a mask which covered
the eyes and frontal region, and then lie down. They subsequently ﬁlled
out forms rating the degree of relief which they attributed to the topical
medications and the masks using a scale of 0 to 10. They were also asked
if this form of treatment had helped or not. Seven of the 20 patients who
received the placebo stated that the medication and mask helped. This
group rated the treatment an average of 4.31 on the scale of 0 to 10. Twen-
ty-eight of 34 patients who received salicin stated that it was effective.
This group rated it 7.42 on the scale of 0 to 10 (p < 0.001). The majority of
the patients treated with salicin stated that the duration of their headaches
was signiﬁcantly reduced, as was their need for analgesic and/or narcotic
medications. This study demonstrates a signiﬁcant difference between
placebo and salicin in association with the photoprotective mask in treat-
ing migraines and/or tension-type headaches with associated frontalis
pain and photophobia (17).
Osteoarthritis
A clinical study involving 78 patients assessed the efﬁcacy of a chemically
standardized willow bark extract in the treatment of osteoarthritis. Wil-
low bark extract, at a dose corresponding to 240.0 mg salicin/day, was
compared to a placebo in a 2-week, double-blind, randomized controlled
trial. The primary outcome measure was the pain dimension of the West-
ern Ontario and McMaster Universities (WOMAC) Osteoarthritis In-
dex. Secondary outcome measures included the stiffness and physical

316
                                                                 Cortex Salicis


function dimensions of the WOMAC, daily visual analogue scales (VAS)
on pain and physical function, and ﬁnal overall assessments by both pa-
tients and investigators. The results demonstrated a statistically signiﬁ-
cant difference between the subjects who received active treatment and
the placebo group in the WOMAC pain dimension (d = 6.5 mm, 95%
conﬁdence intervals (CI), 0.2–12.7 mm, p = 0.047); the WOMAC pain
score was reduced by 14% from the baseline level after 2 weeks of active
treatment, whereas there was an increase of 2% in the placebo group. The
patient diary VAS conﬁrmed the results, and the ﬁnal overall assessments
showed superiority of the willow bark extract over the placebo (patients’
assessment, p = 0.0002; investigators’ assessment, p = 0.0073) (19, 20).
   A double-blind, randomized, controlled clinical trial assessed the efﬁ-
cacy of an extract of the bark (containing 17.6% total salicin), at a dose of
240.0 mg per day, in the treatment of patients with chronic arthritic pain.
Eighty-two subjects with chronic arthritic pain were randomly assigned
for 2 months without cross-over to receive either the extract or a placebo.
The results demonstrated a small but statistically signiﬁcant improvement
in pain symptoms (p < 0.05), although the improvement was less in pa-
tients with osteoarthritis. No other signiﬁcant changes in any other mea-
sures or in the use of other self-prescribed analgesics were observed (28).
   The efﬁcacy of a standardized willow bark extract was investigated in
two randomized, controlled, double-blind trials with follow-up for
6 weeks, in patients with osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis. One
hundred and twenty-seven outpatients with osteoarthritis of the hip or
knee and a pain score of at least 30 mm, and 26 outpatients with active
rheumatoid arthritis were randomly allocated to one of three groups. Pa-
tients in the ﬁrst group received willow bark extract, corresponding to
240 mg of salicin/day; patients in the second group, diclofenac at a dose of
100 mg/day; and the third group, a placebo (n = 43, 43 and 41, respec-
tively). The main outcome measure was the pain subscore. In the rheuma-
toid arthritis trial, patients were randomly assigned to receive either wil-
low bark extract, corresponding to 240 mg salicin/day (n = 13) or a
placebo (n = 13). The main outcome measure was the patient’s assessment
of pain rated on a 100-mm visual analogue scale. In the osteoarthritis trial,
pain scores decreased by 8 mm (17%) in the group treated with willow
bark and by 23 mm (47%) in the group treated with diclofenac, compared
with 5 mm (10%) in the patients who received the placebo. The difference
between the scores following treatment with willow bark extract and
treatment with placebo was not statistically signiﬁcant (–2.8 mm; 95%
CI –12.1 to 6.4 mm; p = 0.55, analysis of covariance (ANCOVA)), but the
difference between the outcomes of treatment with diclofenac and with

                                                                          317
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


the placebo was highly signiﬁcant (–18.0 mm; 95% CI –27.2 to –8.8 mm;
p = 0.0002, ANCOVA). The results in the rheumatoid arthritis trial
showed that the mean reduction of pain reported using the visual ana-
logue scale was –8 mm (15%) in the group treated with willow bark com-
pared with –2 mm (4%) in the placebo group. The difference was not
statistically signiﬁcant (estimated difference –0.8 mm; 95% CI –20.9 to
19.3 mm; p = 0.93, ANCOVA) (29).
Pharmacokinetics
The pharmacokinetics of salicin and its major metabolites were deter-
mined in humans after oral administration of an extract of the crude drug.
The extract, corresponding to 240.0 mg salicin (1360 mg, 838 μmol), was
administered to 10 healthy volunteers in two equal doses at times 0 h and
3 h. Over a period of 24 h, levels of salicylic acid and its metabolites in
urine and serum, i.e. gentisic acid and salicyluric acid, were determined
using reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography. Renal ex-
cretion rate, elimination half-life and total bioavailability of salicylates
were calculated. The results showed that salicylic acid was the major me-
tabolite of salicin detected in the serum (86% of total salicylates), as well
as salicyluric acid (10%) and gentisic acid (4%). Peak serum levels were
reached within less than 2 h after oral administration. Renal elimination
occurred predominantly in the form of salicyluric acid. Peak serum levels
of salicylic acid were on average 1.2 mg/l, and the observed area under the
serum concentration–time curve of salicylic acid was equivalent to that
expected from an intake of 87.0 mg acetylsalicylic acid (30).

Adverse reactions
Allergic reactions such as pruritus, urticaria, asthma and gastrointestinal
symptoms may occur (16). One case of an allergic reaction in a 32-year-old
atopic patient who showed a severe anaphylactic reaction after the ingestion
of a pollen compound containing the crude drug has been reported (31).
One case of anaphylaxis resulting from the use of an extract of the crude
drug in a patient with a history of an aspirin allergy has been reported (32).

Contraindications
Cortex Salicis is contraindicated in cases of hypersensitivity or allergy to
the plant material or to salicylates (e.g. asthma, bronchial spasm, rhinitis
or urticaria).
   It is also contraindicated during pregnancy and lactation, in patients
with salicylate intolerance and patients with impaired thrombocyte func-
tion (7, 27), and in children under the age of 12 years (7).

318
                                                                Cortex Salicis


Warnings
In children under the age of 12 years, Cortex Salicis should only be used
on the advice of a health care professional due to the possibility of Reye’s
syndrome. In cases of a child or adolescent who has become very ill with
severe vomiting, drowsiness or loss of consciousness following a viral in-
fection, Reye’s syndrome should be suspected. This extremely rare, life-
threatening disease requires immediate medical attention.
    In cases of severe liver or renal dysfunction, coagulation disorders,
gastric/duodenal ulcer and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deﬁcien-
cy, the product should only be taken under medical supervision.
    Consult a health care professional in cases of fever (> 39 nC), lasting
longer than 3 days. A health care professional should also be consulted if
acute conditions of swelling of joints, redness and impaired mobility per-
sist or worsen during the ﬁrst week of use of Cortex Salicis.

Precautions
General
The use of Cortex Salicis in patients with hypersensitivity to other non-
steroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs is not recommended. Use should be
avoided in people with asthma because severe reactions (acute broncho-
spasms) could be induced (16).

Drug interactions
Currently there are no data indicating that the crude drug interacts with
anticoagulant drugs such as coumarin and heparin. However, Cortex Sali-
cis may increase the effects of anticoagulants. Patients on anticoagulant
therapy should not use products containing the crude drug without the
supervision of a health care professional (7).

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
Oral administration of a 40% ethanol extract of the bark did not disrupt
the estrous cycle, or inhibit ovulation or fertility when administered to
female rats and rabbits at a dose of 1.6 ml/kg bw (26).

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
Oral administration of a 40% ethanol extract of the bark to female rats
and rabbits at a dose of 1.6 ml/kg bw during pregnancy was not terato-
genic (26).

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

                                                                         319
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Oral administration of a 40% ethanol extract of the bark was not em-
bryotoxic when administered to rats and rabbits during pregnancy at a
dose of 1.6 ml/kg bw (26).

Nursing mothers
See Contraindications.
Salicylates cross the placenta and appear in breast milk (1).

Paediatric use
See Contraindications.

Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug, dried hydroalcoholic or aqueous extracts, tinctures and
ﬂuidextracts (1, 16, 33).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Adult oral daily dose: extracts, tinctures or ﬂuidextracts equivalent to
120–240 mg of total salicin, or 6–12 g of powdered drug material as a de-
coction (corresponding to 120–240 mg of total salicin) in two divided
doses (1, 16, 33).

References
1. Upton R et al., eds. Willow bark. Salix spp. In: American herbal pharmaco-
   peia. Santa Cruz, CA, American Herbal Pharmacopeia, 1999.
2. British herbal pharmacopoeia. Exeter, British Herbal Medicine Association,
   1996.
3. Bradley PR, ed. British herbal compendium. Vol. 1. Dorset, British Herbal
   Medicine Association, 1992.
4. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
   Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
   at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
   of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
   of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
6. Wichtl M. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals, English ed. (Bisset NG
   translator and ed.). Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1994.
7. Ernst E et al., eds. The desktop guide to complementary and alternative med-
   icine. Edinburgh, Mosby, 2001.

320
                                                                       Cortex Salicis


8. Zahedi E. Botanical dictionary. Scientiﬁc names of plants in English, French,
    German, Arabic and Persian Languages. Tehran, University of Tehran Pub-
    lications, 1959.
9. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
10. Parsa A. Flore de l’Iran. Vol. VIII. Tehran, University of Tehran, 1960.
11. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blak-
    iston Company, 1950.
12. WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
13. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
14. Chrubasik S et al. Treatment of low back pain exacerbations with willow
    bark extract: A randomized double-blind study. American Journal of Medi-
    cine, 2000, 109:9–14.
15. Chrubasik S et al. Potential economic impact of using a proprietary willow
    bark extract in outpatient treatment of low back pain: An open non-random-
    ized study. Phytomedicine, 2001, 8:241–251.
16. European Medicines Agency. Final proposal for a core data Salicis Cortex.
    London, EMEA, 2003.
17. Hyson MI. Anticephalgic photoprotective premedicated mask. A report of a
    successful double-blind placebo-controlled study of a new treatment for
    headaches with associated frontalis pain and photophobia. Headache, 1998,
    38:475–477.
18. März RW, Kemper F. Weidenrindenextrakt-Wirkungen und Wirksamkeit.
    Erkenntnisstand zu Pharmakologie, Toxikologie und Klinik [Willow bark
    extract-effects and effectiveness. Status of current knowledge regarding phar-
    macology, toxicology and clinical aspects]. Wiener Medizinische Wochen-
    schrift, 2002, 152:354–359 [in German].
19. Schmid B et al. Wirksamkeit und Verträglichkeit eines standardisierten Weid-
    enrindenextraktes bei Arthrose-Patienten: Randomisierte, Placebo-kontrolli-
    erte Doppelblindstudie [Effectiveness and tolerance of standardized willow
    bark extract in arthrosis patients. Randomized, placebo controlled double-
    blind study]. Zeitschrift für Rheumatologie, 2000, 59:314–320 [in German].
20. Schmid B et al. Efﬁcacy and tolerability of a standardized willow bark ex-
    tract in patients with osteoarthritis: Randomized, placebo-controlled, double
    blind clinical trial. Phytotherapy Research, 2001, 15:344–350.
21. Wagner I et al. Inﬂuence of willow bark extract on cyclooxygenase activity
    and on tumor necrosis factor-A or interleukin 1 release in vitro and ex vivo.
    Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 2003, 73:272–274.
22. Cheng GF et al. Anti-inﬂammatory effects of tremulacin, a salicin-related
    substance isolated from Populus tomentosa Carr. Leaves. Phytomedicine,
    1994, 1:209–211.
23. Leslie GB. A pharmacometric evaluation of nine bio-strath herbal remedies.
    Medita, 1978, 8:3–19.

                                                                                321
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


24. Fiebich BL, Appel K. Anti-inﬂammatory effects of willow bark extract.
    Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, 2003, 74:96–97.
25. Akao T et al. Evaluation of salicin as an antipyretic prodrug that does not
    cause gastric injury. Planta Medica, 2002, 68:714–718.
26. Leslie GB, Salmon G. Repeated dose toxicity studies and reproductive stud-
    ies on nine bio-strath herbal remedies. Swiss Medicine, 1979, 1:1–3.
27. Krivoy N et al. Effect of salicis cortex extract on human platelet aggregation.
    Planta Medica, 2001, 67:209–212.
28. Mills SY et al. Effect of a proprietary herbal medicine on the relief of chronic
    arthritic pain: A double-blind study. British Journal of Rheumatology, 1996,
    35:874–878.
29. Biegert C et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of willow bark extract in the treatment of
    osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis: results of 2 randomized double-blind
    controlled trials. Journal of Rheumatology, 2004, 31:2121–2130.
30. Schmid B, Kötter I, Heide L. Pharmacokinetics of salicin after oral adminis-
    tration of a standardised willow bark extract. European Journal of Clinical
    Pharmacology, 2001, 57:387–391.
31. Chivato T et al. Anaphylaxis induced by ingestion of a pollen compound.
    Journal of Investigative Allergology and Clinical Immunology, 1996,
    6:208–209.
32. Boullata JI, McDonnell PJ, Oliva CD. Anaphylactic reaction to a dietary
    supplement containing willow bark. Annals of Pharmacotherapy, 2003,
    37:832–835.
33. Blumenthal M et al., eds. The complete German Commission E monographs:
    Therapeutic guide to herbal medicines. Austin, TX, American Botanical
    Council, 1998.




322
                          Fructus Tribuli




Deﬁnition
Fructus Tribuli consists of the dried fruits of Tribulus terrestris L. (Zygo-
phyllaceae) (1–4).

Synonyms
Tribulus lanuginosus L. (5).

Selected vernacular names
Abrojo, abrojos, akanti, alaf-e-kanguereh, baijili, bastitaj, be tha gokharu,
bethu, bhakhra, bullhead, burnut, burra gookeron, calthrop, caltrap, caltrop,
cat’s head, chotagokhru, cows hoof, croix de chevalier, croix de malte, dars el
agûz, dava-tehokourtdi, demirdiken, deshi gokhru, devil’s thorn, ekanty,
eskrundki, espáákh, espigón, gai ma duong, gatha, ghota, goathead, gokharu
gokhru, gokhur, gokshura, goksuraka, gokhri, gokhurkata, gokhyura,
gukhura, hamabishi, herbe terrestre, ikshugandha, jili, jilisi, kandaai, khar-e-
khasak khurd, khárk-tehârouk khárk-tehârpar, khárkhassak, khôrbâr,
khokkrasun, kouleh-tighak, krunda, land caltrops, malteserkors, meetha
gokhru, Mexican sanbur, michirkand, mithagokharu, mithogokharu, naal-
khar, naam din, nana gokharu, nature’s viagara, neggilamullu, neggilu, nere-
nchi, nerinjil, nerunjil, ookharu pakhda, outb, pakhda, pakhra, palleru, pal-
leru kaya, palleruveru, pedda palgeru, punctur vine, qutiba, saligot terrestre,
sannanaggilu, sannaneggilu, sarang, sarate, sekal-tali, sharwandi, sher sher,
shitsurishi, small caltrop, svadamstraa, tahkandi, tat le, Teufelsdorm, Texas
sandbur, traikantaka, tribolo commune, trikanta, tribule couché, tribule
terrestre, tsi li, vejtidsel, zama (4–10).

Geographical distribution
Native to the Mediterranean regions, but also found throughout the world (6).

Description
A perennial, decumbent, pubescent herb, branches 0.5–1.8 m long, tips
ascending; longer leaves up to 7 cm long, with 6–9 pairs of leaﬂets, shorter

                                                                            323
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


leaves up to 6 cm long with 3–5 pairs of leaﬂets, midrib ending in a mucro,
0.5–2 mm long; leaﬂets 6–22 mm by 2.5–9 mm, base obliquely rounded,
apex subacute, both surfaces silky, subsessile, stipules falcate, 3–6 mm
long, acuminate; pedicel 2–4 cm long, sepals narrowly lanceolate, 7–11 mm
long, apex acute, appressed hairy, caducous, petals obovate-cuneate,
1–2 cm by 1–1.5 cm, apex broadly rounded-truncate, bright yellow, sta-
mens subequal, anthers 1 mm long; cocci 4–5, spines stout, sharp, 2 lateral
ones largest, pericarp rather thick, corky, seeds 1–3 in each mericarp (6).

Plant material of interest: dried fruits
General appearance
A pentagonal fruit 7–12 mm in diameter consists of 5 mericarps, radially
arranged. Each mericarp often splitting into single hatchet-shaped,
3–6 mm long mericarp; dorsal surface yellowish-green, prominent, with
longitudinal ribs and numerous spinelets, bearing symmetrically a pair of
long spines and a pair of short spines; two lateral surfaces rough, with
reticular striations, greyish-white. Texture hard. Each mericarp contains
1–3 seeds (1–3).

Organoleptic properties
Odourless; taste: bitter and pungent (1, 2).

Microscopic characteristics
Transverse section of fruit shows small epidermal cells of each coccus
rectangular; unicellular trichomes in abundance; rilesocarp 6–10 layers of
large parenchymatous cells, rosette of calcium oxalate crystals abundant;
mesocarp followed by 3–4 compact layers of small cells containing pris-
matic crystals of calcium oxalate (4).

Powdered plant material
Yellow-green. The ﬁbres are ligniﬁed, with upper and lower layers in a
criss-cross arrangement, a few scattered singly, sometimes ﬁbre bundles
connected with stone cells. Stone cells elongated-elliptical or subrounded,
occurring in groups. Testa cells polygonal or subsquare, about 30 μm in
diameter, walls reticulately thickened, ligniﬁed. Prisms of calcium oxalate
8–20 μm in diameter (1).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1, 2, 4), thin-layer chroma-
tography (2) and microchemical test (3).

324
                                                                   Fructus Tribuli


Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (11).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 4.0% fruit stalks and not more than 1% other foreign matter (2, 3).

Total ash
Not more than 12% (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 1.5% (2).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 10% (4).

Alcohol-soluble extractive
Not less than 8.5% (2).

Water
Not more than 9% (1).

Loss on drying
Not less than 11% (2).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (12). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (12)
and the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (11) and pesticide residues (13).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (11).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (11).

Chemical assays
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

                                                                             325
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Major chemical constituents
The major constituents of the fruit are steroidal saponins including gitonin,
protodioscin (0.245%, tribulosaponins A and B, tribulosin and terrestrosins
A–K, among others. Other constituents include alkaloids, tribulusamides
A and B, and trace amounts of harman and norharman; and ﬂavonols such
as kaempferol, quercetin and rutin (5, 14, 15). The structures of the major
chemical constituents are presented below.

                                            H3C       OH                                                    HO
                                        CH3
                                                  H                                                                     O
                                                      O H                                           Glc =        OH
                          CH3      H
         OH                                       H H3C                                                     HO
                                                                    O
                              H         H
                                                                    Glc                                                 OH
          O O
                  H                                                                                -D-glucopyranosyl
     OH
O                               Protodioscin
                                                                                                            HO         O
Rha       O
                                                                                                   Rha =         CH3
          Rha                               H3C
                                        CH3
                                                  H                                                              OH OH
                                                   O H
                          CH3      H                                                          -L-rhamnopyranosyl
         OH                                       H H3C
                                                                    O
                              H         H
                                                                    Glc                                                    O
R         O O
                  H       H                                                                           Xyl =        OH
     OH
                                                                                                              HO
R'
                    Tribulosaponin A R = H, R' = O-Rha                                                                     OH
          O
          Rha         Tribulosaponin B R = O-Glc, R' = H                                              -D-xylopyranosyl

                                                                                          H
                                                                    H3 C                      CH3

                                                                CH3
                                                                              H       O
                                                                                  O
                                                  CH3       H
             OH                OH                                             H
                                                       H        H

Xyl           O       O           O O
                                         H        H
         O                OH
    HO
                                                               Tribulosin
              O                   O
              Xyl                 Rha



Tribulusamide A               X = H2                                    OCH3
                                                  OCH3                            OH
Tribulusamide B               X=O
                                                           O
                          H                                                                   OH
                          N                                         H
                                                                H
                               O
HO                                                    O         N
                                                                H
                                                                          X



326
                                                               Fructus Tribuli


Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Orally for the treatment of cough, headache and mastitis (1).
   Although clinical trials have assessed the use of the crude drug for
the symptomatic treatment of angina pectoris and male infertility
(16–22), randomized controlled clinical trials are needed before the
use of the crude drug can be recommended for the treatment of these
conditions.

Uses described in traditional medicine
Orally for the treatment of abdominal distension, diarrhoea, kidney
stones, nosebleeds and vitiligo (5, 23). Also used as an aphrodisiac, di-
uretic, galactagogue, general tonic and uterine tonic (5).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitory effects
The renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, including angiotensin-
converting enzyme plays an important role in the control of blood pres-
sure and ﬂuid volume (24, 25). An aqueous extract of the fruit (1 g fruit in
10 ml water) inhibited the activity of angiotensin-converting enzyme in
vitro at a concentration of 0.33 mg/ml (24). The mechanism of action of
the aqueous extract (500 mg fruit in water 2:1 w/v) was investigated in
2K1C hypertensive rats by measurement of circulatory and local angio-
tensin converting enzyme activity in aorta, heart, kidney and lung. Hy-
pertension was induced using a silver clip on the renal artery inserted by
surgery. The animals were treated with a single oral daily dose of 10 mg/
kg body weight (bw) of a lyophilized aqueous extract of the fruit for
4 weeks. The systolic blood pressure was increased in 2K1C rats as com-
pared with control rats. The systolic blood pressure of rats treated with
the crude drug extract was signiﬁcantly decreased compared to hyperten-
sive rats (p < 0.05). The angiotensin-converting enzyme activity in all tis-
sues of 2K1C rats including aorta, heart, kidney and lung as well as in the
serum was signiﬁcantly increased compared to that of normal rats. The
angiotensin-converting enzyme activity in all tissues of hypertensive rats
treated with the fruit extract was signiﬁcantly lower than that of control
hypertensive rats (26).

                                                                         327
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Anti-inﬂammatory activity
A methanol extract of the fruit inhibited cyclooxygenase 2 activity in
lipopolysaccharide-induced mouse macrophages RAW264.7 by > 80% at
a concentration of 10.0 μg/ml in vitro (27).
Diuretic activity
An aqueous extract of the fruit was dissolved in physiological saline and
administered by gavage to rats to determine its diuretic effects. When ad-
ministered at an intragastric dose of 5.0 g/kg bw, the extract induced di-
uresis, and was slightly more effective than furosemide. The sodium, po-
tassium and chloride ion concentrations in the urine of animals treated
with the extract were also increased. Addition of the extract to the bath
medium for strips of isolated guinea-pig ileum induced contractile activ-
ity of guinea-pig ileum (28).
   A dried ether extract of the fruit induced diuresis and increased creati-
nine clearance in anaesthetized dogs; however no further details of this
study were available (6).
Hepatoprotective activity
Addition of the tribulusamides A and B, lignanamides isolated from a
70% ethanol extract of the fruit, to a medium containing primary cul-
tured mouse hepatocytes at a concentration of 20 μM signiﬁcantly
(p < 0.05) prevented D-galactosamine/tumour necrosis factor alpha-
induced cytotoxicity (14).
Stimulation of melanocyte proliferation
An aqueous fruit extract was tested in an assay using sulforhodamine B
protein stain for cell number to determine if the extract was capable of
stimulating melanocyte proliferation, and could be useful for the treat-
ment of vitiligo. Signiﬁcant stimulation (p < 0.05) of melanocyte prolifera-
tion was observed, in the absence of tetradecanoyl phorbol acetate, using
aqueous extracts of the fruit at concentrations of 0.01–1 mg/ml (29).
Reproductive effects
The effect of an extract of the fruit on the isolated corpus cavernosal tis-
sue of New Zealand white rabbits was studied. Twenty-four rabbits were
randomly assigned to one of four experimental groups of six animals each.
Group 1 served as control. Groups 2, 3 and 4 were treated with an oral
dose of the extract at doses of 2.5 mg/kg bw, 5.0 mg/kg bw and 10.0 mg/
kg bw, respectively, for 8 weeks. After killing the rabbits, the penile tissue
was isolated and evaluated by the response to both contracting and relax-
ing pharmacological agents and electrical ﬁeld stimulation. The relaxant
responses to electrical ﬁeld stimulation, acetylcholine and nitroglycerin in

328
                                                               Fructus Tribuli


noradrenaline-precontracted corpus cavernosal strips from treated groups
showed an increase in relaxation of a concentration-dependent nature
when compared to that of the tissues from the control group. However,
the contractile, anti-erectile response of corpus cavernosal tissue to nor-
adrenaline and histamine did not differ signiﬁcantly between the treatment
and the control groups. The relaxant responses to acetylcholine, nitro-
glycerin and electrical ﬁeld stimulation by more than 10%, 24% and 10%,
at the doses of 2.5 mg/kg bw, 5.0 mg/kg bw and 10.0 mg/kg bw, respec-
tively, compared to their control values and the lack of such effect on the
contractile response to noradrenaline and histamine indicate that the ex-
tract has a pro-erectile activity (30).
    An extract of the fruit containing protodioscin was investigated in both
normal and castrated rats to determine aphrodisiac effects. Rats were di-
vided into ﬁve groups of eight animals each. The treatments were distilled
water (normal and castrated animals), testosterone (normal and castrated
animals, 10.0 mg/kg bw, subcutaneously, bi-weekly) and extract (castrated
animals, 5.0 mg/kg bw, orally once daily for 8 weeks). Decreases in body
weight and prostate weight were observed among the castrated groups of
rats as compared to the normal rats. There was an overall reduction in the
sexual behaviour parameters in the castrated rats as reﬂected by a decrease
in mount and intromission frequencies and an increase in mount, intro-
mission and ejaculation latencies as well as post-ejaculatory interval. Com-
pared to the castrated control animals, treatment of castrated rats with ei-
ther testosterone or the extract led to a mild to moderate improvement of
the sexual behaviour parameters as demonstrated by an increase in mount
frequency and intromission frequency and a decrease in mount latency,
intromission latency and post-ejaculatory interval (29).
Formation of uroliths (urinary calculi)
An ethanol extract of the fruit exhibited a dose-dependent protection
against uroliths induced by glass bead implantation in albino rats. The
extract provided signiﬁcant protection against deposition of calculogenic
material around the glass bead. It also protected against leukocytosis and
elevation of serum urea levels (32).
Toxicity
The plant, when used as fodder, has been reported to cause photosensitiv-
ity in livestock and is responsible for the diseases geeldikkop (in South
Africa) and “bighead” (in Australia and the USA) in sheep. The condition
is characterized by oedema of the head, fever and jaundice, leading to
death (6). Two beta-carboline indoleamines (harman and norharman),
present in trace amounts in the seeds of Tribulus terrestris have been im-

                                                                         329
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


plicated in causing central nervous system effects in sheep that have grazed
on Tribulus over a period of months. Harman and norharman appear to
accumulate in tryptamine-associated neurons of the central nervous sys-
tem and gradually interact irreversibly with a speciﬁc sequence of neu-
ronal gene DNA. The extractable alkaloid content was 44.0 mg/kg dry
matter. Synthetic harman and norharman administered subcutaneously to
sheep at a dose of 54 mg/kg, caused nervous system effects similar to those
caused by the fresh plant (33).
   Behavioural, haematological, biochemical, functional and morpholog-
ical studies on the acute, subchronic and chronic toxicities of proto-
dioscin, one of the chemical constituents of the crude drug, showed no
toxic manifestations under experimental conditions. No data were avail-
able from which conclusions could be drawn concerning carcinogenic
and teratogenic effect (33).

Clinical pharmacology
Saponin-containing extracts of the fruit have been used to treat coronary
heart disease (22). In a clinical observation study involving 406 patients
and a cross-test (67 cases) the results showed that the extract was signiﬁ-
cantly more effective than the control for the treatment of angina pecto-
ris, with a remission rate of 82.3% and 67.2% (p < 0.05), in the treatment
and control groups, respectively. Electrocardiogram improvement was
52.7% in the treated group and 35.8% in the control group. The extract
dilates the coronary artery and improves coronary circulation, and thus is
more effective than the control treatment in improving the electrocardio-
gram of myocardial ischaemia. No adverse reactions were observed on
haematological parameters or hepatic and renal functions (22).
    A clinical study was conducted to assess the effectiveness of a speciﬁc
dosage and period of administration of protodioscin on sperm quality and
quantity in men with moderate idiopathic oligozoospermia. This study
also evaluated the effect of protodioscin on libido, erection, ejaculation
and orgasm. The results demonstrated that oral treatment with the dose of
3 × 2 tablets per day for 60 days increased sperm quantity and quality in
men diagnosed with moderate idiopathic oligozoospermia and restored
libido, erection, ejaculation and orgasm of sexual intercourse. These re-
sults were observed in more than 80% of the treated patients (18).
    A double-blind study was done on 45 men with infertility due to oligo-
asthenoteratozoospermia. Thirty-six men were treated with 500.0 mg
puriﬁed extract of the fruit containing protodioscin, orally 3 times daily
for 3 months. The nine men in the control group were given a placebo for
the same period of time. Spouses of eight of the men in the treated group
became pregnant after treatment of their husbands, whereas no pregnan-

330
                                                                Fructus Tribuli


cies occurred in the spouses of the men in the control group. An improve-
ment in the sperm morphology, acrosome morphology and reaction
seemed to account for the increased fertility after treatment. In addition,
the extract was shown to increase the level of dehydroepiandrosterone
and might also have contributed to the activation of cell membrane recep-
tors and the production of weak androgens (16).
    An interesting correlation of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate level
with the incidence of low sex drive and higher occurrence of impotence
was discovered in studies of patients diagnosed with diabetes mellitus. A
clinical trial involving 30 men with erectile dysfunction, but not diabetes,
30 with neither erectile dysfunction nor diabetes and 15 men with both
diabetes and erectile dysfunction was performed to assess the relationship
between dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate and erectile dysfunction. The
men were given an extract of the fruit at a dose of 3 × 250 mg per day for
3 weeks. The dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate levels, as well as other blood
and liver parameters were evaluated. The results of the study showed a
signiﬁcant increase of dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate levels in subjects
with and without diabetes after treatment, and a signiﬁcant increase in the
frequency of successful intercourse of 60% in subjects with or without
diabetes and with or without erectile dysfunction (17).

Adverse reactions
No information was found.

Contraindications
Fructus Tribuli is contraindicated in cases of hypersensitivity or allergy to
the plant.

Warnings
Due to the possibility of phototoxic reactions, patients using Fructus
Tribuli should avoid excessive exposure to sunlight and use a sunscreen
with a high sun protection factor (> 30) while taking the crude drug.

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
No information was found.

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
Due to the lack of safety data, use of the crude drug during pregnancy is
not recommended.

                                                                          331
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Due to the lack of safety data, use of the crude drug during pregnancy is
not recommended.

Nursing mothers
Due to the lack of safety data, use of the crude drug during breastfeeding
is not recommended.

Paediatric use
Due to the lack of safety data, use of the crude drug in children under the
age of 12 years is not recommended.

Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug and extracts.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Oral daily dosage: 3–6 g of the powdered crude drug as a decoction (4);
6–9 g in divided doses daily as a decoction (1).

References
1. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Beijing, Chemical Indus-
   try Press, 2005.
2. The Japanese pharmacopoeia XIV, Supplement 2. Tokyo, Ministry of Health
   and Welfare, 2003.
3. The Korean herbal pharmacopoeia, IV (English ed.), 2002. Seoul, Korea Food
   and Drug Administration, 2003.
4. The Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India, Part I. Vol. I, 1st ed. New Delhi,
   Government of India Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of
   Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 1990 (reprinted 2001).
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
   at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
   of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
   of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
6. Van Valkenburg JLCH, Bunyapraphatsara N, eds. Medicinal and poisonous
   plants – 2. Leiden, Backhuys, 2001 (PROSEA. Plant resources of South-east
   Asia, No. 12(2)).
7. Al-Yahya MA et al. Saudi plants: a phytochemical and biological approach.
   Riyadh, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, King Saud Uni-
   versity Press, 1990.

332
                                                                      Fructus Tribuli


8. Schlimmer JL. Terminologie medico-pharmaceutique et francaise-persane
    [French-Persian medico-pharmaceutical terminology]. Tehran, University of
    Tehran, 1970.
9. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
10. Parsa A. Flore de l’Iran. Vol. VIII. Tehran, University of Tehran, 1960
    (No. 613).
11. WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
12. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
13. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
14. Li JX et al. Tribulusamide A and B, new hepatoprotective lignanamides from
    the fruits of Tribulus terrestris: indications of cytoprotective activity in mu-
    rine hepatocyte culture. Planta Medica, 1998, 64:628–631.
15. Ganzera M, Bedir E, Khan IA. Determination of steroidal saponins in Tribu-
    lus terrestris by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography and
    evaporative light scattering detection. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
    2001, 90:1752–1758.
16. Adimoelja A, Setiawan L, Djojotananjo T. Tribulus terrestris (protodioscin)
    in the treatment of male infertility with idiopathic oligoasthenoteratozoo-
    spermia. In: Proceedings of the First International Conference of Medical
    Plants for Reproductive Medicine. Taipei, Taiwan, Province of China, 1995.
17. Adimoelja A, Adaikan PG. Protodioscin from herbal plant Tribulus terrestris
    L improves the male sexual functions, probably via DHEA. In: Proceedings
    of the 6th Biennial Asian-Paciﬁc Meeting on Impotence in Kuala Lumpur,
    Malaysia. International Journal of Impotence Research 1997, 9(Suppl 1):20.
18. Arsyad KM. Effect of protodioscin on the quantity and quality of sperms from
    males with moderate idiopathic oligozoospermia. Medika, 1996, 2: 614–618.
19. Yang et al. [Xinnao shutong therapy in 50 patients with cerebral arterioscle-
    rosis and the sequelae of cerebral thrombosis.] [New Drugs and Clinical
    Remedies], 1991, 10:92–95 [in Chinese].
20. Chui SZ et al. [Xinnao shutong for coronary heart disease in 41 patients.]
    [New Drugs and Clinical Remedies], 1992, 11:202–204 [in Chinese].
21. Lu SB et al. [The clinic report of Xinnao shutong on myocardial infarction.]
    [Acta Universitatis Medicinalis Secondae Shanghai], 1994, 14:78–79 [in Chinese].
22. Wang B, Ma L, Liu T. [406 cases of angina pectoris in coronary heart disease
    treated with saponin of Tribulus terrestris.] [Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi],
    1990, 10:85–87 [in Chinese].
23. Cai L et al. Steroidal saponins from Tribulus terrestris. Planta Medica, 2001,
    67:196–198.
24. Somanadhan B et al. An ethnopharmacological survey for potential angio-
    tensin converting enzyme inhibitors from Indian medicinal plants. Journal of
    Ethnopharmacology, 1999, 65:103–112.

                                                                                333
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


25. Nakata K et al. Effects of an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibi-
    tor, SA446, on tissue ACE activity in normotensive, spontaneously hyper-
    tensive and renal hypertensive rats. Journal of Cardiovascular Pharmacology,
    1987, 9:305–310.
26. Shariﬁ AM, Darabi R, Akbarloo N. Study of antihypertensive mechanism of
    Tribulus terrestris in 2K1C hypertensive rats: role of tissue ACE activity. Life
    Sciences, 2003, 73:2963–2971.
27. Hong CH et al. Evaluation of natural products on inhibition of inducible
    cyclooxygenase (COX-2) and nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) in cultured
    mouse macrophage cells. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2002, 83:153–159.
28. Al-Ali M et al. Tribulus terrestris: preliminary study of its diuretic and con-
    tractile effects and comparison with Zea mays. Journal of Ethnopharmacol-
    ogy, 2003, 85:257–260.
29. Lin ZX, Hoult JRS, Raman A. Sulphorhodamine B assay for measuring pro-
    liferation of a pigmented melanocyte cell line and its application to the evalu-
    ation of crude drugs used in the treatment of vitiligo. Journal of Ethnophar-
    macology, 1999, 66:141–150.
30. Adaikan PG et al. Proerectile pharmacological effects of Tribulus terrestris
    extract on the rabbit corpus cavernosum. Annals of the Academy of Medicine
    Singapore, 2000, 29:22–26.
31. Gauthaman K, Adaikan PG, Prasad RNV. Aphrodisiac properties of Tribu-
    lus terrestris extract (protodioscin) in normal and castrated rats. Life Sciences,
    2002, 71:1385–1396.
32. Anand R et al. Activity of certain fractions of Tribulus terrestris fruits against
    experimentally induced urolithiasis in rats. Indian Journal of Experimental
    Biology, 1994, 32:548–552.
33. Bourke CA, Stevens GR, Carrigan MJ. Locomotor effects on sheep of alka-
    loids identiﬁed in Australian Tribulus terrestris. Australian Veterinary Jour-
    nal, 1992, 69:163–165.




334
                            Flos Trifolii




Deﬁnition
Flos Trifolii consists of the dried inﬂorescences of Trifolium pratense L.
(Fabaceae) (1).


Synonyms
No information was found.


Selected vernacular names
Aasristik, aka kurooba, aka tsumekusa, akerklee, basim ahmar, beebread,
broad-leaved clover, cow clover, creeping clover, hong san ye cao, hong
hua san ye cao, hong che zhou cao, klever krasnyi, klever lugovoi, mead-
ow clover, peavine clover, puna-apila, purple clover, red clover, red-klover,
redo kurooba, ribah, rode klaver, rodklover, rödklöver, Rot-od-kopklee,
Rothe Kleeblumen, Rother klee, Rother Wiesen-Klee, Rotklee, rod-klee,
trébol, trébol common, trébol rojo, trébol violeta, tréﬂe common, tréﬂe
des prés, tréﬂe rouge, tréﬂe violet, trefoil, trevor, trevo-dos-prados, trevo-
violeto, trifoglio pratense, trifoglio violetto, wild red clover, Wiesen-Klee,
wiesenklee (2–8).


Geographical distribution
Native to Europe. Found worldwide (7).


Description
A low-growing, common, perennial herb with ascending slender hairy
stems bearing trifoliate leaves with broad, bristle-pointed stipules, the
leaﬂets varying from ovate to obovate in outline, frequently notched at
the apex, and showing a pale spot on their upper surface. The small but-
terﬂy-shaped ﬂowers are borne in ovoid heads with long or short pe-
duncles; their colour varies from magenta to whitish (7).

                                                                          335
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Plant material of interest: dried inﬂorescences
General appearance
Inﬂorescences are ovoid with a rounded summit, mostly from 12–34 mm
in length and width, usually on a very short stalk, shrivelled, purplish, and
more or less brown from drying, consisting of many papilionaceous ﬂow-
ers, crowded together and clothed at the base with broad, pointed, pale
green ciliate stipules with darker veins. The ﬂowers, which may or may
not be accompanied by diminutive trifoliate leaves, are up to 15 mm in
length and have the following: ﬁve green, hairy, subulate calyx teeth, one
longer than the other four; petals united into a more or less campanulate
tube, somewhat recurved, and colourless with pinkish purple veins; dia-
delphous stamens; slender style (1).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: faintly aromatic, somewhat tea-like; taste: sweetish, then slightly
bitter (1).

Microscopic characteristics
Epidermis of calyx composed of polygonal cells with faintly striated cu-
ticle and occasional anomocytic stomata on the outer epidermis only;
abundant, uniseriate, covering trichomes with two small, thin-walled bas-
al cells and a thick-walled tapering end cell, up to 1 mm in length with a
warty cuticle. Glandular trichomes are also present, particularly on the
lower epidermis, each with a one- or two-celled stalk and a large, cylin-
drical head composed of several cells arranged in two rows. Epidermal
cells of the corolla, papillose at the tip, are elongated with slightly wavy
walls and a strongly striated cuticle; vascular strands of corolla and calyx
are surrounded by a crystal sheath containing prismatic crystals of calci-
um oxalate. The following are also present: ﬁbrous layer of anthers; sub-
spherical pollen grains, 20–48 mm in diameter with smooth exine, three
distinct pores, and three furrows; upper epidermal cells of leaﬂets with
sinuous and slightly beaded anticlinal walls; lower epidermis with sinu-
ous to wavy walls; anomocytic stomata on both surfaces, but more fre-
quent on the lower surface; abundant covering trichomes on both sur-
faces and on the margins; and ﬁbrovascular strands surrounded by a
crystal sheath containing prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate (1).

Powdered plant material
A pinkish-grey powder with a faint, fragrant odour and a slightly bitter
taste. Fragments of corolla with slightly wavy walls and a striated cuticle;
fragments of calyx with rectangular cells and a faintly striated cuticle;
abundant uniseriate, warty-walled covering trichomes with part of the

336
                                                                 Flos Trifolii


end cell frequently broken off; glandular trichomes less frequent; sub-
spherical pollen grains, scattered or associated with fragments of ﬁbrous
layer of anthers; abundant strands of vascular tissue with associated crys-
tal sheath containing prismatic crystals of calcium oxalate; occasional
portions of green leaf with wavy walled epidermis and anomocytic sto-
mata (3).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examination, as well as thin-layer and high-
performance liquid chromatography (1, 3).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (9).
   The United States pharmacopeia requires the absence of Salmonella
species and Escherichia coli, with total aerobic microbial count not ex-
ceeding 106 colony-forming units (cfu) per g, the total combined moulds
and yeast count should not exceed 104 cfu per g, and the enterobacterial
count should not be more than 1000 cfu per g (1).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2% (1).

Total ash
Not more than 10% (1).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 2% (1).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 15% (1).

Loss on drying
Not more than 12% (1).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more
than 0.05 mg/kg (10). For other pesticides, see the European pharmaco-
poeia (10) and the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medi-

                                                                         337
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


cines with reference to contaminants and residues (9) and pesticide resi-
dues (11).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (9). The United States pharmacopeia stipulates to-
tal heavy metals not more than 10 μg/g (1).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (9).

Other purity tests
Chemical tests to be established in accordance with national requirements.

Chemical assays
Not less than 0.5% isoﬂavones, calculated on the dried basis as the sum of
daidzein, genistein, formononetin and biochanin A (1).

Major chemical constituents
Rich in isoﬂavonoids. The major active estrogenic isoﬂavonoids are bio-
chanin A, daidzein, formononetin and genistein (5, 13, 14, 17). The struc-
tures of these isoﬂavonoids are presented below.

HO         O                        Daidzein R1 = R2 = H
                                Formononetin R1 = H R2 = CH3
                                    Genistein R1 = OH R2 = H
      R1   O               R2
                       O         Biochanin A R1 = OH R2 = CH3


Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Although numerous clinical trials have assessed the safety and efﬁcacy of
red clover extracts for the treatment of menopausal symptoms, hyperlipi-
daemia, osteoporosis and prostate cancer (15–19), the data are as yet in-
sufﬁcient to support any of these indications. Further data from well-
controlled clinical trials with sufﬁcient numbers of subjects are needed
before any therapeutic indications can be made.

338
                                                                   Flos Trifolii


Uses described in traditional medicine
Topical treatment of dermatological disorders such as psoriasis and ecze-
ma, as well as orally for the treatment of asthma and cough (5).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Much of the experimental pharmacology for Flos Trifolii is based on in-
formation from pure compounds isolated from the crude drug, or from
extracts of the aerial parts of the plant. Therefore, how these data apply to
the crude drug needs to be further investigated.
Anti-inﬂammatory activity
Genistein has been found to provide protection from oxidative damage
induced by ultraviolet (UV) radiation both in vitro and following dietary
administration. One in vivo study assessed the potential of a number of
isoﬂavones isolated from the crude drug, as well as some metabolically
related compounds, to offer protection against UV irradiation. The re-
sults were assessed in hairless mice after topical application of the extract
or isoﬂavones in combination with UV exposure. Daidzein, biochanin A
and formononetin were not active, while 20 μM lotions of genistein and
the metabolites equol, isoequol and dehydroequol reduced oedema and
inﬂammation, as well as suppressing hypersensitivity induced by moder-
ate doses of artiﬁcial UV radiation. The protective effect of equol was
concentration-dependent and 5 μM equol markedly reduced UV-induced
inﬂammation (20).
Inhibition of cell proliferation
Isoﬂavones inhibit the growth of some types of tumour cells, including
prostate adenocarcinoma. In the prostate cancer cell line, LNCaP, and xe-
nografts, the mechanism of the antiproliferative effects of biochanin A was
determined (18). LNCaP cells were treated with varying concentrations of
biochanin A to evaluate viability, DNA synthesis and DNA fragmenta-
tion by terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase dUTP nick end labelling
(TUNEL) analysis. Regulation of gene expression was determined using
Western immunoblotting and cDNA microarrays. Antiproliferative ef-
fects were evaluated by using athymic mice with LNCaP ﬂank tumours.
Biochanin A induced a dose-dependent inhibition of LNCaP cell prolif-
eration and tritiated thymidine incorporation that correlated with in-
creased DNA fragmentation, indicative of apoptosis. Western blot analy-
ses of cell cycle regulatory proteins revealed that biochanin A signiﬁcantly
decreased expression of cyclin B and p21, whereas ﬂow cytometry showed
that cells were accumulating in the G(0)/G(1) phase. cDNA microarray

                                                                           339
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


analyses identiﬁed 29 downregulated genes with six reduced below assay
detection limits. Eleven genes were upregulated, including nine that were
undetectable in controls. In mice with LNCaP xenografts, biochanin A
signiﬁcantly reduced tumour size and incidence (18). In a similar study,
intragastric administration of an extract of the ﬂowers to aromatase knock-
out mice reduced the enlargement of a non-malignant prostate (21). A
study examined the effect of dietary isoﬂavones on prostate growth in
intact male mice treated with an unidentiﬁed extract of red clover. The
results demonstrated that prostate, but not testis, size was signiﬁcantly
reduced over 28 days of being fed a diet supplemented with red clover
isoﬂavone. Histological examination revealed an increase in apoptotic
cells, rather than a reduction in proliferative activity in the epithelium.
These ﬁndings support the hypothesis that red clover isoﬂavones in the
diet can induce apoptosis and lead to a reduction in prostate size (22).
Estrogenic effects
The estrogenic effect of a standardized ethanol extract, with an average
isoﬂavone content of approximately 9% (dry weight), was assessed in
vitro in a yeast two-plasmid system expressing estrogen receptor alpha
and estrogen receptor beta. The extract had an estrogenic activity that
corresponded to a transactivational capacity of approximately 18 μg of
17-B-estradiol/g extract for estrogen receptor alpha and approximately
78 μg 17-B-estradiol/g extract for estrogen receptor beta. The difference is
due to the higher binding afﬁnity of the isoﬂavone constituents to estro-
gen receptor beta than that observed for estrogen receptor alpha (23).
   A methanol extract (15% total isoﬂavones) of red clover (Trifolium
pratense L.) showed signiﬁcant competitive binding to estrogen receptor
alpha and estrogen receptor beta in vitro (p < 0.01). In Ishikawa (endo-
metrial cancer) cells, the extract also exhibited estrogenic activity as indi-
cated by induction of alkaline phosphatase activity and upregulation of
progesterone receptor mRNA. In S30 breast cancer cells, presenelin-2,
another estrogen-inducible gene, was upregulated in the presence of red
clover. Bioassay-guided isolation utilizing estrogen receptor competitive
binding as a monitor, and screening using ultraﬁltration liquid chroma-
tography–mass spectrometry revealed that genistein was the most active
component of red clover, and the most effective of four red clover isoﬂa-
vones tested in the above in vitro assays (24).
   An extract of the crude drug (15% total isoﬂavones) bound to the al-
pha and beta estrogen receptors with a median inhibitory concentration
of 18 and 2 Mg/ml, respectively. The extract activated the estrogen re-
sponse element in Ishikawa cells and induced luciferase expression in
MCF-7 cells (25).

340
                                                                   Flos Trifolii


   An in vivo study assessed the estrogenic effects of the crude drug in
ovariectomized rats (25). A red clover extract, standardized to contain
15% isoﬂavones was administered by gavage, at a dose of 250, 500 or
750 mg/kg body weight (bw) per day, to virgin, ovariectomized 50-day-
old rats, for 21 days in the presence and absence of 17-B-estradiol (50 μg/
kg bw per day). The estrogenic effects assessed included an increase in
uterine weight, vaginal cell corniﬁcation and branching of mammary
gland ducts. The extract of the ﬂowers produced a dose-dependent in-
crease in uterine weight and differentiated vaginal cells at the two higher
doses, but it did not stimulate cell proliferation in the mammary glands.
Neither antiestrogenic nor additive estrogenic properties were observed
in any of the tissues studied. These data suggest that red clover extract is
weakly estrogenic in ovariectomized rats (26).
Thyroid effects
The effects of isoﬂavones on the secretion of thyroid hormones as well as
on the immunoreactivity to estrogen receptor alpha in the thyroid glands
of ovariectomized ewes were studied. Eight ewes were fed 3.5 kg of 100%
red clover silage daily for 14 days. Blood samples were collected before
and on day 14 of exposure to phytoestrogens. After 5 months, four of the
ewes were re-exposed to red clover silage as described above and the oth-
er four served as controls. Ewes exposed to red clover silage had signiﬁ-
cantly higher plasma concentrations of total T(3) and free T(3) than ewes
fed hay. The cross-sectional area of thyroid follicles tended to be larger in
ewes fed red clover silage than in the control animals. Estrogen receptor
alpha immunoreactivity was stronger in thyroid glands from ewes ex-
posed to phytoestrogens than in ewes fed hay. Daily ingestion of 81–95 mg
phytoestrogens per kg bw for 14 days stimulated secretion of thyroid
hormones and tended to increase follicle size and estrogen receptor alpha
immunoreactivity of thyroid glands (27).

Clinical pharmacology
A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, cross-over trial involv-
ing 51 perimenopausal and postmenopausal women assessed the effects of
an extract of the crude drug for the treatment of hot ﬂushes (28). The
subjects had been amenorrhoeic for at least 6 months and had at least
three hot ﬂushes per day. The women received one tablet of either placebo
or the extract (containing 40 mg total isoﬂavones, including genistein,
4.0 mg; daidzein, 3.5 mg; biochanin, 24.5 mg; and formononetin, 8 mg).
Phase one of the trial lasted for 3 months, and was followed by a 1-month
washout period. The subjects were then crossed over to the other arm for
a further 14 weeks. All subjects were required to maintain a diary of

                                                                           341
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


symptoms based on the Greene Menopause Score list. Of the initial
51 subjects entering the trial, 43 completed the study. At 12 weeks the
frequency of hot ﬂushes had decreased in both the group receiving pla-
cebo and in the group receiving the treatment, by 18% and 20%, respec-
tively. However, there were no statistically signiﬁcant differences between
groups in frequency of hot ﬂushes or Greene Scores at any time point. No
signiﬁcant changes in body weight, steroid hormone binding globulin
levels, blood counts, serum electrolytes, urea, creatinine or liver function
were observed (28).
    A second randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involved
37 perimenopausal and postmenopausal women and also assessed the ef-
fects of an extract of the crude drug for the treatment of hot ﬂushes (15).
All subjects had been amenorrhoeic for at least 6 months and had at least
three hot ﬂushes per day. The women were randomly assigned to receive
either one tablet of placebo or one of two doses of an extract (containing
40 mg or 160 mg of total isoﬂavones; the 40-mg tablet containing genistein,
4.0 mg; daidzein, 3.5 mg; biochanin, 24.5 mg; and formononetin, 8 mg)
for 12 weeks. The outcomes measured were similar to those of the previ-
ous study. During the 12-week treatment period, the frequency of hot
ﬂushes was reduced by 35% in the placebo group; by 29% in the group
treated with 40 mg; and 34% in the group treated with 160 mg of the ex-
tract. No signiﬁcant changes in body weight, levels of steroid hormone
binding globulin, blood counts, serum electrolytes, urea, creatinine or
liver function were observed (15).
    A third randomized, placebo-controlled trial involving 30 menopausal
women who had had amenorrhoea for more than 12 months, and who
were also experiencing more than ﬁve hot ﬂushes per day, assessed the
effect of the same extract as described in the previous two studies for the
treatment of menopausal symptoms. All subjects participated in a single-
blind phase in which they received placebo tablets for 4 weeks, and then
they were randomly assigned to receive either placebo or 80 mg isoﬂa-
vones for a further 12 weeks. Efﬁcacy was measured by the decrease in
number of hot ﬂushes per day and changes in the Greene Menopause
Scale score. During the ﬁrst 4 weeks of treatment with the placebo, the
frequency of hot ﬂushes decreased by 16%. During the subsequent dou-
ble-blind phase, a further, statistically signiﬁcant decrease of 44% was
seen in the group treated with 80 mg of isoﬂavones (p < 0.01), whereas no
further reduction occurred in women in the group treated with the pla-
cebo. The Greene Menopause Scale score decreased by 13% in the group
treated with the isoﬂavones and remained unchanged in the women treat-
ed with the placebo (29).

342
                                                                    Flos Trifolii


    A fourth study compared the efﬁcacy and safety of two products de-
rived from red clover with that of a placebo in symptomatic menopausal
women. This randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involved
menopausal women, aged 45–60 years, who were experiencing at least
35 hot ﬂushes per week. The study included women who had recently
become postmenopausal (mean (standard deviation), 3.3 (4.5) years since
menopause) experiencing on average 8.1 hot ﬂushes per day. Women were
excluded from the study if they were vegetarians, consumed soy products
more than once per week, or took medications affecting isoﬂavone ab-
sorption. After a 2-week placebo run-in, 252 participants were randomly
assigned to receive either Promensil (82 mg of total isoﬂavones per day),
Rimostil (57 mg of total isoﬂavones per day) or a placebo identical in ap-
pearance to the clover products, and followed up for 12 weeks. The pri-
mary outcome measured was the change in frequency of hot ﬂushes as
recorded by participants in their daily diaries. Secondary outcome mea-
sures included changes in quality of life and adverse events. Of 252 par-
ticipants, 246 (98%) completed the 12-week protocol. The reductions in
mean daily count of hot ﬂushes at 12 weeks were similar in all three
groups: Promensil, 5.1; Rimostil, 5.4; and placebo, 5.0. In comparison
with the group treated with the placebo, participants who received the
Promensil (41%; 95% conﬁdence interval (CI), 29%–51%; p = 0.03), but
not those treated with Rimostil (34%; 95% CI, 22%–46%; p = 0.74)
found that the treatment reduced hot ﬂushes more rapidly. Improvements
in quality of life and reports of adverse events were comparable in all
three groups (19).
    Data from two clinical trials, published only as abstracts, are also avail-
able (30). A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot study
conducted in Peru assessed the efﬁcacy of a red clover product in 30 post-
menopausal women. The women were treated with 40 mg of the extract
or a placebo for 4 months (31). A 75% reduction in hot ﬂushes occurred
in the treatment group; however, no data for the placebo group were re-
ported. The second study was an uncontrolled trial (no placebo group) in
23 women with ammenorrhoea for 12 months (32). In patients treated
with 40.0 mg of the extract, there was a 56% reduction in the frequency
of hot ﬂushes over a 2-month period. The severity of hot ﬂushes decreased
by 43% and the severity of night sweats decreased by 52%. No changes
in endometrial thickness and no adverse effects were observed. Complete
blood counts were all within normal limits (32).
    The effects of a red clover-derived isoﬂavone extract on the Ki-67 pro-
liferative marker of endometrial biopsies were assessed in a double-blind,
randomized, controlled study involving 30 perimenopausal women. The

                                                                            343
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


purpose of the study was to detect a decrease in the Ki-67 proliferative
index during the late follicular phase after a 3-month course of 50.0 mg/
day red clover isoﬂavones. The biopsies were timed as close as possible to
days 7–11 of the menstrual cycle, and simultaneous measurements of
trans-vaginal endometrial thickness, uterine artery Doppler, hormone
proﬁles, lipids and bone markers were made. Of 30 women, two did not
return for a second biopsy, and a third had an unsuccessful second biopsy.
Four subjects were excluded from the intention-to-treat analysis because
they did not have menstrual bleeding within the time frame of the study
(3 subjects) or were tested on day 13 instead of between days 7 and 11 of
the cycle (1 subject). There was no change in the Ki-67 proliferation index
after treatment in either group. Eight women in the group given the
placebo and eight in the treatment group had proliferative endometrial
biopsies that were synchronized with estradiol levels at baseline and
post-treatment, and analysis of these subjects revealed no detectable change
in the relationship between estradiol levels and Ki-67 with treatment in
either group. There was no change in fasting lipids, bone markers, uterine
Doppler resistance or pulsatility index (33).
Effects on bone and cardiovascular system
Six trials have assessed the effects of isoﬂavones on total cholesterol and
lipid levels (27, 34–38). A randomized, single-blind, cross-over study in-
volving 21 premenopausal women with regular menstrual cycles assessed
the effect of an extract of the crude drug on plasma lipids and oxidization
of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (34). Subjects were treated with a
placebo or 86 mg of isoﬂavones per day for two menstrual cycles, after
which they were crossed over to the other group. Fourteen women com-
pleted the study and no differences in total cholesterol, triglycerides or
oxidized low-density lipoprotein were observed.
    A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving
66 postmenopausal women with hypercholesterolaemia assessed the ef-
fects of an ascending dose of the extract, 40 or 80 mg of isoﬂavones, on
lipid proﬁles (35). Study participants were asked to follow a low isoﬂa-
vone diet for 3 months during the study. Treatment did not affect total
cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol
or plasma triglycerides at any dose.
    A double-blind placebo-controlled trial compared the effects of two
doses of isoﬂavones, 40 and 80 mg, with the effects of a placebo on arte-
rial compliance and plasma lipids in menopausal women. After a 3–4-
week run-in period and a 5-week placebo phase, 26 women were ran-
domly allocated to receive either 40 mg of the extract or the placebo for
an additional 5 weeks, and then the dose was increased to 80 mg. Sixteen

344
                                                                 Flos Trifolii


women completed the trial. The results demonstrated a signiﬁcant im-
provement in arterial compliance at both the 40- and 80-mg doses as com-
pared with placebo (p < 0.05). No signiﬁcant differences were seen be-
tween the two doses (30, 36).
   A double-blind study to evaluate the effects of varying doses of iso-
ﬂavones on lipid and bone metabolism in postmenopausal women was
performed. An extract of red clover, containing genistein, daidzein, for-
mononetin and biochanin was administered to 46 postmenopausal
women after a single-blind placebo phase; this was followed by a single-
blind wash-out phase. Patients were randomly assigned to receive
28.5 mg, 57 mg or 85.5 mg of isoﬂavones daily for 6 months. At 6 months,
the serum high-density lipoprotein cholesterol was found to have risen
signiﬁcantly by 15.7–28.6% with the different doses (p = 0.007, p = 0.002
and p = 0.027 at doses of 28.5 mg, 57 mg and 85.5 mg, respectively), al-
though the magnitude of the response was independent of the dose used.
The serum apo-lipoprotein B fell signiﬁcantly by 11.5–17.0% with the
different doses (p = 0.005, p = 0.043, p = 0.007, respectively) and the
magnitude of the response was independent of the dose used. The bone
mineral density of the proximal radius and ulna rose signiﬁcantly by
4.1% over 6 months in the women who received 57 mg/day (p = 0.002)
and by 3.0% in the women who received 85.5 mg/day (p = 0.023) of
isoﬂavones. The response to treatment with 28.5 mg/day of isoﬂavones
was not signiﬁcant. These results show that the administration of an iso-
ﬂavone combination extracted from red clover was associated with a sig-
niﬁcant increase in high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, a signiﬁcant fall
in apolipoprotein B, and a small but signiﬁcant increase in the predomi-
nantly cortical bone of the proximal radius and ulna after 6 months of
treatment (37).
   A double-blind, placebo-controlled study, involving 107 premeno-
pausal, perimenopausal and postmenopausal women assessed the effects
of an extract of the crude drug (corresponding to 40 mg of isoﬂavones per
day) for 1 year on bone mineral density and content (39). The outcomes
measured were changes in the lumbar spine and total hip bone mineral
content and density. After 1 year, the bone mineral content and density of
the lumbar spine (measured by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry
(DEXA) scan) had decreased signiﬁcantly (p < 0.01) in both groups.
However, the decrease in the bone mineral content and density of the
spine of premenopausal and perimenopausal women treated with the ex-
tract was signiﬁcantly lower than that in women who received the placebo
(p < 0.02 and p < 0.01, respectively). No differences were observed in the
postmenopausal women. No differences in bone mineral density of the

                                                                         345
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


hip or signiﬁcant changes in markers of bone turnover were seen in any of
the groups (39).
   A 12-week randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was
conducted involving 252 menopausal women aged 45–60 years. The
women, who were experiencing > 35 hot ﬂushes per week, were random-
ly assigned to receive either Promensil (82 mg total isoﬂavones), Rimostil
(57.2 mg total isoﬂavones) or a placebo. The primary outcome measures
were mean absolute changes for high-density lipoprotein cholesterol,
serum osteocalcin and urinary N-telopeptide. The secondary outcome
measures were mean changes of total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol, the ratio of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol to low-
density lipoprotein cholesterol, and triglycerides. Ninety-eight per cent of
the participants completed the 12-week protocol. Women who took Ri-
mostil or Promensil had greater mean increases in high-density lipopro-
tein cholesterol than those who took placebo; however, this change was
small (< 2 mg/dl) and was not statistically signiﬁcant. There was a signiﬁ-
cant decrease in triglyceride levels among women who took Rimostil
(14.4 mg/dl) or Promensil (10.9 mg/dl) compared to those who took the
placebo. The decrease was seen primarily among women with elevated
baseline triglyceride levels. There were no differences in mean changes of
total cholesterol, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, or the ratio of high-
density lipoprotein cholesterol to low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
among treatment groups. There were no statistically signiﬁcant differ-
ences between treatment groups for bone turnover markers. It was con-
cluded that compared with placebo, extracts containing isoﬂavones de-
crease levels of triglycerides in symptomatic menopausal women;
however, this effect was small (38).
Treatment of prostate cancer
A nonrandomized, non-blinded trial with historically matched controls
from archival tissue assessed the effects of acute exposure to a dietary
supplement of isoﬂavones in men with clinically signiﬁcant prostate can-
cer before radical prostatectomy. Thirty-eight patients were recruited to
the study upon diagnosis of prostate cancer. Before surgery, 20 of the men
consumed 160 mg/day of red clover-derived dietary isoﬂavones, contain-
ing a mixture of genistein, daidzein, formononetin and biochanin A.
Serum prostate-speciﬁc antigen, testosterone and biochemical factors were
measured, and clinical and pathological parameters were recorded. The
incidence of apoptosis in prostate tumour cells from radical prostatecto-
my specimens was compared between 18 treated and 18 untreated control
tissues. There were no signiﬁcant differences between pretreatment and
post-treatment serum prostate-speciﬁc antigen, Gleason score, serum

346
                                                               Flos Trifolii


testosterone or biochemical factors in the treated patients (p > 0.05).
Apoptosis in radical prostatectomy specimens from treated patients was
signiﬁcantly higher than in control subjects (p = 0.0018), speciﬁcally
in regions of low to moderate-grade cancer (Gleason grade 1–3). No ad-
verse events related to the treatment were reported (18).


Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
The pharmacokinetics of red clover isoﬂavones were investigated after
long-term administration as a once-daily dietary supplement. Fourteen
subjects who had been consuming a low-isoﬂavone containing diet for
2 weeks were given an oral dose of two isoﬂavone tablets (approximately
80 mg of total isoﬂavones) daily for 2 weeks. Before the study day the
participants fasted overnight and were then administered their last dose
the next morning. Plasma samples were collected for a 48-hour period
after the last dose. Plasma isoﬂavones were assayed by high-performance
liquid chromatography. The results demonstrate that trough plasma lev-
els were signiﬁcantly higher for daidzein and genistein after long-term
dosing than levels recorded prior to the commencement of the study and
plasma levels of isoﬂavones after long-term dosing were in the range pre-
viously reported in populations that consume an isoﬂavone-rich diet. The
plasma half-lives observed after long-term administration were consistent
with once-daily administration. Isoﬂavones have pharmacokinetic char-
acteristics that suggest that once-daily administration is adequate when
they are administered long-term (40).
    The absorption of isoﬂavones varies substantially between individu-
als. A single-blind, randomized, placebo-controlled, cross-over trial
involving 14 subjects investigated whether isoﬂavone absorption differs
depending on whether the isoﬂavones originated from soy beans or
from red clover. Soy bean isoﬂavone glycosides and red clover isoﬂa-
vone aglycones were incorporated into a breakfast cereal and eaten
daily for 2 weeks each, separated by a 2-week control or washout period.
The excretion of isoﬂavones in urine was measured over a 24-hour
period; approximately 25% of each isoﬂavone was recovered in urine,
suggesting that similar amounts were absorbed irrespective of their
glycoside/aglycone nature or the differing compositions of their sources
(daidzein and genistein in soy beans and formononetin and biochanin
in red clover). Although interindividual variability was high, there was
less intraindividual variability; the amounts excreted when subjects
consumed the two sources of isoﬂavone were correlated (r = 0.69;
p = 0.007) (41).

                                                                       347
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Adverse reactions
Ingestion of large amounts of clover in animal feed has been associated
with a number of adverse effects in sheep in Australia. A publication on
“clover disease” described symptoms of infertility, abnormal lactation,
dystocia and prolapsed uterus, all of which were hypothetically attributed
to the estrogenic effects of isoﬂavones (42). None of the controlled, clini-
cal trials has reported adverse effects at doses up to 160 mg of isoﬂavones
per day. Trifolium pratense does not contain coumarins, and therefore the
concerns about blood coagulation are unfounded (43, 44).

Contraindications
Flos Trifolii is contraindicated in cases of hypersensitivity or allergy to
the crude drug. It is also contraindicated during pregnancy, breastfeeding
and for children under the age of 12 years, and in cases of hormone-
associated diseases, due to the potential hormonal effects.

Warnings
Due to the potential estrogenic effects of the crude drug, patients with
hormone-related disorders, estrogen-dependent cancers or a familial his-
tory of estrogen-dependent cancers should contact a health care provider
before use.

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
No information was found.

Drug interactions
There are conﬂicting data concerning an interaction of the crude drug
with tamoxifen and other antiestrogenic drugs. Some studies suggest that
speciﬁc isoﬂavones may enhance the ability of tamoxifen to inhibit the
growth of estrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer cells (45–47). In ro-
dent models, genistein has been shown to inhibit the efﬁcacy of tamoxifen
on the growth of estrogen-receptor-positive breast cancer cells implanted
in ovariectomized mice, while other research shows that speciﬁc isoﬂa-
vones may be additive and work in a synergistic manner to prevent the
development of chemically induced tumours and the growth of existing
tumours (48–50). Therefore, the use of the crude drug or its preparations
is not recommended in those being treated with tamoxifen and other anti-
estrogenic drugs until further research has been done.

348
                                                                         Flos Trifolii


Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Nursing mothers
See Contraindications.

Paediatric use
See Contraindications.

Dosage forms
Crude drug and tablets.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Oral dose: extracts of crude drug: 240–480 mg corresponding to 40–
80 mg/day of isoﬂavones (15, 17, 28, 29).

References
1. The United States Pharmacopeia. 28. Rockville, MD, United States Pharma-
    copeia Convention, 2005.
2. Bedevian AK. Illustrated polyglottic dictionary of plant names. Cairo, Med-
    bouly Library, 1994.
3. British herbal pharmacopoeia. Exeter, British Herbal Medicine Association,
    1996.
4. Bradley PR, ed. British herbal compendium. Vol. 1. Bournemouth, British
    Herbal Medicine Association, 1992.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
6. Ernst E et al, eds. The desktop guide to complementary and alternative med-
    icine. Edinburgh, Mosby, 2001.
7. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy. Philadelphia, Blakiston, 1950.
8. Multilingual multiscript plant name database: Sorting Trifolium names. University
    of Melbourne (http://www.plantnames.unimelb.edu.au/Sorting/Trifolium.html).
9. WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
10. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
11. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed.
    Geneva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
12. Newall CA, Anderson LA, Phillipson JD. Herbal medicines, a guide for
    healthcare professionals. London, Pharmaceutical Press, 1996.

                                                                                 349
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


13. Lin LZ et al. LC-ESI-MS study of the ﬂavonoid glycoside malonates of red
    clover (Trifolium pratense). Journal of Agricultural Food Chemistry, 2000,
    48:354–365.
14. He XG, Lin LZ, Lian LZ. Analysis of ﬂavonoids from red clover by liquid
    chromatography-electrospray mass spectrometry. Journal of Chromatogra-
    phy – A, 1996, 755:127–132.
15. Knight DC, Howes JB, Eden JA. The effect of Promensil, an isoﬂavone ex-
    tract, on menopausal symptoms. Climacteric, 1999, 2:79–84.
16. Murkies AL et al. Dietary ﬂour supplementation decreases post-menopausal
    hot ﬂushes: effect of soy and wheat. Maturitas, 1995, 21:189–195.
17. NAMS – North American Menopause Society. The role of isoﬂavones in
    menopausal health: consensus opinion of the North American Menopause
    Society. Menopause, 2000, 7:215–229.
18. Jarred RA et al. Induction of apoptosis in low to moderate-grade human
    prostate carcinoma by red clover-derived dietary isoﬂavones. Cancer Epi-
    demiology and Biomarkers Previews, 2002, 11:1689–1696.
19. Tice JA et al. Phytoestrogen supplements: for the treatment of hot ﬂashes:
    the isoﬂavone clover extract (ICE) study. Journal of the American Medical
    Association, 2003, 290:207–214.
20. Widyarini S et al. Isoﬂavonoid compounds from red clover (Trifolium prat-
    ense) protect from inﬂammation and immune suppression induced by UV
    radiation. Photochemistry and Photobiology, 2001, 74:465–470.
21. Jarred RA et al. Anti-androgenic action by red clover-derived dietary isoﬂa-
    vones reduces non-malignant prostate enlargement in aromatase knockout
    (ArKo) mice. Prostate, 2003, 56:54–64.
22. Dornstauder E et al. Estrogenic activity of two standardized red clover ex-
    tracts (Menoﬂavon) intended for large scale use in hormone replacement ther-
    apy. Journal of Steroid Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 2001, 78:67–75.
23. Risbridger GP et al. The in vivo effect of red clover diet on ventral prostate
    growth in adult male mice. Reproductive Fertility and Development, 2001,
    13:325–329.
24. Liu J et al. Evaluation of estrogenic activity of plant extracts for the potential
    treatment of menopausal symptoms. Journal of Agriculture and Food Chem-
    istry, 2000, 49:2472–2479.
25. Overk CR et al. Comparison of the in vitro estrogenic activities of com-
    pounds from hops (Humulus lupulus) and red clover (Trifolium pratense).
    Journal of Agriculture and Food Chemistry, 2005, 53:6246–6253.
26. Burdette JE et al. Trifolium pratense (red clover) exhibits estrogenic effects in
    vivo in ovariectomized Sprague-Dawley rats. Journal of Nutrition, 2002,
    132:27–30.
27. Madej A et al. Thyroid gland function in ovariectomized ewes exposed to
    phytoestrogens. Journal of Chromatography B Analytical and Technological
    Biomedical Life Sciences, 2002, 777:281–287.
28. Baber RJ et al. Randomized placebo-controlled trial of an isoﬂavone supple-
    ment and menopausal symptoms in women. Climacteric, 1999, 2:85–92.

350
                                                                       Flos Trifolii


29. Van de Weijer P, Barentsen R. Isoﬂavones from red clover (Promensil) sig-
    niﬁcantly reduce menopausal hot ﬂush symptoms compared with placebo.
    Maturitas, 2002, 42:187–200.
30. Fugh-Berman A, Kronenberg F. Red clover (Trifolium pratense) for meno-
    pausal women: current state of knowledge. Menopause, 2001, 8:333–337.
31. Jeri AR, de Romana C. The effect of isoﬂavone phytoestrogens in relieving
    hot ﬂushes in Peruvian postmenopausal women (abstract). In: The Proceed-
    ings of the 9th International Menopause Society World Congress on the
    Menopause. Yokohama, Japan, 1999:129.
32. Nachtigall LB et al. The effects of isoﬂavones derived from red clover on
    vasomotor symptoms and endometrial thickness (abstract). In: The Proceed-
    ings of the 9th International Menopause Society World Congress on the
    Menopause. Yokohama, Japan, 1999, 128.
33. Hale GE et al. A double-blind randomized study on the effects of red clover
    isoﬂavones on the endometrium. Menopause, 2001, 8:338–346.
34. Samman S et al. The effect of supplementation with isoﬂavones on plasma
    lipids and oxidisability of low density lipoprotein in premenopausal women.
    Atherosclerosis, 1999, 47:277–283.
35. Howes JB et al. The effects of dietary supplementation with isoﬂavones from
    red clover on the lipoprotein proﬁles of postmenopausal women with mild
    to moderate hypercholesterolemia. Atherosclerosis, 2000, 152:143–147.
36. Nestel PJ et al. Isoﬂavones from red clover improve systemic arterial compli-
    ance but not plasma lipids in menopausal women. Journal of Clinical Endo-
    crinology and Metabolism, 1999, 84:895–898.
37. Clifton-Bligh PB et al. The effect of isoﬂavones extracted from red clover
    (Rimostil) on lipid and bone metabolism. Menopause, 2001, 8:259–265.
38. Knudson Schultz K et al. Effect of isoﬂavones on lipids and bone turnover
    markers in menopausal women. Maturitas, 2004, 48:209–218.
39. Atkinson C et al. The effects of isoﬂavone phytoestrogens on bone: prelimi-
    nary data from a large randomized controlled trial (abstract). In: Proceedings
    of the Endocrine Society, Toronto, Canada, 2000:43.
40. Howes J et al. Long-term pharmacokinetics of an extract of isoﬂavones from
    red clover (Trifolium pratense). Journal of Alternative and Complementary
    Medicine, 2002, 8:135–142.
41. Tsunoda N, Pomeroy S, Nestel P. Absorption in humans of isoﬂavones from
    soy and red clover is similar. Journal of Nutrition, 2002, 132:2199–2201.
42. Lewis’ dictionary of toxicology. Boca Raton, FL, CRC Press, 1998.
43. Piersen CE et al. Chemical and biological characterization and clinical evalu-
    ation of botanical dietary supplements: A phase I red clover extract as a mod-
    el. Current Medicinal Chemistry, 2004, 11:1361–1374.
44. Booth N et al. Confusion regarding anticoagulant coumarins in dietary sup-
    plements. Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics, 2004, 511–516.
45. Jones JL et al. Genistein inhibits tamoxifen effects on cell proliferation and
    cell cycle arrest in T47D breast cancer cells. American Surgery, 2002,
    68:575–577.

                                                                               351
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


46. Han D, Tachibana H, Yamada K. Inhibition of environmental estrogen-in-
    duced proliferation of human breast carcinoma MCF-7 cells by ﬂavonoids.
    In Vitro Cell Development and Biology, 2001, 37:275–282.
47. Tanos V et al. Synergistic inhibitory effects of genistein and tamoxifen on
    human dysplastic and malignant epithelial breast cells in vitro. European
    Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology Reproduction Biology, 2002,
    37:188–194.
48. Ju YH et al. Dietary genistein negates the inhibitory effect of tamoxifen on
    growth of estrogen-dependent human breast cancer (MCF-7) cells implanted
    in athymic mice. Cancer Research, 2002, 62:2474–2477.
49. Constantinou A et al. Consumption of soy products may enhance the breast
    cancer preventive effects of tamoxifen. Proceedings of the American Associa-
    tion of Cancer Research, 2001, 42:826.
50. Gotoh T et al. Chemoprevention of N-nitroso-N-methylurea-induced rat
    mammary cancer by miso and tamoxifen, alone and in combination. Japanese
    Journal of Cancer Research, 1998, 89:487–495.




352
            Ramulus cum Uncis Uncariae




Deﬁnition
Ramulus cum Uncis Uncariae consists of the dried hook-bearing stem
branch of Uncaria rhynchophylla (Miq.) Jacks, U. macrophylla Wall.,
U. hirsuta Havil., U. sinensis (Oliv.) Havil. or U. sessilifructus Roxb.
(Rubiaceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Uncaria rhynchophylla (Miq.) Jacks, Nauclea rhynchophylla Miq., Our-
ouparia rhynchophylla Matsum (4).

Selected vernacular names
Choto-ko, chotoko, cho-to-kou, gout eng, kagikazura (1, 4, 5).

Geographical distribution
Indigenous to China and Japan (6, 7).

Description
A deciduous twining shrub up to 10 m long. Branches brownish, gla-
brous, occasionally bearing compressed, hooked thorns. Young stems
slender, square to slightly angular, glabrous. Stipules of the plagiotropic
shoot 6–10 mm long, those of the orthotropic shoot considerably larger,
up to 30 mm long, inside glabrous with glandular hairs at the base, outside
glabrous, margins entire, narrowly triangular, deeply biﬁd for over two
thirds of the length, lobes narrowly triangular to triangular-lanceolate.
Leaves opposite, ovate to ovate-oblong or elliptic to elliptic-oblong,
5–12 × 3–7 cm, membranous, glabrous on either side; apex acute to cus-
pidate; base cuneate to truncate; lateral nerves 4–8 pairs, axils with sparse-
ly hairy domatia, tertiary nerves curved, impressed, ultimate venation
reticulate. Inﬂorescence an axillary or terminal peduncled solitary head.
Flowers yellow, subsessile on the receptacle. Hypanthium 1–2 mm,
densely hairy. Calyx 1 mm, pubescent; lobes oblong to slightly triangular,
0.5–1 mm, sparsely pubescent. Corolla tube 6–8 (6–10 mm), outside

                                                                          353
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


glabrous or with a few scattered hairs; lobes oblong, 1.5–2.5 mm, outside
glabrous or slightly farinose-pubescent, margins sometimes ciliate. Sta-
mens 5. Ovary 2-celled. Fruiting head 14–18 mm in diameter, fruit a dry
capsule. The plant entwines other trees with its hooked thorns (6, 8, 9).

Plant material of interest: dried hook-bearing stem branch
General appearance
Cylindrical or subsquare, 1–4 cm long, 2–5 mm in diameter. Externally
reddish-brown to dark brown or yellow-brown with ﬁne longitudinal
striations, glabrous, or yellowish-green to greyish-brown, sometimes
with white dotted lenticels, covered with yellowish-brown pubescence.
Transverse section: square to elliptical. Most nodes of stem branches with
two opposite downward curved hooks/prickles (sterile peduncles), some
with a hook only on one side and with raised scars on the other side;
hooks relatively ﬂattened or rounded, apex acute, base relatively broad;
dotted scars of fallen petiole and ring-shaped stipule scars visible on the
branch at the hook base; transverse section oblong to elliptical. Texture
hard and tenacious, fracture yellowish-brown, bark ﬁbrous, pith yellow-
ish-white to light brown or hollowed (1, 2).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: none; taste: slight (1, 2).

Microscopic characteristics
Transverse section of the prickle (hook) reveals vascular bundles in the
cortex, unevenly distributed and arranged in a ring. Parenchyma cells in
the secondary cortex containing crystals of calcium oxalate (2, 3).

Powdered plant material
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

General identity tests
Macroscopic examination (1–3), microchemical test (1–3), and high-
performance liquid chromatography for the presence of characteristic
oxindole alkaloids (2, 10–13).

Purity tests
Microbiology
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (14).

354
                                                  Ramulus cum Uncis Uncariae


Chemical
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2% (3).

Total ash
Not more than 4% (2, 3).

Acid-insoluble ash
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Water-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Alcohol-soluble extractive
Not more than 6% (1).

Loss on drying
Not more than 12% (2).

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (15). For other pesticides see the European pharmacopoeia (15)
and the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (14) and pesticide residues (16).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (14).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (14).

Chemical assay
Not less than 0.03% of total rhynchophylline (rhynchophylline and hir-
sutine) as determined by high-performance liquid chromatography and
calculated on the dried basis (2).

Major chemical constituents
The major constituents are indole alkaloids (1.7%) including the tetra-
cyclic oxindoles rhynchophylline (0.02%), isorhynchophylline (0.05%),

                                                                        355
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


corynoxeine (0.006%) and isocorynoxeine (0.001%). Other notable alka-
loids are hirsuteine (0.001%) and hirsutine (0.001%). Besides ursolic acid,
two other triterpenes, the bioactive uncarinic acids A and B as well as the
ﬂavonoid, hyperin, have been reported (4, 5, 17). Structures of major tet-
racyclic indole and oxindole alkaloids and the triterpenes uncarinic acids
A and B are presented below.
            O                                              O

     HN                                             HN
                     N                                             N
            H              H                               H               H
                           R                                               R
                 H                                             H
            O              O                               O               O
      H3C                        CH3                 H3C                       CH3
                 O                                             O

      Corynoxeine          R = CH=CH2              Isocorynoxeine          R = CH=CH2

Rhynchophylline R = CH2-CH3                    Isorhynchophylline R = CH2-CH3

                           H3C    CH3
                                                                           C            OCH3
                                          Uncarinic acid A             O

                                                 R = E-HMC         E-HMC                OH
            CH3      CH3   H       CO2H
                                          Uncarinic acid B
 H               H                                                 Z-HMC                OCH3
                           O
HO                                               R = Z-HMC
            H              R                                                   C
     H3C   CH3                                                                     O    OH


Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
None.

Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Used orally to treat eclampsia, headache, dizziness, high fevers and hyper-
tension (1, 6). Considering the serious nature of these diseases, the useful-
ness of the crude drug needs to be conﬁrmed by controlled clinical studies.

Uses described in traditional medicine
Used as a carminative, diuretic, and a muscle relaxant. Also used to treat
cardiovascular disease, colic, convulsions, stroke and vertigo (5, 6).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Much of the pharmacological work has been performed with pure com-
pounds isolated from the crude drug. These studies used high concentra-

356
                                                    Ramulus cum Uncis Uncariae


tions of the pure compounds and thus the applicability of these data to
the crude drug and its preparations needs to be further investigated.
Antiarrhythmic activity
The effect of hirsutine, an indole alkaloid isolated from the crude drug, on
membrane potentials of rabbit sino-atrial node and guinea-pig right ven-
tricle and left atrium was investigated. Hirsutine at concentrations of
0.1–30.0 μM decreased the maximum rate of rise and prolonged action
potential duration in sino-atrial node in vitro, as well as in atrial and ven-
tricular preparations (18). Hirsutine, in concentrations of 1.0–3.0 μM pro-
duced a dose-dependent relaxation of the isolated rat aorta precontracted
with either norepinephrine or potassium chloride solution, suggesting
that the compound dilated blood vessels through the inhibition of volt-
age-dependent calcium channels (19). The compound, at a concentration
of 30 μM, also decreased intracellular calcium concentrations in isolated
vascular smooth muscle cells through the inhibition of norepinephrine-
induced calcium inﬂux (20).
Anticonvulsant activity
Intragastric administration of a methanol extract of the crude drug to rats
at a dose of 1.0 g/kg body weight (bw) inhibited kainic acid-induced epi-
leptic seizures and reduced the levels of free radicals, as measured by lipid
peroxidation in the brain (21).
    Intraperitoneal administration of an ethyl acetate or methanol extract
of the crude drug to mice at a dose of 70.0 mg/kg bw inhibited pentetra-
zole-induced convulsions (22). Hyperin, a chemical constituent isolated
from the extract, decreased the elevated activities of G-aminobutyric
acid-T, xanthine oxidase and lipid peroxide induced by pentetrazole
in mouse brain tissue in vitro at a concentration of 25.0 mg/ml (23).
    Intragastric administration of an aqueous extract of the crude drug to
mice, at a dose of 1.0–3.0 g/kg bw, inhibited glutamate-induced convul-
sions, but had no effect on convulsions induced by picrotoxin, strychnine
or electroshock (24). The active constituents of the crude drug were iso-
lated and identiﬁed as indole alkaloids, geissoschizine methyl ether and
hirsutine. Intragastric administration of the alkaloids to mice at a dose of
100.0 mg/kg bw also inhibited glutamate-induced convulsions in a dose-
dependent manner (24).
    An aqueous extract of the crude drug at a concentration of 0.1 mg/ml
prevented glutamate-induced neuronal death in cultured rat cerebellar
granule cells through the inhibition of calcium inﬂux into the cells (25). In
cultured mouse cerebral neurons, glucose oxidase-induced toxicity was re-
duced after treatment of the cells with 100 Mg/ml of the crude drug (26).

                                                                          357
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


   In cultured hippocampal neurons from neonatal mice, hydrogen per-
oxide-induced neuronal damage was signiﬁcantly reduced after treatment
of the cells with 80 Mg/ml of the crude drug (27). A methanol extract of
the crude drug protected against N-methyl-D-aspartate-induced excito-
toxicity in cultured rat hippocampus slices at a concentration of 100 Mg/
ml (28).
Antihypertensive activity
An alkaloid-containing extract of the crude drug reduced blood pressure
in rats when administered by gavage at a dose of 50.0 mg/kg bw for
20 days, or when administered by intravenous injection to cats at a dose
of 20.0 mg/kg bw for 20 days (29). A 50% methanol extract of the crude
drug inhibited the activity of angiotensin-converting enzyme isolated
from pig kidney at a concentration of 200.0 μg/ml in vitro (30).
   An infusion of the crude drug inhibited norepinephrine-induced con-
tractions of isolated rat aorta at a concentration of 0.12 mg/ml (31). En-
dothelium-dependent relaxation induced by the extract of the crude drug
was inhibited by N-monomethyl-L-arginine, but not indometacin or atro-
pine, and was decreased when the endothelium was not present. The au-
thors concluded that the extract relaxes the precontracted rat aorta through
an endothelium-dependent mechanism involving nitric oxide (31).
Anti-inﬂammatory activity
A decoction of the crude drug suppressed carrageenan-induced footpad
oedema in rats when administered by subcutaneous injection at a dose of
10.0 ml/kg bw (32). An infusion of the crude drug inhibited the activity of
prostaglandin synthetase in rabbit microsomes at a concentration of
750.0 μg/ml (33).
Antimicrobial activity
An ethanol extract of the crude drug was not active against Bacillus subti-
lis, Candida albicans, Escherichia coli or Streptococcus pneumoniae in
vitro at concentrations up to 500.0 mg/disc (34).
Antioxidant activity
Intraperitoneal administration of an ethanol extract of the crude drug at a
dose of 1.0 g/kg bw to rats inhibited an increase in lipid peroxidation in
the ipsilateral cortex induced by the injection of ferric chloride into the
lateral cortex (35). The extract also induced an increase in the activity of
superoxide dismutase in the mitochondrial fraction of the ipsilateral cor-
tex (35). A methanol extract of the crude drug inhibited kainic acid-
induced lipid peroxidation in rat brain tissues in vitro (21). An aqueous
extract of the crude drug, at a concentration of 50.0 μg/ml, had strong

358
                                                   Ramulus cum Uncis Uncariae


scavenging activity against superoxide anion radicals in vitro, as measured
by electron spin resonance spin-trapping techniques (36).

Depressant effects on the central nervous system
Intragastric administration of an aqueous extract of the crude drug (2.0 g/
kg bw), or oxindole alkaloids isolated from the crude drug (10–100 mg/kg
bw) to mice, signiﬁcantly prolonged thiopental-induced sleep time
(p < 0.05) (13, 37). Intragastric administration of an aqueous extract of the
crude drug to mice at a dose of 2.0 g/kg bw signiﬁcantly depressed loco-
motor activity (p < 0.05) (37). Intragastric administration of three indole
alkaloids isolated from the crude drug, corynoxine (30.0 mg/kg bw),
corynoxine B (100.0 mg/kg bw) or isorhynchophylline (100.0 mg/kg bw)
also signiﬁcantly decreased locomotor activity (p < 0.05) (38).
   The suppressant effects on the central nervous system were conﬁrmed
by a study in mice of extracts prepared from mixtures of the herb with
and without the crude drug. Preparations containing the crude drug pro-
longed thiopental-induced sleep, but the extract prepared from the mix-
ture of herb without the crude drug was devoid of this activity (39). Intra-
peritoneal administration of a 90% ethanol extract of the crude drug
reduced spontaneous motor activity in mice (34).

Effects on neurotransmitters
An 80% ethanol extract of the crude drug inhibited serotonin reuptake
by 97% at a concentration of 10.0 μg/ml in rat brain stem neurons (40).
Uncarinic acids A and B, isolated from the crude drug inhibited the activ-
ity of phosphatidylinositol-speciﬁc phospholipase C, a key enzyme in-
volved in the signal transduction of growth factors, neurotransmitters
and hormones, with a median inhibitory concentration of 35.66 and
44.55 μM, respectively (41). Hirsutine, at a concentration of 300 nM to
10.0 μM inhibited dopamine release induced by nicotine in rat pheochro-
mocytoma PC12 cells (42). In a study in rats, dopamine release induced
by potassium chloride was also inhibited by hirsutine at a concentration
of 10.0 μM (41). Hirsutine also had antagonistic effects on the opioid re-
ceptors and, at a concentration of 10.0 μM, reversed the inhibitory effect
of morphine on twitch contraction in isolated guinea-pig ileum (43).

Toxicology
Intraperitoneal administration of a 90% ethanol extract of the crude drug
to mice had a median lethal dose of 1.0 g/kg bw (34).

Clinical pharmacology
No information was found.

                                                                         359
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Adverse reactions
No information was found.

Contraindications
Allergy to the plant material.

Warnings
No information was found.

Precautions
General
No information was found.

Drug interactions
No information was found.

Drug and laboratory test interactions
No information was found.

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
An aqueous extract of the crude drug was not mutagenic in the Ames test
at a concentration of 40.0–50.0 mg/plate in Salmonella typhimurium
strains TA98 and TA100 (44, 45). The extract was also not mutagenic
when administered by intraperitoneal injection to mice at a dose of 4.0 mg/
kg bw, equal to 10–40 times the amount used in humans (44). An infusion
of the crude drug inhibited aﬂatoxin B1-induced mutagenesis in Salmo-
nella typhimurium strains TA98 and TA100 at a concentration of 40.0 mg/
plate (46). Metabolic activation was required for activity.

Pregnancy: teratogenic effects
No information was found.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
Use of the crude drug during pregnancy requires the supervision of a
health care professional.

Nursing mothers
No safety data are available, thus the use of the crude drug by breastfeed-
ing mothers is not recommended.

Paediatric use
No safety data are available, thus the use of the crude drug in children
under the age of 12 years is not recommended.

360
                                                      Ramulus cum Uncis Uncariae


Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug (1). Store in a dry place (1).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Oral daily dose: 3–12 g of the crude drug, added to a decoction, taken in
divided doses (1).

References
1. Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Vol. I (English ed.). Beijing,
    Chemical Industry Press, 2005.
2. The Japanese pharmacopoeia, 14th ed., Suppl. 1 (English ed.). Tokyo, Minis-
    try of Health, Labour and Welfare, 2004.
3. The Korean herbal pharmacopoeia (English ed.). Seoul, Korea Food and
    Drug Administration, 2002.
4. Hänsel R et al., eds. Hagers Handbuch der pharmazeutischen Praxis. Vol. 6,
    5th ed. Springer, Berlin.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. University of Illinois at Chi-
    cago, IL (an online database available directly through the University of Il-
    linois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN) of
    Chemical Abstracts Services) 30 June 2005.
6. Medicinal plants in China. Manila, Philippines, World Health Organization
    Regional Ofﬁce for the Western Paciﬁc, 1989 (WHO Regional Publications
    Western Paciﬁc, Series No. 2).
7. Perry LM, Metzger J. Medicinal plants of east and southeast Asia: attributed
    properties and uses. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1980.
8. Ridsdale CE. A revision of Mitragyna and Uncaria (Rubiaceae). Blumea,
    1978, 24:43–100.
9. Kariyone T, Koiso R. Atlas of medicinal plants. Osaka, Nihon Rinshosha,
    1973.
10. Laus G, Keplinger D. Separation of stereoisomeric oxindole alkaloids from
    Uncaria tomentosa by high performance liquid chromatography. Journal of
    Chromatography A, 1994, 662:243–249.
11. Laus G, Keplinger D. Radix Uncariae tomentosae (Willd.) DC – Eine monog-
    raphische Beschreibung. Zeitschrift für Phytotherapie, 1997, 18:122–126.
12. Stuppner H, Sturm S, Konwalinka G. HPLC analysis of the main oxindole
    alkaloids from Uncaria tomentosa. Chromatographia, 1992, 34:597–560.
13. Sakakibara I et al. Chemical and pharmacological evaluations of Chinese
    crude drug “Gou-teng”. Natural Medicines, 1998, 52:353–359.

                                                                              361
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


14. WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
15. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
16. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues (revised). Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
17. Yamanaka E et al. Studies of plants containing indole alkaloids. IX. Quanti-
    tative analysis on the tertiary alkaloids in various parts of Uncaria rhyn-
    chophylla MIQ. Yakugaku Zasshi, 1983, 103:1028–1033.
18. Masumiya H et al. Effects of hirsutine and dihydrocorynantheine on the ac-
    tion potentials of sino-atrial node atrium and ventricle. Life Sciences, 1999,
    65:2333–2341.
19. Yano S et al. Ca2+ channel blocking effects of hirsutine, an indole alkaloid
    from Uncaria genus, in the isolated rat aorta. Planta Medica, 1991,
    57:403–405.
20. Horie S et al. Effects of hirsutine, an antihypertensive indole alkaloid from
    Uncaria rhynchophylla, on intracellular calcium in rat thoracic aorta. Life
    Sciences, 1992, 50:491–498.
21. Hsieh CL et al. Anticonvulsive and free radical scavenging actions of two
    herbs, Uncaria rhynchophylla (MIQ) Jack and Gastrodia elata Bl., in kainic
    acid-treated rats. Life Sciences, 1999, 65:2071–2082.
22. Kim DY et al. Anticonvulsant effect of Uncariae Ramulus et Uncus. II. Ef-
    fects of methanol extract and ethyl acetate fraction on neurotransmitters
    related components of brain. Korean Journal of Pharmacognosy, 1998,
    29:179–186.
23. Kim DY et al. Anticonvulsant effect of Uncariae Ramulus et Uncus. III. Ef-
    fects of ursolic acid and hyperin on neurotransmitters related components in
    brain tissue in vitro. Korean Journal of Pharmacognosy, 1998, 29:187–192.
24. Mimaki Y et al. Anti-convulsion effects of Choto-san and Chotoko (Uncar-
    iae Uncis cum Ramulus) in mice, and identiﬁcation of the active principles.
    Yakugaku Zasshi, 1997, 117:1011–1021.
25. Shimada Y et al. Extract prepared from the hooks and stems of Uncaria sin-
    ensis prevents glutamate-induced neuronal death in cultured cerebellar gran-
    ule cells. Journal of Traditional Medicines, 1998, 15:141–146.
26. Kim HS et al. Effect of Ramulus et uncus uncariae on glucose-oxidase-
    induced toxicity in cultured cerebral neurons. Korean Journal of Oriental
    Physiology and Pathology, 2002, 16:1016–1019.
27. Lee JK et al. Effect of Ramulus et uncus uncariae on cultured hippocampal
    neurons damaged by oxidative stress. Korean Journal of Oriental Physiology
    and Pathology, 2001, 15:677–681 [in Korean].
28. Lee JS et al. Protective effect of methanol extract of Uncaria rhynchophylla
    against excitotoxicity induced by N-methyl-D-aspartate in rat hippocam-
    pus. Journal of Pharmacological Sciences, 2003, 92:70–73.
29. Chang TH et al. Hypotensive effect of rhynchophylla total alkaloids and
    rhynchophylline. National Medical Journal of China, 1978, 58:408–411.

362
                                                       Ramulus cum Uncis Uncariae


30. Inokuchi JI et al. Inhibitors of angiotensin converting enzyme in crude drugs.
    I. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1984, 32:3615–3619.
31. Kuramochi T, Chu J, Suga T. Gou-teng (from Uncaria rhynchophylla
    Miquel)-induced endothelium-dependent and -independent relaxations in
    the isolated rat aorta. Life Sciences, 1994, 54:2061–2069.
32. Lin CC, Lin JM, Chiu HF. Studies on folk medicine “thang-kau-tin” from
    Taiwan (I), the anti-inﬂammatory and liver-protectant effect. American Jour-
    nal of Chinese Medicine, 1992, 20:37–50.
33. Kiuchi F et al. Inhibition of prostaglandin biosynthesis by the constitu-
    ents of medicinal plants. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin, 1983,
    31:3391–3396.
34. Woo WS, Lee EB, Han BH. Biological evaluation of Korean medicinal plants.
    III. Archives of Pharmacal Research, 1979, 2:127–131.
35. Liu J, Mori A. Antioxidant and free radical scavenging activities of Gastrodia
    elata Bl. and Uncaria rhynchophylla (Miq.) Jacks. Neuropharmacology, 1992,
    31:1287–1298.
36. Ohsugi M et al. Active-oxygen scavenging activity of traditional nourishing-
    tonic herbal medicines and active constituents of Rhodiola sacra. Journal of
    Ethnopharmacology, 1999, 67:111–119.
37. Sakakibara I et al. Effect of oxindole alkaloids from the hooks of Un-
    caria macrophylla on thiopental-induced hypnosis. Phytomedicine, 1998,
    5:83–86.
38. Sakakibara I et al. Effect on locomotion of indole alkaloids from the hooks
    of Uncaria plants. Phytomedicine, 1999, 6:163–168.
39. Jeenapongsa R, Tohda M, Watanabe H. Effects of Choto-san and Chotoko
    on thiopental-induced sleeping time. Journal of Traditional Medicine, 2003,
    20:165–167.
40. Cho HM et al. Inhibitory effects of extracts from traditional herbal drugs on
    5-hydroxytryptamine uptake in primary cultured rat brainstem neurons. Ko-
    rean Journal of Pharmacognosy, 1995, 26:349–354.
41. Lee JS et al. Uncarinic acids: phospholipase C gamma-1 inhibitors from
    hooks of Uncaria rhynchophylla. Bioorganic & Medicinal Chemistry Letters,
    1999, 9:1429–1432.
42. Watano T et al. Non-competitive antagonism by hirsuteine of nicotinic re-
    ceptor-mediated dopamine release from rat pheochromocytoma cells. Japa-
    nese Journal of Pharmacology, 1993, 61:351–356.
43. Horie S et al. Antagonistic effect of hirsutine, an alkaloid from Uncaria rhyn-
    chophylla with hypotensive effect, on opioid receptors in the in vitro assay.
    Journal of Traditional Medicines, 1998, 15:360–361.
44. Yamaoto H, Mizutani T, Nomura H. Studies on the mutagenicity of crude
    drug extracts. I. Yakugaku Zasshi, 1982, 102:596–601.
45. Yin XJ et al. A study on the mutagenicity of 102 raw pharmaceuticals used in
    Chinese traditional medicine. Mutation Research, 1991, 260:73–82.
46. Liu DX et al. Antimutagenicity screening of water extracts from 102 kinds of
    Chinese medicinal herbs. Chung-kuo chung yao tsa chili, 1990, 15:617–622.

                                                                              363
                Cortex Viburni Prunifolii




Deﬁnition
Cortex Viburni Prunifolii consists of the dried root or stem, trunk or root
bark of Viburnum prunifolium L. (Caprifoliaceae) (1–3).

Synonyms
Viburnum pyrifolium Poiret, V. prunifolium var. globosum Nash., V. len-
tago var. pyrifolium (Poiret) Chapman, V. bushii Ashe, V. prunifolium var.
bushii (Ashe) Palmer and Steyermark (3).

Selected vernacular names
Acerola negra, American sloe, American snowball, Amerikanische Vibur-
num, Amerikanischer Schneeball, Amerikansk snebolles, baya negra, black
haw, black hawthorn, Blommenbladt kvalkved, cramp bark, ploomilehine
lodjapuu, sheepberry, sloe, sloe tree, stagberry, stagbush, sweet viburnum,
viburno americano, Virginische Schneeball Schneebaum (2–5).

Geographical distribution
Native to the USA (2–4, 6).

Description
A shrub or small tree up to 8 m in height. Bark is dark grey, lustrous and
ﬂaking. Leaf: deciduous, alternate, broadly elliptic to ovate-oblong, rarely
lanceolate, 1.8–6.2 cm (mostly 2.3–4.0 cm) wide, 2.5–9.7 (mostly 3–6) cm
long, apex rounded or acute, base obtuse to decurrent, surface membra-
nous or chartaceous, glabrous with stellate hairs along top midrib, and
margins serrulate. Petioles 10–12 (occasionally 4–18) mm long, narrowly
winged or not. Inﬂorescence: terminal, many-ﬂowered cyme, ﬂat-topped,
3.5–12 cm across, bracts 5, peduncle up to 11 mm long. Flower: perfect,
radially symmetric, spreading to broadly campanulate; sepals and petals 5,
each whorl partially fused; corolla white, lobes 2–3 mm long; stamens 5,
exerted, anthers yellow; ovary inferior, 3-carpellate with only 1 locule fer-

364
                                                      Cortex Viburni Prunifolii


tile, uni-ovulate, style short with 3 sessile stigmas. Fruit: drupe globose,
blue-black, glaucous, 6–10 mm wide, 7–16 mm long, persistent (3, 6).

Plant material of interest: dried stem, trunk and root bark
General appearance
Stem and trunk bark: irregularly and transversely curved or quilled or cut
into irregularly shaped oblong chips of varying sizes (1.5–15 cm in length
by 0.5–1.5 cm in diameter, and up to 6 mm in thickness). The outer surface
of young bark is silvery grey with raised oval lenticels. The outer bark is
usually covered with lichens and mosses. The outer surface of older bark
is greyish-brown to black or reddish-brown where the cork has been
abraded. When cork is present, usually on older bark, it is divided into ir-
regular oblique, longitudinal, or transverse intersecting ﬁssures.
   The inner surface is longitudinally striated, pale yellowish to red-
dish-brown, or pale yellow with reddish-brown blotches and streaks. The
fracture is short and uneven showing greyish to blackish outer bark,
greenish-brown to reddish-brown middle bark and light brown to whit-
ish inner bark in which scattered groups of pale yellowish stone cells may
be discerned with a hand lens (3, 6).
Root bark: transversely curved pieces or quills 1.5–10 cm long, up to 2 cm
wide and 0.5–4 mm thick. The outer surface is greyish-brown or brown-
ish-red where the cork is missing. The youngest pieces have slight longi-
tudinal wrinkles, older bark has small rounded or oval lenticels and is ir-
regularly wrinkled, ﬁssured and scaly. The inner surface is pale yellowish
to reddish-brown with longitudinal striations. The fracture is weak, brit-
tle, short and uneven. The fractured surface shows greyish-brown or dark
brown cork, brownish to brownish-red middle bark, and whitish inner
bark with a number of pale yellow groups of stone cells visible with a
hand lens. Fractured surfaces exhibit numerous minute calcium oxalate
crystals that appear as glittering points (3, 6).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: characteristically pungent, valerian-like; taste: astringent and bit-
ter (3, 6).

Microscopic characteristics
Stem bark: cork of variable width and composed of usually tangentially
elongated cells with suberized to ligniﬁed walls. The cork layer consists
of reddish-brown polygonal cells. The primary cortex consists of slightly
thickened parenchyma cells containing calcium oxalate rosettes (10–20 μm
in diameter). Oil droplets are present in the bark of young plants. When

                                                                          365
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


viewed in cross-section, the secondary cortex is characterized by large
subspherical groups of yellow sclereids and radially oriented medullary
rays which are 1–2 cells broad. The parenchyma cells of the secondary
cortex contain calcium oxalate prisms (up to 20 μm in length) and oil
droplets. When viewed in longitudinal section, the sclereid aggregates are
unusually long. The calcium oxalate crystals are arranged in longitudinal
rows. Starch granules are infrequent, but when present, they are sub-
spherical (2–6 μm in diameter). Scattered through the cortex are groups of
stone cells and occasional isolated stone cells. Rifts or spaces of natural
origin also occur in this region. Pericycle consists of parenchyma similar
to the cortex, embedded with a few pericyclic ﬁbres. The latter, when
observed in longitudinal sections, possess an irregular lumen and obtuse
or rounded ends. Phloem is of variable width, consisting of sieve tissue,
phloem parenchyma and phloem rays; the phloem parenchyma contains
starch grains, rosette aggregates and monoclinic prisms of calcium ox-
alate, tannin, amorphous orange, yellow or olive brown masses and oil.
The phloem rays vary from straight to slightly curved or wavy and, while
mostly 1 to 2 cells in width, may be up to 3 cells in width, as best deter-
mined from tangential-longitudinal sections through this region of the
bark. Scattered through the phloem are numerous groups of stone cells.
The margins of these groups are irregularly rounded, crenate, toothed and
indented. Some of the phloem rays are intercepted in their outward course
by groups of stone cells. As the stems grow older, secondary cork cambia
originate successively in the cortex, pericycle and outer phloem forming
wavy borke areas in these zones which contain groups of stone cells and,
in the case of the pericyclic region, pericyclic ﬁbres. In old stem bark, the
medullary rays (phloem rays) reach outward to the periderm (3, 6).
Root bark: cork of variable thickness, composed of somewhat ligniﬁed
cork cells which are tangentially elongated in cross-sections and polygonal
in surface sections, many of which possess orange or yellowish-orange or
brownish contents. Phellogen of tangentially elongated meristematic cells.
A secondary cortex of a narrow zone of tangentially elongated parenchy-
ma cells, some of which contain orange or brownish amorphous masses,
tannin, oil globules, starch, monoclinic prisms and rosette aggregates of
calcium oxalate. Groups of stone cells with irregularly indented margins
and isolated stone cells scattered through the region. Phloem consists of a
relatively broad zone comprising a matrix of parenchyma and sieve tubes
separated into a number of oblong or curved phloem patches by medul-
lary rays which, in cross-sections, run nearly straight or curve and con-
verge in groups. The stone cell groups are numerous and frequently deep-
ly notched, the individual stone cells are strongly ligniﬁed with prominent

366
                                                    Cortex Viburni Prunifolii


pore canals and rounded to irregular lumen, which frequently contain red-
dish to brownish content. Bast ﬁbres absent. The medullary rays are most-
ly 1–2 cells wide, and contain either starch, tannin, orange-brownish
amorphous masses or calcium oxalate crystals. Rosette aggregates of cal-
cium oxalate found in the cells of the cortex, medullary rays and phloem
are up to 54 μm in diameter. Monoclinic crystals also occur in these re-
gions, but are fewer in number and only up to 25 μm in length. Starch
grains present in these regions are simple and spheroidal to 2–3-compound,
the individual grains being up to 23 μm in diameter (6).

Powdered plant material
Stem bark: light brown to moderate yellowish-brown. Cork layer in sur-
face view. Stone cells numerous, rounded or elongated, in groups or iso-
lated, with thick, porous, ligniﬁed walls and with reddish to brownish
lumen and up to 260 μm in length; numerous fragments of ligniﬁed cork
with brownish walls and polygonal in shape; calcium oxalate in rosette
aggregates and monoclinic prisms up to 57 μm in diameter or length; frag-
ments composed of parenchyma cells containing starch grains or calcium
oxalate in rosette aggregates or monoclinic prisms, oil globules or orange
to olive brown-coloured amorphous masses; starch grains simple or 2- to
3-compound, the individual grains spheroidal, ovate, elliptical, pyriform
or plano-convex, up to 23 μm in diameter or length; a few fragments hav-
ing wood ﬁbres with ligniﬁed walls, some with lumen of irregular width
and with bordered pores (3, 6).
Root bark: to be established in accordance with national requirements.

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (3, 6) and thin-layer chroma-
tography (1, 3).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (7).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 3% (1).

Total ash
Not more than 12% (1).

                                                                        367
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 4% (1).

Water-soluble extractive
Not less than 10% (1).

Alcohol-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Loss on drying
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more than
0.05 mg/kg (8). For other pesticides, see the European pharmacopoeia (8)
and the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with
reference to contaminants and residues (7) and pesticide residues (9).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (7).

Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (7).

Chemical assays
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Major chemical constituents
The chemical proﬁle is somewhat diverse with iridoid glycosides (e.g.
patrinoside, 2´-O-acetylpatrinoside and 2´-O-acetyl-dihydropenstemide),
triterpenes (e.g. ursolic acid and ursolic acid acetate), coumarins (e.g. es-
culetin, scopoletin and scopolin) and the rarely found biﬂavonoid, amen-
toﬂavone, having been reported to be present in the crude drug (3, 5). The
structures of patrinoside, esculetin and amentoﬂavone are presented
below.

Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
No information was found.

368
                                                              Cortex Viburni Prunifolii

         OH
                                                                           O      CH3

                                                                    H H O H         CH3
HO            O                                          HO
                                                           H               O
     O                                                    HO
                               OH                        HO           H
                        OH
              HO        O                                           O O
                                    HO         O     O         OH
                                                         HO
                   OH   O           HO                              OH

              Amentoflavone              Esculetin                  Patrinoside


Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
Orally for the treatment of dysmenorrhoea and asthma (1, 10, 11).

Uses described in traditional medicine
Used to treat menstrual irregularities and nervous tension. Also used as
an antispasmodic, diuretic and tonic (5).

Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antispasmodic activity
The data describing the antispasmodic effects of the crude drug are con-
ﬂicting. Up until 1940, the plant material used was not properly identiﬁed
and was thought to be commonly adulterated with other Viburnum spe-
cies or even the inert mountain maple bark (Acer spicatum) (12). Thus, the
lack of activity observed prior to 1940 may have been due to the use of
adulterated plant materials.
   Oral administration of a hot aqueous extract of the bark to pregnant
dogs (50.0 ml/animal) or pregnant rabbits (25 ml/animal) had no inhibi-
tory or stimulatory effects on uterine contractions (13). Intravenous ad-
ministration of a 70% ethanol extract to cats at a dose of 8 ml/animal did
not relax spontaneous uterine spasms (13). In addition, a ﬂuidextract and
hot aqueous extract were not active in vitro in tests in rat uteri, when as-
sayed at a concentration of 1:1000 or 2:1000 (14).
   Scientiﬁc research performed after 1940 with properly identiﬁed plant
materials has yielded more positive results. In 1941, a modiﬁed version of
the oxytocic assay from the 11th edition of the United States Pharmaco-
peia, in which the crude drug was tested for its ability to neutralize the
oxytocic activity of the solution of posterior pituitary (United States

                                                                                    369
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Pharmacopeia) was investigated. Addition of 0.1 ml of an ethanol extract
of the bark to a 100-ml bath chamber containing isolated guinea-pig uter-
ine strips, reduced normal and resting tone, and decreased the rate and
amplitude of spontaneous contractions (15). The antispasmodic effects
were observed 5–15 minutes after addition and when the extract was re-
moved the contractions resumed. A synergistic effect was observed in rat
uteri treated with the ﬂuidextract of the bark and 1 mg papaverine hydro-
chloride (16). In a similar test, the essential oil of the bark reduced uterine
contractions in isolated rat uteri (concentration not stated) (17).
    An aqueous, 95% ethanol, methanol or ﬂuidextract of the bark re-
duced spontaneous uterine contractions in the isolated uterus from fe-
male rats, at a concentration of 1:200, or 1mM (11, 18, 19). Methanol ex-
tracts of the bark had antispasmodic effects in estrone-primed barium
chloride-stimulated rat uterine horns in vitro (11). Scopoletin, isolated
from the bark had antispasmodic properties in vitro in estrone-primed
and barium chloride-induced rat uteri. The concentration needed to pro-
duce a 50% decrease in the contraction amplitude of a single uterine horn
was 0.09 mg/ml. Similar effects were observed in rodents in a study of
oxytocin- and ergonovine-induced uterine contractions (20). A ﬂuid-
extract of the bark (concentration not stated) reduced spontaneous con-
tractions in rat uteri in vitro. Addition of a 95% ethanol extract (concen-
tration not stated) of the bark to the bath medium prevented barium chlo-
ride and acetylcholine-induced spasms in isolated guinea-pig ileum (21).
    A methanol extract (100 g dried bark), as well as the ethyl acetate and
butanol fractions of the bark, inhibited spontaneous contractions of iso-
lated rat uteri by 50% at concentrations of 2.0–200.0 μg/ml. A decrease in
the tone and amplitude of acetylcholine-induced contractions was also
observed. The median inhibitory concentration was 60 μg/ml for the
crude extract, 36.0 μg/ml for the ethyl acetate fraction and 50 μg/ml for
the butanol fraction. 2´-p-Coumaroyldihydropenstemide was the active
constituent (22).

Clinical pharmacology
No controlled clinical trials were found.

Adverse reactions
No information was found.

Contraindications
Cortex Viburni Prunifolii is contraindicated in cases of hypersensitivity
or allergy to the crude drug.

370
                                                          Cortex Viburni Prunifolii


Warnings
Use of the crude drug during pregnancy should only take place under the
supervision of a health care professional.

Precautions
Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
A 30% ethanol extract of the bark was not mutagenic in the Ames test at
concentrations of 200 μl/disc in Salmonella typhimurium strains TA98
and TA100. Metabolic activation had no effect on the results (23).

Nursing mothers
No safety data are available, thus the use of the crude drug during breast-
feeding is not recommended.

Paediatric use
No safety data are available, thus the use of the crude drug for children
under the age of 12 years is not recommended.

Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug, aqueous and ethanol extracts, ﬂuidextracts and tinctures. Stor-
age: protect from air, light, moisture, excessive heat and insect infestation (3).

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Powdered bark: 2.5–5 g as an infusion or decoction three times daily. Liq-
uid extract (1:1) in 70% ethanol: dose 4–8 ml three times daily. Tincture
(1:5 in 70% ethanol): 5–10 ml three times daily (1, 3).

References
1. British herbal pharmacopoeia. Exeter, British Herbal Medicine Association,
   1996.
2. Farmacopea homeopática de los estados unidos mexicanos [Homeopathic
   Pharmacopoeia of the United States of Mexico]. Mexico City, Secretaría de
   Salud, Comisión Permanente de la Farmacopea de los Estados Unidos Mexi-
   canos, 1998 [in Spanish].
3. Upton R et al., eds. Black haw bark. Viburnum prunifolium. In: American
   herbal pharmacopeia. Santa Cruz, CA, American Herbal Pharmacopeia,
   2000.

                                                                              371
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


4. Bisset NR, Wichtl M, eds. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals, English
    ed. Boca Raton, FL, Medpharm, 1994.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
6. Youngken HW. Textbook of pharmacognosy, 6th ed. Philadelphia, PA, Blak-
    iston, 1950.
7. WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
8. European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
9. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
10. Evans Jr WE, Harne WG, Krantz Jr JC. A uterine principle from Viburnum pruni-
    folium. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 1942, 75:174–177.
11. Jarboe CH et al. Uterine relaxant properties of Viburnum. Nature, 1966,
    212:837.
12. Grote IW, Costello CH. Viburnum. Drug and Cosmetic Industry, 1948,
    63:169, 268–269.
13. Hager BH, Becht FC. The action of Viburnum prunifolium. Journal of Phar-
    macology and Experimental Therapeutics, 1919, 13:61–70.
14. Pilcher JD, Delzell WR, Burman GE. The action of various “female” reme-
    dies on the excised uterus of the guinea-pig. Journal of the American Medical
    Association, 1916, 67:490–492.
15. Munch JC, Pratt HJ. Studies on Viburnum. Pharmaceutical Archives, 1941,
    12:88–91.
16. Grote IW, Woods M. Studies on viburnum. III. The uterine sedative action of
    various fractions. Journal of the American Pharmaceutical Association, 1947,
    36:191–192.
17. Costello CH, Lynn EV. An investigation of Viburnum opulus. Journal of the
    American Pharmaceutical Association, 1943, 32:20–22.
18. Baldini L, Brambilla G, Parodi S. Ricerche sull’azione uterine del Viburnum pruni-
    folium. Archivio Italiano di Scienze Farmacologiche, 1963, 3:55–63 [in Italian].
19. Butler CL, Mullen LE. Investigation of Piscidia erythrina (Jamaica Dog-
    wood). Acta Phytotherapeutica, 1955, 2:1–6.
20. Jarboe CH et al. Scopoletin, an antispasmodic component of Viburnum opu-
    lus and V. prunifolium. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry, 1967, 10:488–489.
21. Hörhammer L, Wagner H, Reinhardt H. Über neue Inhaltsstoffe aus den Riden
    von Viburnum prunifolium L. (Amerikanisher Schneeball) und Viburnum opulus
    L. (Gemeiner Schneeball). Zeitschrift für Naturforschaffen, 1967, 226:768–776.
22. Tomassini L et al. Iridoid glucosides from Viburnum prunifolium. Planta
    Medica, 1999, 65:195.
23. Schimmer O et al. An evaluation of 55 commercial plant extracts in the Ames
    mutagenicity test. Pharmazie, 1994, 49:448–451.

372
                       Radix Withaniae




Deﬁnition
Radix Withaniae consists of the dried roots of Withania somnifera (L.)
Dunal. (Solanaceae) (1, 2).

Synonyms
Physalis somnifera L. (3).

Selected vernacular names
Achuvagandi, agol, ahan, aksin, amukkuram, amukkaramkizangu, amuk-
kira, angarberu, a sh a ga n dha, asagand, asagandh, asagandh nagori, asa-
gandha, asan, asana, askagandha as’vagandha, ashvagandha, ashvakandika,
ashwaganda, ashwagandha, ashwaganha, asgand, asgandh, asgandha, as-
ganhisrol, asoda, asun, asundha, asunyho, asuvagandi, asvagandha, asva-
gandhi, aswagandha, aswal, aswgandh, babu, bâibru, bouzidân, dambari-
co, ghoda, ghodakun, ghodasan, gisawa, gizawa, hayagandhã, hidi-budawa,
hirchil, e-gaddy, hiremaddina-gaddy, hiremaddina-gida, Indian ginseng,
juustumari, kakani hindi, kaknaj-e-hindi, kilangee, kuvia, lakri, ol asajet,
oroval, penneru, pennerugadda, punir, samoah, sebbere-gola, sim-alﬁra-
kh, sum-ul-far, sum-ul-ﬁrakh, techil, ubab, u’beb, ubuvimba, vajigandha,
winter cherry, withania (1–7).

Geographical distribution
Widespread from the Mediterranean coast to India in semi-arid habi-
tats (4, 8).

Description
A woody herb or shrub, up to 2 m in height; growing from a long, tuber-
ous taproot; stellatetomentose. Leaf: simple, 2–11 cm in length by 1.5–
9.0 cm in width, exstipulate, petiole 6–20 mm long; blade elliptic to
ovate-lanceolate, apex acute or rounded, base acute to long-decurrent, on
vegetative shoots 8–10 cm long and alternate, on reproductive shoots
3–8 cm long and opposite, arranged in pairs of one large and one smaller

                                                                        373
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


leaf; margin entire or wavy. Inﬂorescence: axillary, umbellate cyme of
2–25 yellow-green, short-pedicellate ﬂowers. Flower: perfect, radially
symmetrical, campanulate; calyx with 5 acute triangular lobes; corolla
twice the length of the calyx, 7–8 mm long, with 5 lanceolate lobes, spread-
ing or reﬂexed; stamens 5, slightly exserted, ﬁlaments alternate to petal
lobes, partially fused to corolla; ovary superior, glabrous, stigma shal-
lowly biﬁd. Fruit: berry; globose, 5–6 mm in diameter, orange-red, en-
closed in green, membranous, inﬂated calyx approximately 2.5 cm in di-
ameter and slightly 5-angled. Seeds: many, discoid, 2.5 mm in diameter,
pale yellow (4, 9).

Plant material of interest: dried root
General appearance
Straight and unbranched, the thickness varying with age. The main roots
bear ﬁbre-like secondary roots. The outer surface of the root is buff to
grey-yellow with longitudinal wrinkles. The crown consists of 2–6 re-
mains of the stem base. The base of the stem is green, variously thickened,
cylindrical and longitudinally wrinkled. The roots break with a short un-
even fracture (1, 2).

Organoleptic properties
Odour: characteristic, horse-like; taste: sweetish, yet bitter and astringent
and slightly mucilaginous (1, 2).

Microscopic characteristics
The transverse section shows a narrow band of yellowish cork, exfoliated
or crushed, a narrow cortex packed with starch grains; cork cambium of
2–4 diffused rows of cells; secondary cortex about 24 layers of compact
parenchymatous cells; phloem consists of sieve tube, companion cells,
phloem parenchyma; cambium 4–5 rows of tangentially elongated cells;
secondary xylem hard, forming a closed vascular ring separated by multi-
seriate medullary rays; a few xylem parenchyma (1, 2).

Powdered plant material
Dusty white or grey to yellow-brown. Cork thin-walled; ligniﬁed, cubi-
cal or elongated cells, often indistinct and collapsed, with yellowish-brown
contents; 2–3 cells deep in smaller roots, up to 16 in larger primary roots.
Parenchyma of the cortex composed of large thin-walled cells, packed
with starch granules, and occasionally containing microsphenoidal crys-
tals of calcium oxalate. Xylem elements are either tracheidal with bor-
dered pits or, more rarely, reticulately thickened vessels. Fibres from xy-

374
                                                            Radix Withaniae


lem have thickened ligniﬁed walls and simple pits. Starch abundant, simple
or 2–4-compound, with a pronounced irregularly shaped hilum (4, 9).

General identity tests
Macroscopic and microscopic examinations (1), thin-layer chromatogra-
phy (4) and high-performance liquid chromatography (10).

Purity tests
Microbiological
Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms and microbial contamination limits are
as described in the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medi-
cines with reference to contaminants and residues (11).

Foreign organic matter
Not more than 2.0% (1, 2).

Total ash
Not more than 7% (1, 2).

Acid-insoluble ash
Not more than 1% (1, 2).

Water-soluble extractive
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Alcohol-soluble extractive
Not less than 15% (1, 2).

Loss on drying
To be established in accordance with national requirements.

Pesticide residues
The recommended maximum limit of aldrin and dieldrin is not more
than 0.05 mg/kg (12). For other pesticides, see the European pharmaco-
poeia (12) and the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal med-
icines with reference to contaminants and residues (11) and pesticide
residues (13).

Heavy metals
For maximum limits and analysis of heavy metals, consult the WHO
guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to con-
taminants and residues (11).

                                                                       375
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Radioactive residues
Where applicable, consult the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of
herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues (11).

Chemical assays
Contains not less than 0.2% of total alkaloids determined by gravimetric
method (1).

Major chemical constituents
The major characteristic constituents are steroidal lactones collectively
known as “withanolides” including withaferin A, 27-deoxywithaferin A,
withanolide D, withanosides I–XI, and withasomniferols A–C. Alka-
loids constitute the other major group of compounds found in this plant
material. Among the alkaloids found in the root are anaferine, anahygrine,
cuscohygrine, dl-isopelletierine, 3-tropyltigloate, tropane-3-B-ol, 3-A-
tigloyl-oxy-tropane and tropine. Also present are saponins including
sitoindosides VII–X (5, 8, 14). The structures of withaferin A, withano-
lide D, withasomniferol A, cuscohygrine and dl-isopelletierine are
presented below.


                          R1 H O     O                                           OH H O     O
                    H3C                                                    H3C
                    CH3                  R2                                CH3                  OH
                              H                                                    H
     O                                                   O
          CH3   H                                              CH3     H
                                   CH3                                                    CH3

            H       H                                              H       H
                                                                           H
H      O                                                     HO        O
     OH  H                                                         H

    Withaferin A R1 = H R2 = OH                                   Withasomniferol A
    Withanolide D R1 = OH R2 = H

                O
           H        H                         NH     O
    N                     N                                       and enantiomer
                                                         CH3
    CH3                   CH3                 H

        Cuscohygrine                               Isopelletierine



Medicinal uses
Uses supported by clinical data
As an antistress agent to improve reaction time (15).

376
                                                            Radix Withaniae


Uses described in pharmacopoeias and well established documents
As a general tonic to increase energy, improve overall health and prevent
disease in athletes and the elderly (1, 16).

Uses described in traditional medicine
Treatment of bronchitis, dyspepsia, impotency, scabies and ulcers (5, 16).


Pharmacology
Experimental pharmacology
Antistress activity
The activity of a standardized extract of the root (1:1 aqueous ethanol
fraction containing the withanolide glycosides and withaferin A at a
concentration of 28–30%) was investigated in a rat model of chronic
stress. A mild, unpredictable foot-shock was administered once daily for
21 days to rats. These chronic stress-induced perturbations were attenu-
ated by the intragastric administration of the crude drug, at a dose of
25.0 and 50.0 mg/kg body weight (bw) given 1 h before foot-shock for
21 days (17).
   In a mouse model of chronic stress, the antioxidant effects of the root
were assessed in the forced swimming test. Biochemical analysis revealed
that chronic swimming signiﬁcantly increased lipid peroxidation and de-
creased glutathione levels in the brains of mice. The animal models also
showed decreased levels of antioxidant defence enzymes, superoxide
dismutase and catalase. Intragastric treatment with an extract of the crude
drug, at a dose of 100.0 mg/kg bw signiﬁcantly reduced lipid peroxidation
and restored the glutathione levels decreased by chronic swimming in
mice. Further, the treatment increased levels of superoxide dismutase in
the forebrain and increased levels of catalase (18).
   A withanolide-free aqueous fraction from the root (13 kg plant mat-
erial in 70% ethanol, aqueous fraction) was evaluated for putative anti-
stress activity. Intragastric administration of the preparation to immuno-
compromised mice for 7 days increased antibody production with a
median effective dose of 40 mg/kg bw. Thus, the fraction exhibited sig-
niﬁcant antistress activity in a dose-related manner. The same fraction
was protective against chemically and physically induced stress in rats
and mice (19).
   Intragastric administration of sitoindosides IX and X, at a dose range
of 50–200.0 mg/kg bw also produced antistress activity in albino mice and
rats, and augmented learning acquisition and memory retention in both
young and old rats (16).

                                                                       377
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Anti-inﬂammatory activity
Numerous investigations have assessed the anti-inﬂammatory effects of
the crude drug in vitro and in vivo (20–22). In one study, a suspension of
powdered root (1 g/kg suspended in 2% acacia gum, 50 mg/ml) adminis-
tered intragastrically to rats for 3 days, 1 hour before the injection of
Freund’s complete adjuvant, reduced inﬂammation. Many serum proteins
such as A 2-glycoprotein, a major acute inﬂammatory phase protein and
pre-albumin were decreased, indicating a reduction in acute inﬂammation
(20). In another study by the same research group, 1 g/kg of the root sus-
pension reduced the A 2-macroglobulin in the serum of rats given sub-
plantar injection of carrageenan suspension (21).
   In one study, air pouch granuloma was induced by subcutaneous in-
jections of 4 ml of carrageenan on the dorsum of rats which had been
subcutaneously injected 1 day previously with 6 ml of air on the dorsum
(22). The powdered crude drug was administered by gastric lavage at a
dose of 1 g/kg bw for 3 days. Radioactive sodium sulfate was injected
intraperitoneally on day 9 and the incorporation of radio-labelled sulfur
in glycosaminoglycan, oxidative phosphorylation (ADP/O ratio), mg2+-
dependent-ATPase enzyme activity and succinate dehydrogenase activity
were determined in the mitochondria of the granuloma tissue. Adminis-
tration of the root decreased the glycosaminoglycan content of the granu-
loma tissue by 92%, compared with 43.6% following treatment with hy-
drocortisone (15.0 mg/kg bw) and had no effect following treatment with
phenylbutazone (100.0 mg/kg bw) (22).
   In a further study, the effect of oral administration of the crude drug
(root powder, 1 g/kg bw, daily for 15 days) on paw swelling and bony
degenerative changes in Freund’s complete adjuvant-induced arthritis in
rats was assessed. Intragastric administration of the powdered root to the
rats caused a signiﬁcant reduction in both paw swelling and degenerative
changes as observed by radiological examination. The reductions were
better than those produced by the reference drug, hydrocortisone
(15.0 mg/kg bw) (16, 23).
   Daily intragastric administration of 1.0 g/kg bw of the powdered root
suspended in 2% gum acacia, was given 1 hour before the induction of
inﬂammation by injection of Freund’s complete adjuvant in rats for
3 days. Phenylbutazone (100.0 mg/kg bw) was administered to another
group of animals as a positive control. Assessment of acute phase reac-
tants of the blood showed changes in the concentration of A 2-glycopro-
tein, major acute phase A 1-protein, and pre-albumin in rats with inﬂam-
mation, while in animals treated with the powdered root, the A 2-

378
                                                             Radix Withaniae


glycoprotein and acute phase protein were decreased to undetectable
levels (16).
    Intragastric administration of the root, at doses of 500, 1000, 1500 or
1200 mg/kg bw, given orally as a suspension 3–4 hours prior to induction
of inﬂammation, also caused a dose-dependent suppression of A 2-macro-
globulin (an indicator for anti-inﬂammatory drugs) in the serum of rats
inﬂamed by subplantar injection of carrageenan. The maximum effect
(about 75%) was seen at 1.0 g/kg bw. Actual measurements of inﬂamma-
tion were not made (16). Glycowithanolides and a mixture of sitoindo-
sides IX and X isolated from the crude drug were evaluated for their im-
munomodulatory and central nervous system effects (antistress and
improvements to memory and learning) in mice and rats. Both mixtures of
compounds led to mobilization and activation of peritoneal macrophages,
phagocytosis and increased activity of the lysosomal enzymes (16).
Anti-ischaemic activity
An in vivo study assessed the effect of the crude drug as a prophylactic
treatment against stroke using the middle cerebral artery occlusion model
in rats. Two groups of rats were pretreated with a hydroalcoholic extract
of the crude drug (1.0 g/kg, administered by gastric lavage) for 15 or
30 days. The rats were then subjected to focal ischaemia by occlusion of
the middle cerebral artery using an intraluminal thread. After 2 hours of
middle cerebral artery occlusion, reperfusion was allowed by retracting
the thread and the animals were assessed for ischaemic changes 30 min
after reperfusion. Twenty-four hours later, rats were subjected to motor
performance tests and were subsequently killed to enable estimation of
the marker of oxidative stress, malondialdehyde. Signiﬁcant motor im-
pairment, with elevated levels of malondialdehyde, was observed in mid-
dle cerebral artery-occluded control rats. Treatment with the crude drug
for 30 days prevented motor impairment and signiﬁcantly decreased the
raised levels of malondialdehyde compared with rats treated with the
vehicle. Treatment also attenuated the percentage hemispheric lesion area in
diffusion-weighted imaging (17 ± 2%) compared with the vehicle-treated
middle cerebral artery-occluded group (30 ± 4%) (24).
   A study was conducted to evaluate the cardioprotective potential of a
hydro-alcoholic extract of the roots, by assessing the effects of treatment
on haemodynamic, histopathological and biochemical parameters in iso-
prenaline- (isoproterenol-) induced myocardial necrosis in rats and to
compare the effects with those of vitamin E (25). Rats were divided into
six main groups: sham, isoprenaline control, Withania somnifera and vi-
tamin E controls and Withania somnifera and vitamin E treatment groups.
The root extract was administered at doses of 25, 50 and 100 mg/kg, and

                                                                        379
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


vitamin E at a dose of 100 mg/kg, orally for 4 weeks. On days 29 and 30,
the rats in the isoprenaline control group and the Withania somnifera and
vitamin E treatment groups were given isoprenaline (85 mg/kg), subcuta-
neously at an interval of 24 hours. On day 31, haemodynamic parameters
were recorded before the animals were killed, and the hearts were sub-
sequently removed and subjected to histopathological and biochemical
studies. A signiﬁcant decrease in glutathione (p < 0.05), activities of super-
oxide dismutase, catalase, creatinine phosphokinase and lactate dehydro-
genase (p < 0.01) as well as an increase in the level of the lipid peroxidation
marker malonyldialdehyde (p < 0.01) was observed in the hearts of rats in
the isoproterenol control group as compared to rats in the sham control
group. Treatment with the root extract exerted a strong protective effect
against isoprenaline-induced myonecrosis in rats. The dose of 50 mg/kg
bw of the root extract had the greatest cardioprotective effect of the treat-
ments studied (25).

Antioxidant activity
Dried ethanol extracts of the roots were tested for their total antioxidant
activity in the iron (Fe3+) reducing assay, and found to be potent reduc-
tants of Fe3+ at pH 5.5 (26). In an in vivo study, the powdered roots were
assessed for their ability to protect neurons against excitotoxic lesions
induced by kainic acid in mice. Mice were anaesthetized with ketamine
and xylazine and kainic acid was administered by intra-hippocampal in-
jections. The results showed an impairment of the function of the hip-
pocampus region of brain after injection of kainic acid, and lipid peroxi-
dation and protein carbonyl content were signiﬁcantly increased in
comparison with control animals (p < 0.05). The extract given 3 weeks
prior to injections of kainic acid resulted in a decrease in neurotoxicity
and measures of lipid peroxidation and protein carbonyl declined. The
results of this study suggest that the crude drug mitigates the effects of
excitotoxicity and oxidative damage in hippocampus by its antioxidative
properties (26).
   The glycowithanolides isolated from the crude drug were investigated
for their preventive effect on the animal model of tardive dyskinesia, in-
duced by once daily administration of the neuroleptic, haloperidol, for
28 days. Involuntary orofacial movements chewing movements, tongue
protrusion and buccal tremors were assessed as parameters of tardive dys-
kinesia. Intragastric administration of 100.0 and 200.0 mg of the root,
concomitantly with haloperidol, for 28 days inhibited the induction of
the neuroleptic tardive dyskinesia (27).

380
                                                             Radix Withaniae


    The effects of the roots against oxidative stress in haloperidol-induced
orofacial dyskinesia (haloperidol-induced vacuous chewing movements
and tongue protrusion) were assessed in rats. Animals were treated for
21 days with intraperitoneal haloperidol (1 mg/kg); on day 22, vacuous
chewing movements and tongue protrusions were counted during a
5-minute observation period. Coadministration of the extract (100–
300 mg/kg bw) dose-dependently reduced haloperidol-orofacial dys-
kinesia. Biochemical analysis revealed that chronic treatment with halo-
peridol signiﬁcantly increased lipid peroxidation and decreased forebrain
levels of glutathione and the antioxidant defence enzymes, superoxide
dismutase and catalase. Coadministration of the crude drug extract sig-
niﬁcantly reduced the lipid peroxidation and signiﬁcantly reversed the
decrease in forebrain superoxide dismutase and catalase levels, but had no
signiﬁcant effect on the haloperidol-induced decrease in forebrain gluta-
thione levels (28).
    The sitoindosides VII–X and withaferin A (glycowithanolide), were
tested for antioxidant activity using the major free-radical scavenging en-
zymes, superoxide dismutase, catalase and glutathione peroxidase levels
in the rat brain frontal cortex and striatum. Active glycowithanolides of
Withania somnifera (10.0 or 20.0 mg/kg bw) were administered by intra-
peritoneal injection once daily for 21 days to groups of six rats. Dose-re-
lated increases in all enzymes were observed; the increases were compa-
rable to those seen following administration of deprenyl (2 g/kg bw
intraperitoneally), indicating that the crude drug has an antioxidant effect
in the brain which may be responsible for its diverse pharmacological
properties (29).
    In another study, an aqueous suspension of the crude drug was evalu-
ated for its effect on stress-induced lipid peroxidation in mice and rabbits
(30). Levels of lipid peroxidation in the blood were increased by intra-
venous administration of lipopolysaccharides from Klebsiella pneumoniae
and peptidoglycans from Staphylococcus aureus. Simultaneous intragas-
tric administration of the extract (100.0 mg/kg bw) prevented an increase
in lipid peroxidation.
    In another study, the powdered root was administered to mice at a
dose of 0.7 and 1.4 g/kg bw, for 15 and 30 days, to determine its effects on
lipid peroxidation, superoxide dismutase and catalase activities. Thirty
days of treatment produced a signiﬁcant decrease in lipid peroxidation,
and an increase in both superoxide dismutase and catalase activities (31).
The effect of an extract of the crude drug on the regulation of lead tox-
icity and lipid peroxidative activity was investigated in liver and kidney
tissues of rodents. Lead treatment of the animals for 20 days enhanced

                                                                        381
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


hepatic and renal lipid peroxidation, whereas administration of the ex-
tract at doses of 0.7 g/kg bw and 1.4 g/kg bw together with equivalent
doses of lead acetate for 20 days signiﬁcantly decreased lipid peroxidation
and increased the activities of antioxidant enzymes, such as superoxide
dismutase and catalase (32).
    An in vivo study examined the attenuating effect of extracts of the root
and of aloe vera on prevention of hippocampal and cortical cell degenera-
tion due to oxidative damage in mice with streptozotocin-induced dia-
betes. Doses of both plant extracts given to experimental animals were based
on the evaluation of their total antioxidant activity and also their potency
to reduce Fe3+. Lipid peroxidation and protein carbonyl were assayed in
both regions of the brain and the changes in memory and motor behavi-
oural functions in diabetic and control mice were observed. The results
showed a signiﬁcant increase in lipid peroxidation and protein carbonyl
in the hippocampus and cortical regions of mice with streptozotocin-
induced diabetes, as well as a signiﬁcant impairment in both motor and
memory behavioural functions in diabetic mice. However, when diabetic
mice were supplemented with the extracts of the root and with aloe vera,
the oxidative damage in both brain regions was reduced as marked by a
signiﬁcant decline in both lipid peroxidation and protein carbonyl. The
combination of extracts of root and aloe vera was more effective in reduc-
ing oxidative damage in brain regions than either of the plant extracts
given alone. The combination of the extract and the aloe vera lowered the
blood glucose level in mice with streptozotocin-induced diabetes. Mem-
ory impairment and motor dysfunction were also lessened by supplemen-
tation with the plant extracts (33).

Chemopreventive activity
The chemopreventive effect of an alcohol extract of the crude drug on
7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA)-induced skin cancer was in-
vestigated in mice. The skin lesions were induced by the twice-weekly
topical application of DMBA for 8 weeks to the shaved backs of mice.
The alcohol extract was administered at the maximum oral tolerated dose
of 400.0 mg/kg bw three times per week on alternate days 1 week before
DMBA application and treatment was continued for 24 weeks. The re-
sults showed a signiﬁcant decrease in incidence and average number of
skin lesions in mice that received the extract compared to those treated
with DMBA alone at the end of week 24. A signiﬁcant impairment was
noticed in the levels of reduced glutathione, malondialdehyde, superoxide
dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase and glutathione S-transferase
in skin lesions of DMBA-treated control mice compared with vehicle-

382
                                                            Radix Withaniae


treated mice. These parameters returned to near normal following admin-
istration of the crude drug to DMBA-treated mice (34).
    Another chemopreventive study of an alcohol extract of the crude
drug against 20-methylcholanthrene-induced ﬁbrosarcoma tumours in
mice was performed. A single subcutaneous injection of 20-methyl-
cholanthrene into the thigh region of the mice produced a high incidence
(96%) of tumours. Intragastric administration of the extract at a dose of
400.0 mg/kg bw (1 week before injecting 20-methylcholanthrene and
continued until 15 weeks thereafter) signiﬁcantly reduced the incidence
and volume of tumours and enhanced the survival of the mice, compared
with mice injected with 20-methylcholanthrene. The tumour incidence
was also delayed in the group treated with the extract when compared
with mice injected with 20-methylcholanthrene without pretreatment
with the extract. Liver biochemical parameters revealed a signiﬁcant
modulation of reduced glutathione, lipid peroxides, glutathione S-trans-
ferase, catalase and superoxide dismutase in mice treated with the extract
compared with mice injected with 20-methylcholanthrene (35).
Effects on memory and cognition
An aqueous suspension (100 mg/ml of powdered root suspended in 2%
acacia gum and water) was assessed for its effects on improving short-
term memory by reversing the effects of memory deﬁcits induced by sco-
polamine and amnesia induced by electroconvulsive shock (36). Daily
administration of 200 mg/kg bw of the suspension signiﬁcantly reversed
the scopolamine-induced delay in latency for the animals to reach the
shock free zone and the number of errors in the passive avoidance step-
down test (p < 0.001). Treatment of the animals with 100 mg/kg bw of the
suspension produced a signiﬁcant reduction in latency to reach the shock
free zone (p < 0.05) (36).
   Sitoindosides VII–X and withaferin A were isolated from an aqueous
methanol extract of the roots. Rats were treated with 40 mg/kg bw (intra-
peritoneally) of an equimolar mixture of these compounds for 7 days and
the anticholinesterase activity was determined in brain slices. Acetyl-
cholinesterase activity was increased in the lateral septum and globus pal-
lidus indicating a possible enhancement of cognition (37).
   Withanolides isolated from the crude drug inhibited acetylcholinest-
erase and butyrylcholinesterase enzymes in a concentration-dependent
fashion with IC50 values ranging between 20.5 and 85.2 MM for acetylcho-
linesterase and butyrylcholinesterase. Lineweaver-Burk as well as Dixon
plots and their secondary replots indicated that the compounds were lin-
ear mixed-type inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase and non-competitive
inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase with Ki (dissociation constant) values

                                                                       383
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


ranging between 20.0 and 45.0 MM. All compounds were found to be non-
competitive inhibitors of butyrylcholinesterase with Ki values ranging
between 27.7 and 90.6 MM (38).

Immune stimulant activity
The effects of the root were investigated in mice with myelosuppression
induced by cyclophosphamide, azathioprin or prednisolone (39). Admin-
istration of the root (100 mg/kg bw) prevented myelosuppression in mice
treated with all three immunosuppressive drugs tested. A signiﬁcant in-
crease in haemoglobin concentration (p < 0.01), red blood cell count
(p < 0.01), white blood cell count (p < 0.05), platelet count (p < 0.01), and
body weight (p < 0.05) was observed in treated mice as compared with
untreated (control) mice (39).
    The effect of the crude drug on the cellular immune responses was
studied in normal and in tumour-bearing animals. Intraperitoneal injec-
tion of ﬁve doses of an extract of the crude drug (20 mg/dose/animal)
enhanced the proliferation of lymphocytes, bone marrow cells and thymo-
cytes in response to mitogens. Both phytohaemagglutinin and conca-
navalin A mitogens administered concomitantly with crude drug treat-
ment doubled the proliferation of lymphocytes, bone marrow cells and
thymocytes. Splenocytes treated with the crude drug together with the
mitogen led to a six-fold increase in lymphocyte proliferation. Natural
killer cell activity was stimulated by the crude drug extract in both normal
and tumour-bearing animals and it was found to be earlier than in the
controls (48.92% cell lysis). Antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity
was found to be enhanced in the group treated with the crude drug on the
ninth day after treatment (65% cell lysis) (40). These authors have also
reported that intraperitoneal administration of a 70% methanol extract of
the roots to mice at a dose of 20 mg/animal enhanced total white blood
cell count on day 10 after the administration of a single dose; bone mar-
row cellularity also increased, and the delayed-type hypersensitivity reac-
tion (Mantoux test) was reduced (41).
    The immunomodulatory effects of extracts of the crude drug (suspen-
sions in carboxymethyl cellulose) were investigated in mice to measure
their effects on immune hyper-reactivity. The animal models used includ-
ed antibody-mediated immune hyper-reactivity, as seen in active paw
anaphylaxis with disodium chromoglycate and cell-mediated immune
hyper-reactivity using the delayed-type hypersensitivity model with
cyclophosphamide. The immunomodulatory effect was assessed in IgE-
mediated anaphylaxis as the reduction of ovalbumin-induced paw oedema
in animals treated with the crude drug suspension at doses of 150 and

384
                                                             Radix Withaniae


300.0 mg/kg bw. The positive control drug used was disodium chromo-
glycate. Potentiation of the delayed-type hypersensitivity reaction was
observed in animals treated with cyclophosphamide at a dose of 20.0 mg/
kg bw, and the crude drug suspensions at a dose of 300–1000.0 mg/kg bw.
A signiﬁcant increase in white blood cell counts and platelet counts was
observed in animals treated with the crude drug. A protective effect
against cyclophosphamide-induced myelosuppression was observed in
animals treated with suspensions of the crude drug at doses of 300–
1000.0 mg/kg bw, and a signiﬁcant increase in white blood cell counts and
platelet counts was observed. Cyclophosphamide-induced immunosup-
pression was counteracted by treatment with the same crude drug sus-
pension. Treated animals showed an increase in haemagglutinating anti-
body responses and haemolytic antibody responses towards sheep red
blood cells (42).
    In a study in mice, intraperitoneal administration of a methanol extract
of the root (20.0 mg/kg bw) was found to signiﬁcantly reduce leukopaenia
induced by treatment with cyclophosphamide. On the twelfth day the to-
tal white blood cell count in the group treated with cyclophosphamide
was 3720 cells/mm2 and that of the group that received cyclophosphamide
together with the root was 6120 cells/mm2. Treatment with the root and
cyclophosphamide signiﬁcantly increased the bone marrow cellularity
(13.1 × 106 cells/femur) compared to the group treated with cyclophosph-
amide alone (8 × 106 cells/femur) (p < 0.001). Administration of the extract
increased the number of alpha-esterase positive cells in the bone marrow
of animals treated with cyclophosphamide, compared with the animals in
the group treated with cyclophosphamide alone (687/4000 cells) (43).
    The mechanism underlying the immunostimulant effect of a methanol
extract of the root was investigated by assessing nitric oxide production
in J774 macrophages (44). At concentrations of 1–256 μg/ml the extract
produced a signiﬁcant and concentration-dependent increase in nitric ox-
ide production, an effect which was abolished by N(G)nitro-L-arginine
methyl ester, a non-selective inhibitor of nitric oxide synthase; dexa-
methasone, an inhibitor of protein synthesis; and N(alpha-p)-tosyl-L-lysine
chloromethyl ketone, an inhibitor of nuclear factor-kappa-B activation.
In addition, Western blot analysis showed that the methanol extract in-
creased, in a concentration-dependent fashion, expression of inducible
nitric oxide synthase protein. The results suggest that the crude drug may
induce the synthesis of inducible nitric oxide synthase expression, prob-
ably by acting at the transcriptional level, and the increased nitric oxide
production by macrophages could account, at least in part, for the immuno-
stimulant properties (44).

                                                                        385
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Neuroprotective activity
Eighteen compounds isolated from a methanol extract of the crude drug
enhanced neurite outgrowth in human neuroblastoma cells. Double im-
munostaining was performed in rat cortical neurons using antibodies to
phosphorylated nuclear factor-H as an axonal marker, and to mitogen
activated protein kinase as a dendritic marker. In cells treated with witha-
nolide A, the length of nuclear factor-H-positive processes was signiﬁ-
cantly increased compared with that of vehicle-treated cells, whereas the
length of mitogen activated protein kinase-positive processes was in-
creased by withanosides IV and VI. These results suggest that axons are
predominantly extended by withanolide A, and dendrites by withano-
sides IV and VI (45).
   The anti-parkinsonian effects of a root extract were investigated in rats
pretreated with 100, 200 and 300 mg/kg bw of the root extract orally for
3 weeks. On day 21, 2 μl of 6-hydroxydopamine was infused into the
right striatum while animals in the sham-operated group received 2 Ml of
the vehicle solvent. Three weeks after being injected with 6-hydroxy-
dopamine, the rats were tested for neurobehavioural activity and 5 weeks
after treatment they were killed for the estimation of lipid peroxidation,
reduced glutathione content, activities of glutathione S-transferase, gluta-
thione reductase, glutathione peroxidase, superoxide dismutase and cata-
lase, catecholamine content, dopaminergic D2-receptor binding and ty-
rosine hydroxylase expression. The root extract reversed all the parameters
in a dose-dependent manner indicating a potential for preventing neu-
ronal injury in Parkinson disease (46).
Toxicity
In one study of its effects on the central nervous system, a 2% aqueous
suspension of the powdered root, an alkaloid-containing extract of the
root prepared in 10% propylene glycol using 2% gum acacia as the sus-
pending agent, was used to determine acute toxicity (47). The acute me-
dian lethal dose (LD50) was 465.0 mg/kg bw in rats and 432.0 mg/kg bw
in mice. In an antistress-effect study, the acute toxicity of aqueous-meth-
anol extracts of the crude drug and equimolar combinations of sitoindo-
sides VII and VIII (SG-I) and withaferin-A (SG-2) were studied. The
acute LD50 of SG-1 and SG-2 administered intraperitoneally to mice was
1076.0 mg/kg bw and 1564.0 mg/kg bw, respectively (48).
   In one study of the effects of chronic administration, the root was
boiled in water and administered to rats in their drinking-water for
8 months while monitoring body weight, general toxicity, well-being,
number of pregnancies, litter size and weight of progeny (16). The es-
timated dose given was 100.0 mg/kg bw per day. In the second part of

386
                                                              Radix Withaniae


the study, an estimated dose of 200 mg/kg bw per day was given for
4 weeks as above while monitoring body temperature, body weight,
cortisol value in heparinized plasma and ascorbic acid content of the
adrenals. The liver, spleen, lungs, kidneys, thymus, adrenals and stom-
ach were examined histopathologically and were all found to be nor-
mal. The initial average body weights of the animals in the group treat-
ed with the crude drug (100.0 mg/kg bw per day) and in the control
group on day 1 were 91 g and 106 g, which, after 4 weeks, had increased
to 185 g (103%) and 178 g (67.9%), respectively. The rats treated with
the crude drug gained more weight than those in the control group
(no p value given). The percentage weight gain after 8 weeks of the
same Withania somnifera treatment was 227% for the animals in the
treated group and 145.3% for those in the control group. The relative
body weight gain was signiﬁcantly greater in the group treated with the
crude drug than in the control group (p < 0.001). While it is not clear
when the rats were mated, the average weights of the progeny at
1 month of age were 70 g and 45 g in the crude-drug-treated and con-
trol groups, respectively, indicating healthier progeny in the treated
group. In the 4-week study, the weight gain in the animals in the treat-
ed group was comparable to that of those in the control group. The
body temperature of animals in the group treated with the crude drug
was 1.7 ºC lower than in the control animals. The treatment caused an
increase in lung and liver weights and a decrease in adrenocortical ac-
tivity as was evident from the reduction in adrenal weight and a sig-
niﬁcant reduction in plasma cortisol (p < 0.001). Histopathologically,
all organs were normal, and no toxicity was observed (16).

Clinical pharmacology
A double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial assessed the effects of the
root (250 mg twice daily) on psychomotor performance in 30 healthy vol-
unteers (15). The effects were compared with those of Panax ginseng
(100 mg twice daily). Test parameters included tapping, cancellation test,
mental mathematical calculations, logical deductions, choice reaction
times and auditory reactions. The performance of both groups was su-
perior to that of subjects who received a placebo and the performance of
subjects given the crude drug was superior to that of those given Panax
ginseng after 40 days of treatment.


Adverse reactions
May cause nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea (4).

                                                                         387
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Contraindications
Due to the lack of safety data and the fact that the crude drug has been
used in traditional medicine to induce abortion, its use during pregnancy
or breastfeeding is contraindicated (4).

Warnings
No information was found.

Precautions
Drug interactions
The crude drug may potentiate the effects of barbiturates and reduce the
effects of diazepam and clonazepam (4).

Carcinogenesis, mutagenesis, impairment of fertility
No information was found.

Pregnancy: non-teratogenic effects
See Contraindications.

Other precautions
No information was found.

Dosage forms
Crude drug, extracts and tinctures.

Posology
(Unless otherwise indicated)
Powdered crude drug: 3–6 g of the dried powdered root (1). Orally as an
antistress agent: 250 mg twice daily (15).

References
1. The Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia of India. Part I, Vol. I, 1st ed. New Delhi,
   Government of India Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of
   Indian Systems of Medicine and Homeopathy, 1990 (reprinted 2001).
2. Unani pharmacopoeia of India. Part I, Vol. I. New Delhi, Ministry of Health
   and Family Welfare, Department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Hom-
   eopathy, 1999.
3. Al-Yahya MA et al. Saudi plants. A phytochemical and biological approach.
   Riyadh, King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology, King Saud Uni-
   versity, 1990.

388
                                                                    Radix Withaniae


4. Upton R, Petrone C, Swisher D, eds. Ashwagandha root. Withania som-
    nifera. In: American herbal pharmacopeia. Santa Cruz, CA, American Herb-
    al Pharmacopeia, 2000.
5. Farnsworth NR, ed. NAPRALERT database. Chicago, University of Illinois
    at Chicago, IL (an online database available directly through the University
    of Illinois at Chicago or through the Scientiﬁc and Technical Network [STN]
    of Chemical Abstracts Services), 30 June 2005.
6. Nadkarni AK, ed. Dr. K.M. Nadkarni’s Indian materia medica. Vol. 1. Bom-
    bay, Popular Prakashan, 1976.
7. Parsa A. Flore de l’Iran. Vol. 16. Tehran, University of Tehran, 1997.
8. Bruneton J. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Paris, Lavoisi-
    er, 1995.
9. Arambewela L, Silva R. (eds). Sri Lankan medicinal plant: monographs and
    analysis. Vol. 4. Withania somnifera. Colombo, Industrial Technology Insti-
    tute (CISIR) and National Science Foundation, 1999:1–26.
10. Ganzera M, Choudhary MI, Khan IA. Quantitative HPLC analysis of with-
    anolides in Withania somnifera. Fitoterapia, 2003, 74:68–76.
11. WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to
    contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
12. European pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg, Directorate for the Quality of
    Medicines of the Council of Europe (EDQM), 2005.
13. Guidelines for predicting dietary intake of pesticide residues, 2nd rev. ed. Ge-
    neva, World Health Organization, 1997 (WHO/FSF/FOS/97.7).
14. Zhao J et al. Withanolide derivatives from the roots of Withania somnifera
    and their neurite outgrowth activities. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bul-
    letin, 2002, 50:760–765.
15. Karnick CR. Pharmacopoeial standards of herbal plants. Delhi, Sri Satguru
    Publications, 1994.
16. Mishra LC, Singh BB, Dagenais S. Scientiﬁc basis for the therapeutic use of
    Withania somnifera (Ashwagandha): A review. Alternative Medicine Review,
    2000, 5:334–346.
17. Bhattacharya SK, Muruganandam AV. Adaptogenic activity of Withania
    somnifera: an experimental study using a rat model of chronic stress. Phar-
    macology Biochemistry and Behavior, 2003, 75:547–555.
18. Singh A et al. Effect of natural and synthetic antioxidants in a mouse model
    of chronic fatigue syndrome. Journal of Medicinal Food, 2002, 5:211–220.
19. Singh B, Chandan BK, Gupta DK. Adaptogenic activity of a novel withano-
    lide-free aqueous fraction from the roots of Withania somnifera Dun. (Part
    II). Phytotherapy Research, 2003, 17:531–536.
20. Anbalagan K, Sadique J. Inﬂuence of an Indian medicine (Ashwagandha) on
    acute-phase reactants in inﬂammation. Indian Journal of Experimental Bio-
    logy, 1981, 19:245–249.
21. Anbalagan K, Sadique J. Role of prostaglandins in acute phase proteins in
    inﬂammation. Biochemical Medicine, 1984, 31:236–245.

                                                                               389
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


22. Begum VH, Sadique J. Effect of Withania Somnifera on glycosaminoglycan
    synthesis in carrageenin-induced air pouch granuloma. Biochemical Medi-
    cine and Metabolic Biology, 1987, 38:272–277.
23. Begum VH, Sadique J. Long term effect of herbal drug Withania somnifera
    on adjuvant induced arthritis in rats. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology,
    1988, 26:877–882.
24. Chaudhary G et al. Evaluation of Withania somnifera in a middle cerebral
    artery occlusion model of stroke in rats. Clinical and Experimental Pharma-
    cology and Physiology, 2003, 30:399–404.
25. Mohanty I et al. Mechanisms of cardioprotective effect of Withania som-
    nifera in experimentally induced myocardial infarction. Basic and Clinical
    Pharmacology and Toxicology, 2004, 94:184–190.
26. Parihar MS, Hemnani T. Phenolic antioxidants attenuate hippocampal neu-
    ronal cell damage against kainic acid induced excitotoxicity. Journal of Bio-
    science, 2003, 28:121–128.
27. Bhattacharya SK et al. Effect of Withania somnifera glycowithanolides on a
    rat model of tardive dyskinesia. Phytomedicine, 2002, 9:167–170.
28. Naidu PS, Singh A, Kulkarni SK. Effect of Withania somnifera root extract
    on haloperidol-induced orofacial dyskinesia: possible mechanisms of action.
    Journal of Medicinal Food, 2003, 6:107–114.
29. Bhattacharya SK, Stayan KS, Ghosal S. Antioxidant activity of glycowitha-
    nolides from Withania somnifera. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology,
    1997, 35:236–239.
30. Dhuley JN. Effect of ashwagandha on lipid peroxidation in stress-induced
    animals. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1998, 60:173–178.
31. Panda S, Kar A. Evidence for free radical scavenging activity of Ashwagand-
    ha root powder in mice. Indian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology,
    1997, 41:424–426.
32. Chaurasia SS, Panda S, Kar A. Withania somnifera root extract in the regula-
    tion of lead-induced oxidative damage in male mouse. Pharmacological Re-
    search, 2000, 41:663–666.
33. Parihar MS et al. Susceptibility of hippocampus and cerebral cortex to oxida-
    tive damage in streptozotocin treated mice: prevention by extracts of Withania
    somnifera and Aloe vera. Journal of Clinical Neuroscience, 2004, 11:397–402.
34. Prakash J, Gupta SK, Dinda AK. Withania somnifera root extract prevents
    DMBA-induced squamous cell carcinoma of skin in Swiss albino mice. Nu-
    trition and Cancer, 2002, 42:91–97.
35. Prakash J et al. Chemopreventive activity of Withania somnifera in experi-
    mentally induced ﬁbrosarcoma tumours in Swiss albino mice. Phytotherapy
    Research, 2001, 15:240–244.
36. Dhuley JN. Nootropic-like effect of Ashwagandha (Withania somnifera L.)
    in mice. Phytotherapy Research, 2001, 15:524–528.
37. Choudhary MI et al. Withanolides, a new class of natural cholinesterase in-
    hibitors with calcium antagonistic properties. Biochemical and Biophysical
    Research Communications, 2005, 334:276–287.

390
                                                                  Radix Withaniae


38. Schliebs R et al. Systemic administration of deﬁned extracts from Withania
    somnifera (Indian ginseng) and Shilajit differentially affects cholinergic but
    not glutamatergic and gabaergic markers in rat brain. Neurochemistry Inter-
    national, 1997, 30:181–190.
39. Ziauddin M et al. Studies on the immunomodulatory effects of Ashwagand-
    ha. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1996, 50:69–76.
40. Davis L, Kuttan G. Effect of Withania somnifera on cell mediated immune
    responses in mice. Journal of Experimental and Clinical Cancer Research,
    2002, 21:585–590.
41. Davis L, Kuttan G. Immunomodulatory activity of Withania somnifera.
    Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 2000, 71:193–200.
42. Agarwal R et al. Studies on immunomodulatory activity of Withania som-
    nifera (Ashwagandha) extracts in experimental immune inﬂammation. Jour-
    nal of Ethnopharmacology, 1999, 67:27–35.
43. Davis L, Kuttan G. Suppressive effect of cyclophosphamide-induced toxicity
    by Withania somnifera extract in mice. Journal of Ethnopharmacology, 1998,
    62:209–214.
44. Iuvone T et al. Induction of nitric oxide synthase expression by Withania
    somnifera in macrophages. Life Sciences, 2003, 72:1617–1625.
45. Kuboyama T et al. Axon- or dendrite-predominant outgrowth induced by
    constituents from Ashwagandha. Neuroreport, 2002, 13:1715–1720.
46. Ahmad M et al. Neuroprotective effects of Withania somnifera on 6-hy-
    droxydopamine induced Parkinsonism in rats. Human and Experimental
    Toxicology, 2005, 24:137–147.
47. Malhotra CL et al. Studies on Withania ashwagandha, Kaul. IV. The effect of
    total alkaloids on the smooth muscles. Indian Journal of Physiology and
    Pharmacology, 1965, 9:9–15.
48. Singh N et al. Withania Somnifera (Ashwagandha), a rejuvenating herbal
    drug which enhances survival during stress (an adaptogen). International
    Journal of Crude Drug Research, 1982, 20:29–35.




                                                                              391
                             Annex 1
        Participants of the Fourth WHO Consultation
                 on Selected Medicinal Plants
          Salerno-Paestum, Italy, 3–6 October 2005




Dr Anibal Amat, Departtamento de Pharmacognosy y Medical Botany,
   Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Quimicas y Naturales, Universidad Na-
   cional de Misiones, Misiones, Argentina
Professor Elmira Amroyan, Head of Pharmacological Council, Arme-
   nian Drug & Medical Technology Scientiﬁc Centre, Yerevan, Republic
   of Armenia
Dr Ki-Ho Cho, Department of Cardiovascular & Neurologic Diseases
   (Stroke Center), Hospital of Oriental Medicine, Kyung Hee Univer-
   sity Medical Center, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Dr Anchalee Chuthaputti, Institute of Thai Traditional Medicine, De-
   partment for Development of Thai Traditional Medicine, Ministry of
   Public Health, Nonthaburi, Thailand
Dr Mariana Eve Costaguta, Scientiﬁc Assistant, Caribbean Pharmaco-
   poeia, Buenos Aires, Argentina
Professor Vincenso De Feo, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
   Faculty of Pharmacy, State University of Salerno, Fisciano (Salerno),
   Italy
Professor Francesco De Simone, Dean, Faculty of Pharmacy, State Uni-
   versity of Salerno, Fisciano (Salerno), Italy (Co-Chairperson)
Dr Drissa Diallo, Director, Département du Médecine Traditionnelle, In-
   stitut Nationale du Recherche en Santé Publique, Bamako, Mali
Professor Peter Eagles, Chairperson, Medicines Control Council, Preto-
   ria, South Africa (Co-Chairperson)
Professor Hassan Farsam, Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty
   of Pharmacy, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Islamic
   Republic of Iran
Dr Gabriel I. Giancaspro, Associate Director/LatinAmerican Specialist
   Department of Standards Development, United States Pharmacopeia,
   Rockville, MD, USA
Dr Benjamin Gilbert, FarManguinhos – FIOCRUZ, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

392
                                                                   Annex 1


Professor Alberto Giménez Turba, Director of IIFB, Universidad Mayor
   de San Andrés, La Paz, Bolivia (Co-Rapporteur)
Dr Yukihiro Goda, Director, Division of Pharmacognosy, Phytochemis-
   try and Narcotics, National Institute of Health Sciences, Ministry of
   Health, Labour and Welfare, Tokyo, Japan
Dr Tansir Ulhaq Haqqi, Research Ofﬁcer, National Medicinal Plants
   Board, Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Sid-
   dha and Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, New
   Delhi, India
Professor Konstantin Keller, Department for International Pharmaceuti-
   cal Affairs, Federal Ministry of Health and Social Security, Bonn, Ger-
   many (Group Chairperson)
Professor Fritz Hubertus Kemper, Director, Environmental Specimen
   Bank for Human Tissue, University of Muenster, Munster, Germany
   (Group Chairperson)
Dr Jong-hwan Kim, Scientiﬁc Ofﬁcer, Herbal Medicines Standardization
   Division, Medicines Evaluation Department, Korea Food and Drug
   Administration, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Dr I-hsin Lin, Chairperson, Committee on Chinese Medicine and
   Pharmacy, Department of Health, Taiwan, China
Dr Robin Marles, Manager, Research and Science Division, Natural
   Health Products Directorate, Health Canada, Ottawa, Canada (Co-
   Rapporteur)
Professor Emilio Minelli, Centre of Research in Medical Bioclimatology,
   Biotechnologies and Natural Medicine, State University of Milan, Mi-
   lan, Italy
Professor Tamàs Paàl, Director-General, National Institute of Pharmacy,
   Budapest, Hungary (Group Chairperson)
Dr Ju-Young Park, Senior Scientiﬁc Ofﬁcer, Herbal Medicines Standard-
   ization Division, Medicines Evaluation Department, Korea Food and
   Drug Administration, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Dr Ain Raal, Associate Professor Docent of Pharmocognosy, Depart-
   ment of Pharmacy, The University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia
Dr Farnaz Niaz Rathore, Drugs Controller, Ministry of Health, Islam-
   abad, Pakistan
Dr Lionel Robineau, Coordinator Caribbean Pharmacopoeia, TRAdi-
   tional Medicine for the IsLands (TRAMIL), Laboratoire de Biologie
   et Physiologie vegetales, Département de Biologie, UFR Sciences Ex-
   actes et Naturales, Pointe-à-Pitre, Guadeloupe, France
Professor Umbelto Solimene, Director, WHO Collaborating Centre for
   Traditional Medicine, Centre of Research in Medical Bioclimatology,

                                                                      393
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


   Biotechnologies and Natural Medicine, State University of Milan, Mi-
   lan, Italy
Professor Yang-Chang Wu, Graduate Institute of Natural Products,
   Kaohsiung Medical University (KMU), Taiwan, China
Dr Zhang Qian, Regulatory Scientist, Chinese Proprietary Medicines
   Unit, Centre for Drug Administration, Health Sciences Authority,
   Singapore, Singapore

WHO temporary advisers
Professor Raymond Boudet-Dalbin, Laboratoire de Chimie thérapeu-
   tique, University of René, Paris, France
Professor Norman Farnsworth, Director of WHO Collaborating Centre
   for Traditional Medicine, College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois
   at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA (Group Rapporteur)
Professor Harry H. S. Fong, WHO Collaborating Centre for Traditional
   Medicine, College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chi-
   cago, IL, USA (Group Rapporteur)
Professor Gail B. Mahady, WHO Collaborating Centre for Traditional
   Medicine, College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chi-
   cago, USA, IL (Group Rapporteur)

WHO Secretariat
Ms Yukiko Maruyama, Scientist, Traditional Medicine, Department of
  Technical Cooperation for Essential Drugs and Traditional Medicine,
  World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland
Dr Xiaorui Zhang, Coordinator, Traditional Medicine, Department of
  Technical Cooperation for Essential Drugs and Traditional Medicine,
  World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland




394
                                  Annex 2
                          Cumulative index
                 (in alphabetical order of plant name)




For the convenience of users of Volume 4, the monographs described in Vol-
umes 1, 2, and 3 are also listed in this index. The numbers printed in bold type,
preceding the page numbers, indicate the volume in which the indexed item is to
be found. Monographs are listed in alphabetical order of the plant name.


A                                         Flos Carthami, 3, 114
Fructus Agni Casti, 4, 9                  Flos Caryophylli, 2, 45
Bulbus Allii Cepae, 1, 5                  Herba Centellae, 1, 77
Bulbus Allii Sativi, 1, 16                Flos Chamomillae, 1, 86
Aloe, 1, 33                               Fructus Chebulae, 4, 71
Aloe Vera Gel, 1, 43                      Rhizoma Cimicifugae Racemosae, 2, 55
Radix Althaeae, 2, 5                      Cortex Cinnamomi, 1, 95
Fructus Ammi Majoris, 3, 9                Rhizoma Coptidis, 1, 105
Fructus Ammi Visnagae, 3, 23              Folium cum Flore Crataegi, 2, 66
Herba Andrographidis, 2, 12               Stigma Croci, 3, 126
Fructus Anethi, 3, 33                     Semen Cucurbitae, 4, 83
Radix Angelicae Sinensis, 2, 25           Rhizoma Curcumae Longae, 1, 115
Aetheroleum Anisi, 3, 42                  Folium Cynarae, 4, 92
Fructus Anisi, 3, 53
Semen Armeniacae, 3, 64                   E
Flos Arnicae, 3, 77                       Radix Echinaceae, 1, 125
Radix Astragali, 1, 50                    Herba Echinaceae Purpureae, 1, 136
Folium Azadirachti, 3, 88                 Radix Eleutherococci, 2, 83
Oleum Azadriachti, 3, 102                 Herba Ephedrae, 1, 145
                                          Aetheroleum Eucalypti, 2, 97
B                                         Folium Eucalypti, 2, 106
Cortex Berberidis, 4, 30
Gummi Boswellii, 4, 48                    F
Fructus Bruceae, 1, 59                    Fructus Foeniculi, 3, 136
Radix Bupleuri, 1, 67                     Cortex Frangulae, 2, 114

C                                         G
Flos Calendulae, 2, 35                    Radix Gentianae Luteae, 3, 150
Semen Cardamomi, 4, 61                    Radix Gentianae Scabrae, 3, 160

                                                                             395
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Folium Ginkgo, 1, 154                     Testa Plantaginis, 3, 268
Radix Ginseng, 1, 168                     Radix Platycodi, 1, 213
Radix Glycyrrhizae, 1, 183                Cortex Pruni Africanae, 2, 246
Cortex Granati, 4, 108
Pericarpium Granati, 4, 117               R
Folium Guavae, 4, 127                     Radix Rauwolﬁae, 1, 221
Gummi Gugguli, 3, 169                     Radix Rehmanniae, 3, 286
                                          Cortex Rhamni Purshianae, 2, 259
H                                         Rhizoma Rhei, 1, 231
Folium et Cortex Hamamelidis, 2, 124      Oleum Ricini, 4, 271
Radix Harpagophyti, 3, 182                Aetheroleum Rosmarini, 4, 284
Semen Hippocastani, 2, 137                Folium Rosmarini, 4, 294
Rhizoma Hydrastis, 3, 194
Herba Hyperici, 2, 149                    S
                                          Cortex Salicis, 4, 309
I                                         Flos Sambuci, 2, 269
Radix Ipecacuanhae, 3, 204                Fructus Schisandrae, 3, 296
Lichen Islandicus, 4, 140
                                          Radix Scutellariae, 3, 314
L                                         Radix Senegae, 2, 276
Aetheroleum Lavandulae, 3, 219            Folium Sennae, 1, 241
Flos Lavandulae, 3, 229                   Fructus Sennae, 1, 250
Strobilus Lupuli, 3, 236                  Fructus Serenoae Repentis, 2, 285
                                          Fructus Silybi Mariae, 2, 300
M
Fructus Macrocarponii, 4, 149             T
Cortex Magnoliae, 4, 167                  Herba Tanaceti Parthenii, 2, 317
Aetheroleum Melaleucae Alternifoliae,     Radix cum herba Taraxaci, 3, 328
   2, 172                                 Herba Thymi, 1, 259
Folium Melissae, 2, 180                   Fructus Tribuli, 4, 323
Aetheroleum Menthae Piperitae, 2, 188     Flos Trifolii, 4, 335
Folium Menthae Piperitae, 2, 199          Semen Trigonellae foenugraeci, 3, 338
Herba Millefolii, 4, 179
Fructus Momordicae, 4, 192                U
Gummi Myrrha, 3, 247                      Cortex Uncariae, 3, 349
Fructus Myrtilli, 4, 210                  Ramulus cum Uncis Uncariae, 4, 353
                                          Radix Urticae, 2, 329
O                                         Folium Uvae Ursi, 2, 342
Folium Ocimi Sancti, 2, 206
Oleum Oenotherae Biennis, 2, 217          V
                                          Herba Valerianae, 1, 267
P                                         Cortex Viburni Prunifolii, 4, 364
Radix Paeoniae, 1, 195
Radix Panacis Quinquefolii, 4, 226        W
Herba Passiﬂorae, 3, 257                  Radix Withaniae, 4, 373
Cortex Phellodendron, 4, 244
Rhizoma Picrorhizae, 4, 258               Z
Rhizoma Piperis Methystici, 2, 231        Rhizoma Zingiberis, 1, 277
Semen Plantaginis, 1, 202                 Fructus Zizyphi, 3, 359

396
                             Annex 3
                        Cumulative index
        (in alphabetical order of plant material of interest)




For the convenience of users of Volume 4, the monographs described in
Volumes 1, 2 and 3 are also listed in this index. The numbers printed in
bold type, preceding the page numbers, indicate the volume number in
which the indexed item is to be found. Monographs are listed in alpha-
betical order of the plant material of interest.


Aetheroleum                             Viburni Prunifolii, 4, 364
  Anisi, 3, 42
  Eucalypti, 2, 97                   Dried juice of the leaves
  Lavandulae, 3, 219                   Aloe, 1, 33
  Melaleucae Alternifoliae, 2, 172
                                     Flore
  Menthae Piperitae, 2, 188
                                        Crataegi, 2, 66 (see also Folium)
  Rosmarini, 4, 284
Bulbus                               Flos
  Allii Cepae, 1, 5                     Arnicae, 3, 77
  Allii Sativi, 1, 16                   Calendulae, 2, 35
                                        Carthami, 3, 114
Cortex                                  Caryophylli, 2, 45
  Berberidis, 4, 30                     Chamomillae, 1, 86
  Cinnamomi, 1, 95                      Lavandulae, 3, 229
  Frangulae, 2, 114                     Sambuci, 2, 269
  Granati, 4, 108                       Trifolii, 4, 335
  Hamamelidis, 2, 124 (see also
  Folium)                            Folium
  Magnoliae, 4, 167                    Azadirachti, 3, 88
  Phellodendron, 4, 244                Crataegi, 2, 66 (see also Flore)
  Pruni Africanae, 2, 246              Cynarae, 4, 92
  Rhamni Purshianae, 2, 259            Eucalypti, 2, 106
  Salicis, 4, 309                      Ginkgo, 1, 154
  Uncariae, 3, 349                     Guavae, 4, 127

                                                                     397
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


   Hamamelidis, 2, 124 (see also              Passiﬂorae, 3, 257
   Cortex)                                    Tanaceti Parthenii, 2, 317
   Melissae, 2, 180                           Taraxaci, 3, (see also Radix) 328
   Menthae Piperitae, 2, 199                  Thymi, 1, 259
   Ocimi Sancti, 2, 206                       Valerianae, 1, 267
   Rosmarini, 4, 294
   Sennae, 1, 241                         Lichen
   Uvae Ursi, 2, 342                         Islandicus, 4, 140

Fructus                                   Oleum
   Agni Casti, 4, 9                         Azadriachti, 3, 102
   Ammi Majoris, 3, 9                       Oenotherae Biennis, 2, 217
   Ammi Visnagae, 3, 23                     Ricini, 4, 271
   Anethi, 3, 33
                                          Pericarpium
   Anisi, 3, 53
                                             Granati, 4, 117
   Bruceae, 1, 59
   Chebulae, 4, 71                        Radix
   Foeniculi, 3, 136                        Althaeae, 2, 5
   Macrocarponii, 4, 149                    Angelicae Sinensis, 2, 25
   Momordicae, 4, 192                       Astragali, 1, 50
   Myrtilli, 4, 210                         Bupleuri, 1, 67
   Schisandrae, 3, 296                      Echinaceae, 1, 125
   Sennae, 1, 250                           Eleutherococci, 2, 83
   Serenoae Repentis, 2, 285                Gentianae Luteae, 3, 150
   Silybi Mariae, 2, 300                    Gentianae Scabrae, 3, 160
   Tribuli, 4, 323                          Ginseng, 1, 168
   Zizyphi, 3, 359                          Glycyrrhizae, 1, 183
Gel                                         Harpagophyti, 3, 182
  Aloe Vera, 1, 43                          Ipecacuanhae, 3, 204
                                            Paeoniae, 1, 195
Gummi                                       Panacis Quinquefolii, 4, 226
  Boswellii, 4, 48                          Platycodi, 1, 213
  Gugguli, 3, 169                           Rauwolﬁae, 1, 221
  Myrrha, 3, 247                            Rehmanniae, 3, 283
                                            Scutellariae, 3, 314
Herba                                       Senegae, 2, 276
  Andrographidis, 2, 12                     Taraxaci, 3, (see also Herba) 328
  Centellae, 1, 77                          Urticae, 2, 329
  Echinaceae Purpureae, 1, 136              Withaniae, 4, 373
  Ephedrae, 1, 145
  Hyperici, 2, 149                        Ramulus
  Millefolii, 4, 179                        Uncariae, 4, 353 (see also Uncis)

398
                                                              Annex 3


Rhizoma                             Hippocastani, 2, 137
  Cimicifugae Racemosae, 2, 55      Plantaginis, 1, 202
  Coptidis, 1, 105                  Trigonellae Foenugraeci, 3, 338
  Curcumae Longae, 1, 115
  Hydrastis, 3, 194              Stigma
  Picrorhizae, 4, 258               Croci, 3, 126
  Piperis Methystici, 2, 231        Strobilus
  Rhei, 1, 231                      Lupuli, 3, 236
  Zingiberis, 1, 277             Testa
Semen                               Plantaginis, 3, 268
  Armeniacae, 3, 64              Uncis
  Cardamomi, 4, 61                 Uncariae, 4, 353 (see also Ramulus)
  Cucurbitae, 4, 83




                                                                  399
                               Annex 4
             Cumulative index of medicinal plants
      (in alphabetical order of Latin binomial plant name)




For the convenience of users of Volume 4, the medicinal plants described
in Volumes 1, 2, and 3 are also listed in this index. The plants are listed in
alphabetical order of their Latin binomial name along with the family
they belong to in square brackets. The speciﬁc monograph(s) in which the
plant is deﬁned is listed next to the white bullet. The numbers printed in
bold type, preceding the page numbers, indicate the volume number in
which the monograph is found.



A                                       Ammi visnaga (L.) Lam. [Apiaceae]
Achillea millefolium L. [Asteraceae]        º Fructus Ammi Visnagae, 3, 23
    º Herba Millefolii, 4, 179          Andrographis paniculata (Burm. f.)
Aesculus hippocastanum L.                  Nees [Acanthaceae]
   [Hippocastanaceae]                       º Herba Andrographidis, 2, 12
    º Semen Hippocastani, 2, 137        Anethum graveolens L. [Apiaceae]
Allium cepa L. [Liliaceae]                  º Fructus Anethi, 3, 33
    º Bulbus Allii Cepae, 1, 5          Angelica sinensis (Oliv.) Diels
Allium sativum L. [Liliaceae]              [Apiaceae]
    º Bulbus Allii Sativi, 1, 16            º Radix Angelicae Sinensis, 2, 25
Aloe ferox Mill. and its hybrid with    Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng.
   A. africana Mill. and A. spicata        [Ericaceae]
   Baker [Liliaceae]                        º Folium Uvae Ursi, 2, 342
    º Aloe, 1, 33                       Arnica montana L. [Asteraceae]
Aloe vera (L.) Burm. f. [Liliaceae]         º Flos Arnicae, 3, 77
    º Aloe, 1, 33                       Astragalus membranaceus (Fisch.)
    º Aloe Vera Gel, 1, 43                 Bunge [Fabaceae]
Althaea ofﬁcinalis L. [Malvaceae]           º Radix Astragali, 1, 50
    º Radix Althaeae, 2, 5              Astragalus mongholicus Bunge
Ammi majus L. [Apiaceae]                   [Fabaceae]
    º Fructus Ammi Majoris, 3, 9            º Radix Astragali, 1, 50

400
                                                                  Annex 4


Azadirachta indica A. Juss.            Chamomilla recutita (L.) Rauschert
  [Meliaceae]                            [Asteraceae]
   º Folium Azadirachti, 3, 88             º Flos Chamomillae, 1, 86
   º Oleum Azadirachti, 3, 102         Cimicifuga racemosa (L.) Nutt.
                                         [Ranunculaceae]
B
                                           º Rhizoma Cimicifugae
Berberis vulgaris L. [Berberidaceae]         Racemosae, 2, 55
    º Cortex Berberidis, 4, 30         Cinnamomum cassia Blume
Boswellia serrata Roxb. ex Colebr.       [Lauraceae]
   [Burseraceae]
                                           º Cortex Cinnamomi, 1, 95
    º Gummi Boswellii, 4, 48           Cinnamomum verum J.S. Presl.
Brucea javanica (L.) Merr.
                                         [Lauraceae]
   [Simaroubaceae]
                                           º Cortex Cinnamomi, 1, 95
    º Fructus Bruceae, 1, 59           Commiphora molmol Engler
Bupleurum falcatum L. [Apiaceae]
                                         [Burseraceae]
    º Radix Bupleuri, 1, 67
Bupleurum falcatum L. var.                 º Gummi Myrrha, 3, 247
                                       Commiphora mukul (Hook. ex
   scorzonerifolium (Willd.)
                                         Stocks) Engl. [Burseraceae]
   Ledeb. [Apiaceae]
                                           º Gummi Gugguli, 3, 169
    º Radix Bupleuri, 1, 67            Coptis chinensis Franch
C                                        [Ranunculaceae]
Calendula ofﬁcinalis L. [Asteraceae]       º Rhizoma Coptidis, 1, 105
    º Flos Calendulae, 2, 35           Coptis deltoides C.Y. Cheng et
Carthamus tinctorius L.                  Hsiao [Ranunculaceae]
  [Asteraceae]                             º Rhizoma Coptidis, 1, 105
    º Flos Carthami, 3, 114            Coptis japonica Makino
Cassia senna L. [Fabaceae]               [Ranunculaceae]
    º Folium Sennae, 1, 241                º Rhizoma Coptidis, 1, 105
    º Fructus Sennae, 1, 250           Crataegus laevigata (Poir.) DC
Centella asiatica (L.) Urban.            [Rosaceae]
  [Apiaceae]                               º Folium cum Flore Crataegi,
    º Herba Centellae, 1, 77                 2, 66
Cephaelis acuminata (Benth.)           Crataegus monogyna Jacq. (Lindm)
  Karst. [Rubiaceae]                     [Rosaceae]
    º Radix Ipecacuanhae, 3, 204           º Folium cum Flore Crataegi,
Cephaelis ipecacuanha (Brot.) A.             2, 66
  Rich. [Rubiaceae]                    Crocus sativus L. [Iridaceae]
    º Radix Ipecacuanhae, 3, 204           º Stigma Croci, 3, 126
Cetraria islandica (L.) Acharius       Cucurbita pepo L.
  s.1. [Parmeliaceae]                    [Cucurbitaceae]
    º Lichen Islandicus, 4, 140          º Semen Cucurbitae, 4, 83

                                                                     401
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Curcuma longa L. [Zingiberaceae]          Gentiana scabra Bunge
   º Rhizoma Curcumae Longae,               [Gentianaceae]
     1, 115                                  º Radix Gentianae Scabrae, 3,
Cynara cardunculus L. [Asteraceae]             160
   º Folium Cynarae, 4, 92                Ginkgo biloba L. [Ginkgoaceae]
                                             º Folium Ginkgo, 1, 154
E                                         Glycyrrhiza glabra L.
Echinacea angustifolia D.C. var.            [Fabaceae]
   angustifolia [Asteraceae]
                                             º Radix Glycyrrhizae, 1, 183
     º Radix Echinaceae, 1, 125           Glycyrrhiza uralensis Fisch.
Echinacea angustifolia D.C. var.            [Fabaceae]
   strigosa McGregor [Asteraceae]
                                             º Radix Glycyrrhizae, 1, 183
     º Radix Echinaceae, 1, 125
Echinacea pallida (Nutt.) Nutt.           H
   [Asteraceae]                           Hamamelis virginiana L.
     º Radix Echinaceae, 1, 125             [Hamamelidaceae]
Echinacea purpurea (L.) Moench
                                              º Folium et Cortex Hamame-
   [Asteraceae]                                 lidis, 2, 124
     º Herba Echinaceae Purpu-            Harpagophytum procumbens DC.
       reae, 1, 136                         ex Meiss. [Pedaliaceae]
Elettaria cardamomum (L.) Maton
                                              º Radix Harpagophyti, 3, 182
   [Zingiberaceae]                        Humulus lupulus L.
     º Semen Cardamomi, 4, 61               [Cannabaceae]
Eleutherococcus senticosus (Rupr.
                                              º Strobilus Lupuli, 3, 236
   & Maxim.) Maxim. [Araliaceae]
                                          Hydrastis canadensis L. [Ranuncu-
     º Radix Eleutherococci, 2, 83          laceae]
Ephedra sinica Stapf [Ephedraceae]
                                              º Rhizoma Hydrastis, 3, 194
     º Herba Ephedrae, 1, 145             Hypericum perforatum L.
Eucalyptus globulus Labill
                                            [Clusiaceae]
   [Myrtaceae]
                                              º Herba Hyperici, 2, 149
     º Aetheroleum Eucalypti, 2, 97
     º Folium Eucalypti, 2, 106           L
F                                         Lavandula intermedia Loisel
Foeniculum vulgare Mill.                    [Lamiaceae]
   [Apiaceae]                                º Aetheroleum Lavandulae, 3,
                                               219
    º Fructus Foeniculi, 3, 136
                                          Lavandula angustifolia Mill.
G                                           [Lamiaceae]
Gentiana lutea L. [Gentianaceae]             º Aetheroleum Lavandulae, 3,
   º Radix Gentianae Luteae, 3,                219
     150                                     º Flos Lavandulae, 3, 229

402
                                                                      Annex 4


M                                       Panax ginseng C.A. Meyer
Magnolia obovata Thunberg.                 [Araliaceae]
  [Magnoliaceae]                             º Radix Ginseng, 1, 168
    º Cortex Magnoliae, 4, 167          Panax quinquefolius L. [Araliaceae]
Magnolia ofﬁcinalis Rehder and               º Radix Panacis Quinquefolii,
  Wilson [Magnoliaceae]                        4, 226
    º Cortex Magnoliae, 4, 167          Passiﬂora incarnata L. [Passiﬂoraceae]
Magnolia ofﬁcinalis Rehder and               º Herba Passiﬂorae, 3, 257
  Wilson var. biloba Rehder and         Phellodendron amurense Rupr.
  Wilson [Magnoliaceae]                    [Rutaceae]
    º Cortex Magnoliae, 4, 167               º Cortex Phellodendron, 4, 244
Melaleuca alternifolia (Maiden and      Phellodendron chinense Schneid.
  Betche) Cheel [Myrtaceae]                [Rutaceae]
   º Aetheroleum Melaleucae                  º Cortex Phellodendron, 4, 244
      Alternifoliae, 2, 172             Picrorhiza kurrooa Royle
Melissa ofﬁcinalis L.                      [Scrophulariaceae]
  [Lamiaceae]                                º Rhizoma Picrorhizae, 4, 258
   º Folium Melissae, 2, 180            Pimpinella anisum L. [Apiaceae]
Mentha x piperita L. [Lamiaceae]             º Aetheroleum Anisi, 3, 42
   º Aetheroleum Menthae Pip-                º Fructus Anisi, 3, 53
      eritae, 2, 188                    Piper methysticum G. Forst.
   º Folium Menthae Piperitae, 2,          [Piperaceae]
      199                                    º Rhizoma Piperis Methystici,
Momordica charantia L.                         2, 231
  [Cucurbitaceae]                       Plantago afra L. [Plantaginaceae]
   º Fructus Momordicae, 4, 192              º Semen Plantaginis, 1, 202
                                        Plantago asiatica L. [Plantaginaceae]
N
                                             º Semen Plantaginis, 1, 202
Neopicrorhiza scrophulariiﬂora          Plantago indica L. [Plantaginaceae]
  Hong [Scrophulariaceae]
                                             º Semen Plantaginis, 1, 202
   º Rhizoma Picrorhizae, 4, 258        Plantago ovata Forsk. [Plantagin-
O                                          aceae]
Ocimum sanctum L. [Lamiaceae]                º Semen Plantaginis, 1, 202
   º Folium Ocimi Sancti, 2, 206             º Testa Plantaginis, 3, 268
Oenothera biennis L. [Onagraceae]       Platycodon grandiﬂorum (Jacq.) A.
                                           DC. [Campanulaceae]
   º Oleum Oenotherae Biennis,
     2, 217                                  º Radix Platycodi, 1, 213
                                        Polygala senega L. [Polygalaceae]
P                                            º Radix Senegae, 2, 276
Paeonia lactiﬂora Pallas [Paeonaceae]   Polygala senega L. var. latifolia
    º Radix Paeoniae, 1, 195               Torrey et Gray [Polygalaceae]

                                                                          403
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


    º Radix Senegae, 2, 276                   º Aetheroleum Rosmarini, 4,
Prunus africana (Hook. f.)                      284
   Kalkman [Rosaceae]                         º Folium Rosmarini, 4, 294
    º Cortex Pruni Africanae, 2,
      246                                 S
Prunus armeniaca L. [Rosaceae]            Salix alba L. [Salicaceae]
    º Semen Armeniacae, 3, 64                 º Cortex Salicis, 4, 309
Prunus armeniaca L. var. ansu Max-        Salix daphnoides Vill. [Salicaceae]
   im. or allied species [Rosaceae]           º Cortex Salicis, 4, 309
    º Semen Armeniacae, 3, 64             Salix fragilis L. [Salicaceae]
Psidium guajava L. [Myrtaceae]                º Cortex Salicis, 4, 309
    º Folium Guavae, 4, 127               Salix purpurea L. [Salicaceae]
Punica granatum L. [Lythraceae]               º Cortex Salicis, 4, 309
    º Cortex Granati, 4, 108              Sambucus nigra L. [Caprifoliaceae]
    º Pericarpium Granati, 4, 117             º Flos Sambuci, 2, 269
                                          Schisandra chinensis (Turcz.) Baill.
R
                                             [Schisandraceae]
Rauvolﬁa serpentina (L.) Benth. ex
   Kurz [Apocynaceae]                         º Fructus Schisandrae, 3, 296
                                          Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi
    º Radix Rauwolﬁae, 1, 221
Rehmannia glutinosa Libosch.                 [Lamiaceae]
   [Scrophulariaceae]                         º Radix Scutellariae, 3, 314
                                          Serenoa repens (Bartr.) Small.
    º Radix Rehmanniae, 3, 283
Rehmannia glutinosa Libosch. var.            [Arecaceae]
   purpurea Makino [Scrophula-                º Fructus Serenoae Repentis,
   riaceae]                                      2, 285
    º Radix Rehmanniae, 3, 283            Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn.
Rhamnus frangula L. [Rhamnaceae]             [Asteraceae]
    º Cortex Frangulae, 2, 114                º Fructus Silybi Mariae, 2, 300
Rhamnus purshiana D.C.                    Syzygium aromaticum (L.) Merrill
   [Rhamnaceae]                              et L.M. Perry [Myrtaceae]
    º Cortex Rhamni Purshianae,               º Flos Caryophylli, 2, 45
      2, 259
Rheum ofﬁcinale Baill.                    T
   [Polygonaceae]                         Tanacetum parthenium (L.) Schultz
    º Rhizoma Rhei, 1, 231                   Bip. [Asteraceae]
Rheum palmatum L. [Polygonaceae]              º Herba Tanaceti Parthenii, 2,
    º Rhizoma Rhei, 1, 231                      317
Ricinus communis L. [Euphorbi-            Taraxacum ofﬁcinale Weber ex
   aceae]                                    Wiggers [Asteraceae]
    º Oleum Ricini, 4, 271                    º Radix cum Herba Taraxaci,
Rosmarinus ofﬁcinalis L. [Lamiaceae]            3, 328

404
                                                                    Annex 4


Terminalia chebula Retz. [Com-           º Ramulus cum Uncis Uncari-
   bretaceae]                              ae, 4, 353
    º Fructus Chebulae, 4, 71        Uncaria tomentosa (Willd.) DC.
Terminalia chebula Retz. var. to-      [Rubiaceae]
   mentella Kurt. [Combretaceae]         º Cortex Uncariae, 3, 349
    º Fructus Chebulae, 4, 71        Urtica dioica L. [Urticaceae]
Thymus vulgaris L. [Lamiaceae]           º Radix Urticae, 2, 329
    º Herba Thymi, 1, 259            Urtica urens L. [Urticaceae]
Thymus zygis L. [Lamiaceae]              º Radix Urticae, 2, 329
    º Herba Thymi, 1, 259
Tribulus terrestris L.               V
   [Zygophyllaceae]                  Vaccinium macrocarpon Ait.
                                        [Ericaceae]
    º Fructus Tribuli, 4, 323
Trifolium pratense L. [Fabaceae]         º Fructus Macrocarponii, 4, 149
                                     Vaccinium myrtillus L. [Ericaceae]
    º Flos Trifolii, 4, 335
Trigonella foenum-graecum L.             º Fructus Myrtilli, 4, 210
   [Fabaceae]                        Valeriana ofﬁcinalis L. [Valerianaceae]
    º Semen Trigonellae Foenu-           º Radix Valerianae, 1, 267
       graeci, 3, 338                Viburnum prunifolium L.
                                        [Caprifoliaceae]
U                                        º Cortex Viburni Prunifolii, 4,
Uncaria hirsuta Havil. [Rubiaceae]         364
                                     Vitex agnus-castus L. [Lamiaceae]
   º Ramulus cum Uncis Uncari-
     ae, 4, 353                          º Fructus Agni Casti, 4, 9
Uncaria macrophylla Wall.            W
  [Rubiaceae]                        Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal.
   º Ramulus cum Uncis Uncari-         [Solanaceae]
     ae, 4, 353
                                        º Radix Withaniae, 4, 373
Uncaria rhynchophylla (Miq.)
  Jacks [Rubiaceae]                  Z
   º Ramulus cum Uncis Uncari-       Zingiber ofﬁcinale Roscoe
     ae, 4, 353                         [Zingiberaceae]
Uncaria sessilifructus Roxb.             º Rhizoma Zingiberis, 1, 277
  [Rubiaceae]                        Zizyphus jujuba Mill. [Rhamnaceae]
   º Ramulus cum Uncis Uncari-           º Fructus Zizyphi, 3, 359
     ae, 4, 353                      Zizyphus jujuba var. inermis Rehd.
Uncaria sinensis (Oliv.) Havil.         [Rhamnaceae]
  [Rubiaceae]                            º Fructus Zizyphi, 3, 359




                                                                        405
                                      Annex 5
         Cumulative index of major chemical constituents
            (by compound name in alphabetical order)




Cumulative index of major chemical compounds whose chemical structure
drawings were presented in four volumes of WHO monographs on se-
lected medicinal plants
Names are classiﬁed in alphabetical order. Some of the names are consid-
ered as synonyms, they are followed by the name of the “leading name”.
CAS RN is the number of the compound in the Chemical Abstracts Ser-
vice database.
Mol. form. is the molecular formula.
Volume number (in bold) of the WHO monographs on selected medici-
nal plants is given followed by __ and the page within the volume, where
one can ﬁnd the structure of the compound.
The corresponding monograph name is given in the last column.


Name                    CAS RN        Mol. form.       Volume Monograph name
acetoxyvalerenic acid    84638-55-1   C-17 H-24 O-4    1_271   Radix Valerianae
3-O-acetyl-11-oxo-       67416-61-9   C-32 H-48 O-5    4_51    Gummi Boswellii
B-boswellic acid
3-O-acetyl-B-            5968-70-7    C-32 H-50 O-4    4_51    Gummi Boswellii
boswellic acid
3-O-acetyl-A-            89913-60-0   C-32 H-50 O-4    4_51    Gummi Boswellii
boswellic acid
4-acetylguaiacol (see apocynine)
2´-O-acetylsalicortin                 C-22 H-26 O-11   4_312   Cortex Salicis
acevaltrate              25161-41-5   C-24 H-32 O-10   1_271   Radix Valerianae
achillicin               71616-00-7   C-17 H-22 O-5    4_184   Herba Millefolii
acintene A (see A-pinene)
actein                   18642-44-9   C-37 H-56 O-11   2_58    Rhizoma Cimicifugae
                                                               Racemosae
acteol                  27208-74-8    C-30 H-46 O-6    2_58    Rhizoma Cimicifugae
                                                               Racemosae
adhyperforin            143183-63-5 C-36 H-54 O-4      2_153   Herba Hyperici


406
                                                                                  Annex 5


Name                     CAS RN         Mol. form.         Volume Monograph name
aesculetin (see esculetin)
agnuside                   11027-63-7   C-22 H-26 O-11     4_13     Fructus Agni Casti
ailanthinone               53683-73-1   C-25 H-34 O-9      1_62     Fructus Bruceae
(E)-ajoene                 92284-99-6   C-9 H-14 O S-3     1_19     Bulbus Alli Sativi
(Z)-ajoene                 92285-00-2   C-9 H-14 O S-3     1_19     Bulbus Alli Sativi
ajugol                     52949-83-4   C-15 H-24 O-9      3_286    Radix Rehmanniae
alizarine yellow (see ellagic acid)
allicin                    539-86-6     C-6 H-10 O S-2     1_19     Bulbus Alli Sativi
alliin                     556-27-4     C-6 H-11 N O-3 S   1_19     Bulbus Alli Sativi
aloe-emodin                481-72-1     C-15 H-10 O-5      1_234    Rhizoma Rhei
aloin A                    1415-73-2    C-21 H-22 O-9      1_37;    Aloe
                                                           2_262    Cortex Rhamni
                                                                    Purshianae
aloin B                  28371-16-6     C-21 H-22 O-9      1_37;    Aloe
                                                           2_262    Cortex Rhamni
                                                                    Purshianae
aloinoside A             56645-88-6     C-27 H-32 O-13     1_37     Aloe
aloinoside B             11006-91-0     C-27 H-32 O-13     1_37     Aloe
alphanon (see camphor)
alphitolic acid          19533-92-7     C-30 H-48 O-4      3_362    Fructus Zizyphi
amarine (see cucurbitacin B)
amarogentin              21018-84-8     C-29 H-30 O-13     3_153;   Radix Gentianae
                                                                    Luteae
                                                           3_162    Radix Gentianae
                                                                    Scabrae
amentoﬂavone             1617-53-4      C-30 H-18 O-10     1_157;   Folium Ginkgo
                                                           4_369    Cortex Viburni
                                                                    Prunifolii
ammidin (see imperatorin)
ammiol                  668-10-0        C-14 H-12 O-6      3_26     Fructus Ammi
                                                                    Visnagae
ammoidin (see xanthotoxin)
amygdalin              29883-15-6       C-21 H-27 N O-11 3_66       Semen Armenicae
A-amyrin               638-95-9         C-30 H-50 O      2_272      Flos Sambuci
andrographiside        82209-76-5       C-26 H-40 O-10   2_15       Herba
                                                                    Andrographidis
andrographolide          5508-58-7      C-20 H-30 O-5      2_15     Herba
                                                                    Andrographidis
andropanoside            82209-72-1     C-26 H-40 O-9      2_15     Herba
                                                                    Andrographidis
trans-anethole           4180-23-8      C-10 H-12 O        3_44;    Aetheroleum Anisi
                                                           3_56;    Fructus Anisi
                                                           3_139    Fructus Foeniculi
angelicide               92935-94-9     C-24 H-28 O-4      2_28     Radix Angelicae
                                                                    Sinensis


                                                                                         407
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Name                    CAS RN         Mol. form.        Volume Monograph name
angelicone              37719-98-5     C-16 H-16 O-5     2_28     Radix Angelicae
                                                                  Sinensis
angelol G               83199-38-6     C-20 H-24 O-7     2_28     Radix Angelicae
                                                                  Sinensis
p-anisaldehyde          123-11-5       C-8 H-8 O-2       3_44;    Aetheroleum Anisi
                                                         3_56;    Fructus Anisi
                                                         3_139    Fructus Foeniculi
apigenin                 520-36-5      C-15 H-10 O-5     1_89     Flos Chamomillae
apocynine                498-02-2      C-9 H-10 O-3      4_262    Rhizoma Picrorhizae
arasaponin E1 (see ginsenoside Rb1)
arbutin                  497-76-7      C-12 H-16 O-7     2_345    Folium Uvae Ursi
artecanin                29431-84-3    C-15 H-18 O-5     2_320    Herba Tanaceti
                                                                  Parthenii
asiatic acid             464-92-6      C-30 H-48 O-5     1_80     Herba Centellae
asiaticoside             16830-15-2 C-48 H-78 O-19       1_80     Herba Centellae
asterin (see cyanidin 3-monoglucoside)
astragalin               480-10-4      C-21 H-20 O-11    2_39     Flos Calendulae
astragaloglucans                                         1_53     Radix Astragali
astragaloside I          84680-75-1 C-45 H-72 O-16       1_53     Radix Astragali
astragaloside II         84676-89-1 C-43 H-70 O-15       1_53     Radix Astragali
astragaloside III        84687-42-3 C-41 H-68 O-14       1_53     Radix Astragali
astragaloside IV         84687-43-4 C-41 H-68 O-14       1_53     Radix Astragali
astragaloside V          84687-44-5 C-47 H-78 O-19       1_53     Radix Astragali
astragaloside VI         84687-45-6 C-47 H-78 O-19       1_53     Radix Astragali
astragaloside VII        84687-46-7 C-47 H-78 O-19       1_53     Radix Astragali
aucubin                  479-98-1      C-15 H-22 O-9     3_286;   Radix Rehmanniae
                                                         4_13;    Fructus Agni Casti
                                                         4_262    Rhizoma Picrorhizae
aucubin p-hydroxybenzoate (see agnuside)
azadirachtin          11141-17-6 C-35 H-44 O-16          3_91;    Folium Azadirachti
                                                         3_104    Oleum Azadirachti
baicalein                 491-67-8     C-15 H-10 O-5     3_316    Radix Scutellariae
baicalin                  21967-41-9   C-21 H-18 O-11    3_316    Radix Scutellariae
baichanin A (see genistein)
baldrinal                 18234-46-3   C-12 H-10 O-4     1_271    Radix Valerianae
barbaloin (see aloin)
barringtogenol C          13844-01-4   C-30 H-50 O-5     2_140    Semen Hippocastani
bellaradine (see cuscohygrine)
benzoaric acid (see ellagic acid)
berbamine                 478-61-5     C-37 H-40 N-2 O-6 4_33     Cortex Berberidis
berbericinine (see palmatine)
berberine                 2086-83-1    C-20 H-18 N O-4   1_109;   Rhizoma Coptidis
                                                         3_197;   Rhizoma Hydrastis



408
                                                                                   Annex 5


Name                     CAS RN        Mol. form.            Volume Monograph name
                                                             4_33;    Cortex Berberidis
                                                             4_247    Cortex Phellodendron
bergapten                484-20-8      C-12 H-8 O-4          3_12     Fructus Ammi
                                                                      Majoris
betulinic acid            472-15-1    C-30 H-48 O-3          3_362    Fructus Zizyphi
I3´,II8-biapigenin (see amentoﬂavone)
2,2´-bichavicol (see magnolol)
bilobalide                33570-04-6 C-14 H-16 O-8           1_157    Folium Ginkgo
bilobetin                 521-32-4    C-31 H-20 O-10         1_157    Folium Ginkgo
biochanin A               491-80-5    C-16 H-12 O-5          4_338    Flos Trifolii
biochanin B (see formononetin)
(-)-A-bisabolol           23089-26-1 C-15 H-26 O             1_89     Flos Chamomillae
bisdesmetho-              33171-05-0 C-19 H-16 O-4           1_118    Rhizoma Curcumae
xycurcumin                                                            Longae
2-bornanone (see camphor)
borneol                   507-70-0    C-10 H-18 O            4_286;   Aetheroleum
                                                                      Rosmarini
                                                             4_297    Folium Rosmarini
bornyl acetate            20347-65-3 C-12 H-20 O-2           1_271    Radix Valerianae
bornyl isovalerate        76-50-6      C-15 H-26 O-2         1_271    Radix Valerianae
A-boswellic acid          471-66-9     C-30 H-48 O-3         4_51     Gummi Boswellii
A-boswellic acid acetate (see 3-O-acetyl-A-boswellic acid)
B-boswellic acid          631-69-6     C-30 H-48 O-3         4_51     Gummi Boswellii
B-boswellic acid acetate (see 3-O-acetyl-B-boswellic acid)
bruceantin                41451-75-6 C-28 H-36 O-11          1_62     Fructus Bruceae
brucein A                 25514-31-2 C-26 H-34 O-11          1_62     Fructus Bruceae
brucein B                 25514-29-8 C-23 H-28 O-11          1_62     Fructus Bruceae
brucein C                 25514-30-1 C-28 H-36 O-13          1_62     Fructus Bruceae
brucein D                 21499-66-1 C-20 H-26 O-9           1_62     Fructus Bruceae
brusatol                  14907-98-3 C-26 H-32 O-12          1_62     Fructus Bruceae
buddlejoside A (see agnuside)
(Z)-butylidenephtalide 551-08-6        C-12 H-12 O-2         2_28     Radix Angelicae
                                                                      Sinensis
B-cadinene               523-47-7      C-15 H-24             2_28     Radix Angelicae
                                                                      Sinensis
caffeic acid              331-39-5      C-9 H-8 O-4          4_95     Folium Cynarae
3-caffeoylquinic acid (see chlorogenic acid)
cajeputol (see 1,8-cineole)
calenduloside A           32725-74-9 C-42 H-68 O-13          2_38     Flos Calendulae
calenduloside E           26020-14-4 C-36 H-56 O-9           2_38     Flos Calendulae
calenduloside F           51415-02-2 C-42 H-66 O-14          2_38     Flos Calendulae
calenduloside H           26020-29-1 C-48 H-76 O-19          2_38     Flos Calendulae
camphol (see borneol)
camphor                   76-22-2       C-10 H-16 O          4_184;   Herba Millefolii


                                                                                         409
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Name                    CAS RN         Mol. form.        Volume Monograph name
                                                         4_286;   Aetheroleum
                                                                  Rosmarini
                                                         4_297    Folium Rosmarini
dl-camphor (see camphor)
(+)-(R)-canadine (see B-canadine)
(-)-(S)-canadine (see A-canadine)
A-canadine                5096-57-1    C-20 H-21 N O-4   3_197    Rhizoma Hydrastis
B-canadine                2086-96-6    C-20 H-21 N O-4   3_197    Rhizoma Hydrastis
canin                     24959-84-0   C-15 H-18 O-5     2_320    Herba Tanaceti
                                                                  Parthenii
cannabiscetin (see myricetin)
carnosol                 5957-80-2     C-20 H-26 O-4     4_297    Folium Rosmarini
carthamin                36338-96-2    C-43 H-42 O-22    3_117    Flos Carthami
carvacrol                499-75-2      C-10 H-14 O       1_262;   Herba Thymi
                                                         2_28     Radix Angelicae
                                                                  Sinensis
carvone                  99-49-0       C-10 H-14 O       3_36     Fructus Anethi
caryophyllene (see B-caryophyllene)
A-caryophyllene (see humulene)
B-caryophyllene          87-44-5       C-15 H-24         2_48;    Flos Caryophylli
                                                         2_183;   Folium Melissae
                                                         2_209;   Folium Ocimi Sancti
                                                         4_130;   Folium Guavae
                                                         4_184    Herba Millefolii
cascaroside A           53823-08-8     C-27 H-32 O-14    2_262    Cortex Rhamni
                                                                  Purshianae
cascaroside B           53861-34-0     C-27 H-32 O-14    2_262    Cortex Rhamni
                                                                  Purshianae
cascaroside C           53823-09-9     C-27 H-32 O-13    2_262    Cortex Rhamni
                                                                  Purshianae
cascaroside D           53861-35-1     C-27 H-32 O-13    2_262    Cortex Rhamni
                                                                  Purshianae
cascaroside E           164178-32-9 C-27 H-32 O-14       2_262    Cortex Rhamni
                                                                  Purshianae
cascaroside F           164322-83-2 C-27 H-32 O-14       2_262    Cortex Rhamni
                                                                  Purshianae
casticin                479-91-4       C-19 H-18 O-8     4_13     Fructus Agni Casti
catalpol                2415-24-9      C-15 H-22 O-10    3_286    Radix Rehmanniae
catechin                154-23-4       C-15 H-14 O-6     2_70     Folium cum Flore
                                                                  Crataegi
catechol (see catechin)
cathine (see (+)-norpseudoephedrine)
cembrene                 1898-13-1   C-20 H-32         3_172      Gummi Gugguli
cepaenes                                               1_8        Bulbus Allii Cepae
cephaeline               483-17-0    C-28 H-38 N-2 O-4 3_208      Radix Ipecacuanhae


410
                                                                                 Annex 5


Name                     CAS RN          Mol. form.        Volume Monograph name
ceramides                104404-17-3                       2_333    Radix Urticae
cetraric acid            489-49-6    C-20 H-18 O-9         4_143    Lichen Islandicus
chamazulene              529-05-5    C-14 H-16             1_89;    Flos Chamomillae
                                                           4_184    Herba Millefolii
chebulagic acid          23094-71-5      C-41 H-30 O-27    4_74     Fructus Chebulae
chebulanin               166833-80-3     C-27 H-24 O-19    4_74     Fructus Chebulae
chebulinic acid          18942-26-2      C-41 H-32 O-27    4_74     Fructus Chebulae
chicoric acid            6537-80-0       C-22 H-18 O-12    1_130;   Radix Echinaceae
                                                           1_139    Herba Echinaceae
                                                                    Purpureae
chlorogenic acid         327-97-9        C-16 H-18 O-9     2_272;   Flos Sambuci
                                                           4_95     Folium Cynarae
chrysaloin               73889-54-0      C-21 H-22 O-8     2_262    Cortex Rhamni
                                                                    Purshianae
chrysaloin A (see 11-deoxyaloin)
chrysaloin B (see 11-deoxyaloin)
chrysanthemin (see cyanidin 3-monoglucoside)
chrysophanol              481-74-3   C-15 H-10 O-4         1_234    Rhizoma Rhei
chrysosplenol D           14965-20-9 C-18 H-16 O-8         4_13     Fructus Agni Casti
cichorigenin (see esculetin)
cimicifugoside            66176-93-0 C-37 H-54 O-11        2_58     Rhizoma Cimicifugae
                                                                    Racemosae
cimigenol                3779-59-7       C-30 H-48 O-5     2_58     Rhizoma Cimicifugae
                                                                    Racemosae
cineole (see 1,8-cineole)
1,8-cineole               470-82-6       C-10 H-18 O       2_99;    Aetheroleum
                                                                    Eucalypti
                                                           2_109;   Folium Eucalypti
                                                           2_174;   Aetheroleum
                                                                    Melaleucae
                                                                    Alternifoliae
                                                           3_36;    Fructus Anethi
                                                           4_69;    Semen Cardamomi
                                                           4_184;   Herba Millefolii
                                                           4_286;   Aetheroleum
                                                                    Rosmarini
                                                           4_297    Folium Rosmarini
cinnamaldehyde           104-55-2        C-9 H-8 O         1_99     Cortex Cinnamomi
6´-cinnamoylcatalpol (see picroside I)
citral A (see geranial)
citral b (see neral)
citronellal              106-23-0        C-10 H-18 O       2_183    Folium Melissae
columbamine              3621-36-1       C-20 H-20 N O-4   4_33     Cortex Berberidis
coniferyl ferulate       63644-62-2      C-20 H-20 O-6     2_28     Radix Angelicae
                                                                    Sinensis


                                                                                        411
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Name                    CAS RN         Mol. form.         Volume Monograph name
corynoxeine             630-94-4       C-22 H-26 N-2 O-4 4_356    Ramulus cum Uncis
                                                                  Uncariae
coumarin                  91-64-5      C-9 H-6 O-2        1_99    Cortex Cinnamomi
crocetin (see A-crocetin)
A-crocetin                27876-94-4   C-20 H-24 O-4      3_129   Stigma Croci
B-crocetin                25368-09-6   C-21 H-26 O-4      3_129   Stigma Croci
G-crocetin                5892-54-6    C-22 H-28 O-4      3_129   Stigma Croci
crocin (see A-crocin)
A-crocin                  42553-65-1   C-44 H-64 O-24     3_129   Stigma Croci
B-crocin                  55750-84-0   C-38 H-54 O-19     3_129   Stigma Croci
C-crocin                  55750-85-1   C-32 H-44 O-14     3_129   Stigma Croci
D-crocin                  57710-64-2   C-32 H-44 O-14     3_129   Stigma Croci
E-crocin                  58050-17-2   C-26 H-34 O-9      3_129   Stigma Croci
crocin 2 (see B-crocin)
crocin 3 (see C-crocin)
crocin 4 (see D-crocin)
cucurbitacin B            6199-67-3    C-32 H-46 O-8      4_262   Rhizoma Picrorhizae
cucurbitacin D            3877-86-9    C-30 H-44 O-7      4_262   Rhizoma Picrorhizae
cucurbitacin E            18444-66-1   C-32 H-44 O-8      4_262   Rhizoma Picrorhizae
cucurbitacin F            5939-57-1    C-30 H-46 O-7      4_262   Rhizoma Picrorhizae
cucurbitacin I            2222-07-3    C-30 H-42 O-7      4_262   Rhizoma Picrorhizae
cucurbitacin R            55903-92-9   C-30 H-46 O-7      4_262   Rhizoma Picrorhizae
cucurbitine               6807-92-7    C-5 H-10 N-2 O-2   4_86    Semen Cucurbitae
curcumin                  458-37-7     C-21 H-20 O-6      1_118   Rhizoma Curcumae
                                                                  Longae
curcumin I (see curcumin)
curcumin II (see desmethoxycurcumin)
curcumin III (see bisdesmethoxycurcumin)
curzerene                17910-09-7 C-15 H-20 O           3_250   Gummi Myrrha
curzerenone              20493-56-5 C-15 H-18 O-2         3_250   Gummi Myrrha
cuscohygrine             454-14-8   C-13 H-24 N-2 O       4_376   Radix Withaniae
cyanidin                 528-58-5   C-15 H-11 Cl O-6      4_152   Fructus
                                                                  Macrocarponii
cyanidin                 7084-24-4   C-21 H-21 Cl O-11 4_213      Fructus Myrtilli
3-monoglucoside
cyanidol (see cyanidin)
cyclamin (see malvidin 3-monoglucoside)
p-cymene                 99-87-6     C-10 H-14         3_36       Fructus Anethi
cynarin                  30964-13-7 C-25 H-24 O-12     1_130;     Radix Echinaceae
                                                       4_95       Folium Cynarae
cynaropicrin             35730-78-0 C-19 H-22 O-6      4_95       Folium Cynarae
cynaroside               5373-11-5   C-21 H-20 O-11    4_13;      Fructus Agni Casti
                                                       4_95       Folium Cynarae
daidzein                 486-66-8    C-15 H-10 O-4     4_338      Flos Trifolii


412
                                                                                 Annex 5


Name                      CAS RN       Mol. form.        Volume Monograph name
daidzeol (see daidzein)
daucosterol               474-58-8     C-35 H-60 O-6     2_86;   Radix Eleutherococci
                                                         2_333   Radix Urticae
deacetylnimbin            18609-16-0   C-28 H-34 O-8     3_91;   Folium Azadirachti
                                                         3_104   Oleum Azadirachti
delphinidin              6906-38-3     C-21 H-21 Cl O-12 4_213   Fructus Myrtilli
3-monoglucoside
delphinin (see delphinidin 3-monoglucoside)
demethoxyyangonin        15345-89-8 C-14 H-12 O-3        2_234   Rhizoma Piperis
                                                                 Methystici
(+)-11-deoxyaloin         69980-49-0   C-21 H-22 O-8     2_262   Cortex Rhamni
                                                                 Purshianae
(-)-11-deoxyaloin         18262-45-8   C-21 H-22 O-8     2_262   Cortex Rhamni
                                                                 Purshianae
deoxyschizandrin; wuweizisu A (see schisandrin A)
desacylsenegasaponin A 173557-02-3 C-64 H-102 O-33       2_279   Radix Senegae
desacylsenegin II      163589-51-3 C-59 H-94 O-29        2_279   Radix Senegae
desacylsenegin III     180572-65-0 C-65 H-104 O-33       2_279   Radix Senegae
desmethoxycurcumin 22608-11-3 C-20 H-18 O-5              1_118   Rhizoma Curcumae
                                                                 Longae
diallyl disulﬁde          2179-57-9     C-6 H-10 S-2     1_19    Bulbus Alli Sativi
diallyl trisulﬁde         2050-87-5     C-6 H-10 S-3     1_19    Bulbus Alli Sativi
1,5-dicaffeoylquinic acid (see cynarin)
1,5-dicaffeylquinic acid (see cynarin)
dihydrocarvone            5948-04-9     C-10 H-16 O      3_36    Fructus Anethi
(9E)-4,5-dihydro-         88010-65-5 C-15 H-20 O-2       3_250   Gummi Myrrha
furanodien-6-one
11A,13-dihydro-           34257-95-9 C-15 H-20 O-4       3_80    Flos Arnicae
helenalin
dihydrokawain             587-63-3      C-14 H-16 O-3    2_234   Rhizoma Piperis
                                                                 Methystici
dihydromethysticin        19902-91-1   C-15 H-16 O-5     2_234   Rhizoma Piperis
                                                                 Methystici
3,4-dihydroxycinnamic acid (see caffeic acid)
dimethulene (see chamazulene)
dimethylcrocetin (see G-crocetin)
A-dimorphecolic acid     73543-67-6 C-18 H-32 O-3        2_333   Radix Urticae
docosanol                661-19-8      C-22 H-46 O       2_248   Cortex Pruni
                                                                 Africanae
1-docosanol (see docosanol)
docosyl (E)-ferulate    101927-24-6 C-32 H-54 O-4        2_248   Cortex Pruni
                                                                 Africanae
echinacoside              82854-37-3   C-35 H-46 O-20    1_130   Radix Echinaceae
(+)-echinolone            59440-97-0   C-14 H-24 O-2     1_130   Radix Echinaceae
elatericin B (see cucurbitacin I)



                                                                                    413
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Name                     CAS RN         Mol. form.        Volume Monograph name
elatericine A (see cucurbitacin D)
A-elaterine (see cucurbitacin E)
eleutheroside A (see daucosterol)
eleutheroside B           118-34-3      C-17 H-24 O-9     2_86     Radix Eleutherococci
eleutheroside B1          16845-16-2    C-17 H-20 O-10    2_86     Radix Eleutherococci
eleutheroside B4 (see (+)-sesamin)
eleutheroside C           15486-24-5    C-8 H-16 O-6      2_86     Radix Eleutherococci
eleutheroside D           79484-75-6    C-34 H-46 O-18    2_86     Radix Eleutherococci
eleutheroside E           39432-56-9    C-34 H-46 O-18    2_86     Radix Eleutherococci
eleutheroside E1          7374-79-0     C-28 H-36 O-13    2_86     Radix Eleutherococci
ellagic acid              476-66-4      C-14 H-6 O-8      4_120;   Pericarpium Granati
                                                          4_130    Folium Guavae
emetine                 483-18-1        C-29 H-40 N-2 O-4 3_208    Radix Ipecacuanhae
emodin (see frangula emodin)
enin (see malvidin 3-monoglucoside)
(-)-ephedrine           299-42-3        C-10 H-15 N O     1_148    Herba Ephedrae
epi-catechin            490-46-0        C-15 H-14 O-6     2_70     Folium cum Flore
                                                                   Crataegi
epi-catechol (see epi-catechin)
eremophilene               10219-75-7   C-15 H-24         2_183    Folium Melissae
escholine (see magnoﬂorine)
esculetin                  305-01-1     C-9 H-6 O-4       4_369    Cortex Viburni
                                                                   Prunifolii
esculetol (see esculetin)
estragole                 140-67-0      C-10 H-12 O       3_139    Fructus Foeniculi
estragole (see methylchavicol)
eucalyptol (see 1,8-cineole)
eugenol                   97-53-0       C-10 H-12 O-2     1_99;    Cortex Cinnamomi
                                                          2_48;    Flos Caryophylli
                                                          2_209    Folium Ocimi Sancti
eugenol acetate           93-28-7       C-12 H-14 O-3     2_48     Flos Caryophylli
eutannin (see chebulinic acid)
farnesyl acetate          4128-17-0     C-17 H-28 O-2     2_183    Folium Melissae
fenchone                  1195-79-5     C-10 H-16 O       3_139    Fructus Foeniculi
feniculin (see gajaverin)
(E)-ferulic acid          1135-24-6     C-10 H-10 O-4     2_28     Radix Angelicae
                                                                   Sinensis
ﬂavosil (see formononetin)
formononetin            485-72-3        C-16 H-12 O-4     2_58;    Rhizoma Cimicifugae
                                                                   Racemosae
                                                          4_338    Flos Trifolii
fragilin                 19764-02-4     C-15 H-20 O-8     4_312    Cortex Salicis
frangula emodin          518-82-1       C-15 H-10 O-5     1_234;   Rhizoma Rhei


414
                                                                                   Annex 5


Name                      CAS RN         Mol. form.       Volume Monograph name
                                                          2_117    Cortex Frangulae
frangula emodin           491-60-1       C-15 H-12 O-4    2_117    Cortex Frangulae
anthrone
frangulin A               521-62-0       C-21 H-20 O-9    2_117    Cortex Frangulae
frangulin B               14101-04-3     C-20 H-18 O-9    2_117    Cortex Frangulae
franguloside (see frangulin A)
friedelin                 559-74-0       C-30 H-50 O      2_249    Cortex Pruni
                                                                   Africanae
fumarprotocetraric        489-50-9       C-22 H-16 O-12   4_143    Lichen Islandicus
acid
(5E,9Z)-furanodiene       19912-61-9     C-15 H-20 O      3_250    Gummi Myrrha
furanoeudesma-            87605-93-4     C-15 H-18 O      3_250    Gummi Myrrha
1,3-diene
gallic acid               149-91-7       C-7 H-6 O-5      2_129;   Folium et Cortex
                                                                   Hamamelidis
                                                          2_345;   Folium Uvae Ursi
                                                          4_74     Fructus Chebulae
gallogen (see ellagic acid)
genistein                   446-72-0     C-15 H-10 O-5    4_338    Flos Trifolii
genisteol (see genistein)
genkwanin                   437-64-9     C-16 H-12 O-5    4_297    Folium Rosmarini
gentiopicrin (see gentiopicroside)
gentiopicroside             20831-76-9   C-16 H-20 O-9    3_153;   Radix Gentianae
                                                                   Luteae
                                                          3_162    Radix Gentianae
                                                                   Scabrae
geranial                141-27-5     C-10 H-16 O          2_183    Folium Melissae
geraniol                106-24-1     C-10 H-18 O          2_183    Folium Melissae
[1]-gingerol            99742-03-7 C-12 H-16 O-4          1_280    Rhizoma Zingiberis
[3]-gingerol            41743-67-3 C-14 H-20 O-4          1_280    Rhizoma Zingiberis
[4]-gingerol            41743-68-4 C-15 H-22 O-4          1_280    Rhizoma Zingiberis
[5]-gingerol            41743-69-5 C-16 H-24 O-4          1_280    Rhizoma Zingiberis
[6]-gingerol            23513-14-6 C-17 H-26 O-4          1_280    Rhizoma Zingiberis
[8]-gingerol            23513-08-8 C-19 H-30 O-4          1_280    Rhizoma Zingiberis
[10]-gingerol           23513-15-7 C-21 H-34 O-4          1_280    Rhizoma Zingiberis
ginkgetin               481-46-9     C-32 H-22 O-10       1_157    Folium Ginkgo
ginkgolide A            15291-75-5 C-20 H-24 O-9          1_157    Folium Ginkgo
ginkgolide B            15291-77-7 C-20 H-24 O-10         1_157    Folium Ginkgo
ginkgolide C            15291-76-6 C-20 H-24 O-11         1_157    Folium Ginkgo
ginkgolide J            107438-79-9 C-20 H-24 O-10        1_157    Folium Ginkgo
ginkgolide M            15291-78-8 C-20 H-24 O-10         1_157    Folium Ginkgo
ginsenoside A1 (see pseudoginsenoside F11)
ginsenoside Rb1         41753-43-9 C-54 H-92 O-23         1_171;   Radix Ginseng
                                                          4_230    Radix Panacis
                                                                   Quinquefolii


                                                                                       415
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Name                    CAS RN       Mol. form.           Volume Monograph name
ginsenoside Rb2         11021-13-9   C-53 H-90 O-22       1_171;   Radix Ginseng
                                                          4_230    Radix Panacis
                                                                   Quinquefolii
ginsenoside Rc          11021-14-0   C-53 H-90 O-22       1_171;   Radix Ginseng
                                                          4_230    Radix Panacis
                                                                   Quinquefolii
ginsenoside Rd          52705-93-8   C-48 H-82 O-18       1_171;   Radix Ginseng
                                                          4_230    Radix Panacis
                                                                   Quinquefolii
ginsenoside Re          52286-59-6   C-48 H-82 O-18       1_171;   Radix Ginseng
                                                          4_230    Radix Panacis
                                                                   Quinquefolii
ginsenoside Rf          52286-58-5   C-42 H-72 O-14       1_171    Radix Ginseng
ginsenoside Rg1         22427-39-0   C-42 H-72 O-14       1_171;   Radix Ginseng
                                                          4_230    Radix Panacis
                                                                   Quinquefolii
ginsenoside Rg2           52286-74-5 C-42 H-72 O-13       1_171    Radix Ginseng
glaucarubinone            1259-86-5      C-25 H-34 O-10   1_62     Fructus Bruceae
glucofrangulin A          21133-53-9 C-27 H-30 O-14       2_117    Cortex Frangulae
glucofrangulin B          14062-59-0 C-26 H-28 O-14       2_117    Cortex Frangulae
glycyrrhetic acid         471-53-4       C-30 H-46 O-4    1_187    Radix Glycyrrhizae
glycyrrhetinic acid (see glycyrrhetic acid)
glycyrrhizic acid (see glycyrrhizin)
glycyrrhizin              1405-86-3      C-42 H-62 O-16   1_187    Radix Glycyrrhizae
gomisin A (see schisandrol B)
gomisin N                 69176-52-9 C-23 H-28 O-6        3_299    Fructus Schisandrae
goyaglycoside a           333332-41-5 C-37 H-60 O-9       4_195    Fructus Momordicae
goyaglycoside b           333332-48-2 C-37 H-60 O-9       4_195    Fructus Momordicae
goyaglycoside c           333332-49-3 C-38 H-62 O-9       4_195    Fructus Momordicae
goyaglycoside d           333332-50-6 C-38 H-62 O-9       4_195    Fructus Momordicae
goyaglycoside e           333333-12-3 C-42 H-68 O-13      4_195    Fructus Momordicae
goyaglycoside f           333333-13-4 C-42 H-68 O-13      4_195    Fructus Momordicae
goyaglycoside g           333333-14-5 C-43 H-70 O-14      4_195    Fructus Momordicae
goyaglycoside h           333333-19-0 C-42 H-70 O-15      4_195    Fructus Momordicae
goyasaponin I             333333-20-3 C-65 H-102 O-31     4_195    Fructus Momordicae
goyasaponin II            333333-23-6 C-70 H-110 O-35     4_195    Fructus Momordicae
goyasaponin III           333333-27-0 C-49 H-76 O-19      4_195    Fructus Momordicae
guajaverin                22255-13-6 C-20 H-18 O-11       4_130    Folium Guavae
guggulsterol I            39025-25-7 C-27 H-44 O-4        3_172    Gummi Gugguli
guggulsterol-II           39025-26-8 C-27 H-46 O-3        3_172    Gummi Gugguli
guggulsterol-III          39025-27-9 C-27 H-44 O-3        3_172    Gummi Gugguli
(E)-guggulsterone         39025-24-6 C-21 H-28 O-2        3_172    Gummi Gugguli
(Z)-guggulsterone         39025-23-5 C-21 H-28 O-2        3_172    Gummi Gugguli


416
                                                                              Annex 5


Name                    CAS RN        Mol. form.        Volume Monograph name
gypenoside VIII (see ginsenoside Rd)
hamamelitannin           469-32-9    C-20 H-20 O-14     2_129    Folium et Cortex
                                                                 Hamamelidis
harman                   486-84-0     C-12 H-10 N-2     3_261    Herba Passiﬂorae
harpagide                6926-08-5    C-15 H-24 O-10    3_185    Radix Harpagophyti
harpagoside              19210-12-9 C-24 H-30 O-11      3_185    Radix Harpagophyti
helenalin                6754-13-8    C-15 H-18 O-4     3_80     Flos Arnicae
henquanin (see genkwanin)
heraclin (see bergapten)
homobaldrinal            67910-07-0 C-15 H-16 O-4       1_271    Radix Valerianae
homovanillic alcohol (see homovanillyl alcohol)
homovanillyl alcohol     2380-78-1    C-9 H-12 O-3      2_333    Radix Urticae
honokiol                 35354-74-6 C-18 H-18 O-2       4_170    Cortex Magnoliae
A-humulene (see humulene)
humulene                 6753-98-6    C-15 H-24         2_48;    Flos Caryophylli
(A-caryophyllene)
                                                        2_183;   Folium Melissae
                                                        2_209;   Folium Ocimi Sancti
                                                        3_239    Strobilus Lupuli
humulone                26472-41-3    C-21 H-30 O-5     3_239    Strobilus Lupuli
hydrastine              118-08-1      C-21 H-21 N O-6   3_197    Rhizoma Hydrastis
hydroquinone            123-31-9      C-6 H-6 O-2       2_345    Folium Uvae Ursi
p-hydroxybe-            123-08-0      C-7 H-6 O-2       2_333    Radix Urticae
nzaldehyde
3B-hydroxy-                           C-15 H-20 O-4     2_320    Herba Tanaceti
parthenolide                                                     Parthenii
hydroxysafﬂor           78281-02-4    C-27 H-32 O-16    3_117    Flos Carthami
yellow A
hyperforin              11079-53-1    C-35 H-52 O-4     2_153    Herba Hyperici
hypericin               548-04-9      C-30 H-16 O-8     2_153    Herba Hyperici
hyperoside              482-36-0      C-21 H-20 O-12    2_39;    Flos Calendulae
                                                        2_70;    Folium cum Flore
                                                                 Crataegi
                                                        2_153    Herba Hyperici
imperatorin             482-44-0      C-16 H-14 O-4     3_12     Fructus Ammi
                                                                 Majoris
ipecoside                15401-60-2   C-27 H-35 N O-12 3_208     Radix Ipecacuanhae
isoanethole (see methylchavicol)
isoastragaloside I       84676-88-0   C-45 H-72 O-16    1_53     Radix Astragali
isoastragaloside II      86764-11-6   C-43 H-70 O-15    1_53     Radix Astragali
(10E)-N-isobutyldode- 75917-90-7      C-16 H-25 N O     1_130    Radix Echinaceae
catetraenamide
(10Z)-N-isobutyldode- 77448-63-6      C-16 H-25 N O     1_130    Radix Echinaceae
catetraenamide


                                                                                    417
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Name                    CAS RN         Mol. form.         Volume Monograph name
N-isobutyl-             360762-35-2 C-16 H-25 N O         1_130    Radix Echinaceae
dodecatetraenamide
isocorynoxeine          51014-29-0     C-22 H-26 N-2 O-4 4_356     Ramulus cum Uncis
                                                                   Uncariae
7-isocorynoxeine (see isocorynoxeine)
(E)-isoferulic acid      537-73-5     C-10 H-10 O-4       2_58     Rhizoma Cimicifugae
                                                                   Racemosae
isofraxidin               486-21-5     C-11 H-10 O-5     2_86      Radix Eleutherococci
isoginkgetin              548-19-6     C-32 H-22 O-10    1_157     Folium Ginkgo
isoliquiritigenin         961-29-5     C-15 H-12 O-4     1_187     Radix Glycyrrhizae
isoliquiritin             5041-81-6    C-21 H-22 O-9     1_187     Radix Glycyrrhizae
isomitraphylline          4963-01-3    C-21 H-24 N-2 O-4 3_352     Cortex Uncariae
iso-orientin              4261-42-1    C-21 H-20 O-11    3_261     Herba Passiﬂorae
isopelletierine           4396-01-4    C-8 H-15 N O      4_376     Radix Withaniae
isopteropodine            5171-37-9    C-21 H-24 N-2 O-4 3_352     Cortex Uncariae
isopunicine (see isopelletierine)
isoquercitrin             21637-25-2   C-21 H-20 O-12    2_39;     Flos Calendulae
                                                         2_153;    Herba Hyperici
                                                         2_272     Flos Sambuci
isorhamnetin            480-19-3       C-16 H-12 O-7     1_157     Folium Ginkgo
isorhynchophylline      6859-01-4      C-22 H-28 N-2 O-4 4_356     Ramulus cum Uncis
                                                                   Uncariae
isoschaftoside          52012-29-0     C-26 H-28 O-14     3_261    Herba Passiﬂorae
isotussilagine          91108-32-6     C-10 H-17 N O-3    1_130;   Radix Echinaceae
                                                          1_139    Herba Echinaceae
                                                                   Purpureae
isovaltrate             31078-10-1     C-22 H-30 O-8      1_271    Radix Valerianae
isovitexin              38953-85-4     C-21 H-20 O-10     3_261    Herba Passiﬂorae
jatrorrhizine           3621-38-3      C-20 H-20 N O-4    4_33;    Cortex Berberidis
                                                          4_247    Cortex Phellodendron
jujuboside B           55466-05-2 C-52 H-84 O-21          3_362    Fructus Zizyphi
kaempferol diglycoside 111957-48-3 C-36 H-36 O-17         1_157    Folium Ginkgo
coumarate
kawain                 500-64-1    C-14 H-14 O-3          2_234    Rhizoma Piperis
                                                                   Methystici
11-keto-B-boswellic acid (see 11-oxo-B-boswellic acid)
11-keto-B-boswellic acid acetate (see 3-O-acetyl-11-oxo-B-boswellic acid)
khellenin (see khellinin)
khellin                   82-02-0       C-14 H-12 O-5      3_26       Fructus Ammi
                                                                      Visnagae
khellinin                 17226-75-4 C-19 H-20 O-10        3_26       Fructus Ammi
                                                                      Visnagae
khellinol                 478-42-2      C-13 H-10 O-5      3_26       Fructus Ammi
                                                                      Visnagae
khellol                   478-79-5      C-13 H-10 O-5      3_26       Fructus Ammi
                                                                      Visnagae


418
                                                                                 Annex 5


Name                       CAS RN       Mol. form.         Volume Monograph name
kuromanin (see cyanidin 3-monoglucoside)
kutkoside                    35988-27-3 C-23 H-28 O-13     4_262    Rhizoma Picrorhizae
lagistase (see ellagic acid)
lauric acid                  143-07-7   C-12 H-24 O-2      2_288    Fructus Serenoae
                                                                    Repentis
(Z)-ligusticum lactone (see (Z)-butylidenephtalide)
ligusticumic acid (see valerophenone-o-carboxylic acid)
(Z)-ligustilide           4431-01-0     C-12 H-14 O-2      2_28     Radix Angelicae
                                                                    Sinensis
(+)-limonene               5989-27-5    C-10 H-16          3_36;    Fructus Anethi
                                                           3_139    Fructus Foeniculi
linalool (B-linalool)      78-70-6      C-10 H-18 O        2_183;   Folium Melissae
                                                           3_44;    Aetheroleum Anisi
                                                           3_56;    Fructus Anisi
                                                           3_221;   Aetheroleum
                                                                    Lavandulae
                                                           3_232;   Flos Lavandulae
                                                           4_184    Herba Millefolii
linalyl acetate            115-95-7     C-12 H-20 O-2      3_221;   Aetheroleum
                                                                    Lavandulae
                                                           3_232    Flos Lavandulae
linoleic acid              60-33-3      C-18 H-32 O-2      2_219;   Oleum Oenotherae
                                                                    Biennis
                                                           2_248;   Cortex Pruni
                                                                    Africanae
                                                           2_288    Fructus Serenoae
                                                                    Repentis
cis-linoleic acid (see linoleic acid)
linolenic acid              463-40-1    C-18 H-30 O-2      2_288    Fructus Serenoae
                                                                    Repentis
cis-G-linolenic acid (see G-linolenic acid)
G-linolenic acid            506-26-3       C-18 H-30 O-2   2_219    Oleum Oenotherae
                                                                    Biennis
liquiritigenin            578-86-9    C-15 H-12 O-4        1_187    Radix Glycyrrhizae
liquiritin                551-15-5    C-21 H-22 O-9        1_187    Radix Glycyrrhizae
lucenin-2                 29428-58-8 C-27 H-30 O-16        3_261    Herba Passiﬂorae
lupulone                  468-28-0    C-26 H-38 O-4        3_239    Strobilus Lupuli
luteolin 7-O-B-D-glucopyranoside (see cynaroside)
luteolin 7-O-B-D-rutinoside (see scolymoside)
lutexin (see orientin)
lutonaretin (see iso-orientin)
madecassic acid           18449-41-7 C-30 H-48 O-6         1_80     Herba Centellae
madecassoside             34540-22-2 C-48 H-78 O-20        1_80     Herba Centellae
magnocurarine             6801-40-7   C-19 H-24 N O-3      4_170    Cortex Magnoliae
magnoﬂorine               2141-09-5   C-20 H-24 N O-4      4_33;    Cortex Berberidis


                                                                                        419
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Name                  CAS RN       Mol. form.           Volume Monograph name
                                                        4_247    Cortex Phellodendron
magnolol                 528-43-8   C-18 H-18 O-2       4_170    Cortex Magnoliae
majarine (see berberine)
majudin (see bergapten)
maltol                   118-71-8   C-6 H-6 O-3         3_261    Herba Passiﬂorae
malvidin 3-mono-         7228-78-6  C-23 H-25 Cl O-12   4_213    Fructus Myrtilli
glucoside
mamorekku RUH 2 (see rosmarinic acid)
maslinic acid            4373-41-5  C-30 H-48 O-4       3_362    Fructus Zizyphi
melittoside              19467-03-9 C-21 H-32 O-15      3_286    Radix Rehmanniae
menthol                  2216-51-5  C-10 H-20 O         2_190;   Aetheroleum Menthae
                                                                 Piperitae
                                                        2_202    Folium Menthae
                                                                 Piperitae
menthone              14073-97-3   C-10 H-18 O          2_190;   Aetheroleum Menthae
                                                                 Piperitae
                                                        2_202    Folium Menthae
                                                                 Piperitae
methoxsalen (see xanthotoxin)
5´-methoxybilobetin       77053-35-1 C-32 H-22 O-11     1_157    Folium Ginkgo
(5E,8R,9E)-2-methox- 108376-98-3 C-16 H-22 O-2          3_250    Gummi Myrrha
yfuranodiene
(5E,8S,9E)-2-methox- 82901-10-8 C-16 H-22 O-2           3_250    Gummi Myrrha
yfuranodiene
5-methoxypsoralen (see bergapten)
8-methoxypsoralen (see xanthotoxin)
7-methylaxillarin (see chrysosplenol D)
2-methylbut-3-en-2-ol 115-18-4         C-5 H-10 O       3_239    Strobilus Lupuli
methylchavicol            140-67-0     C-10 H-12 O      3_44;    Aetheroleum Anisi
                                                        3_56     Fructus Anisi
N-methylcoreximine (see phellodendrine)
methylcrocetin
(see B-crocetin)
methylcysteine S-oxide 6853-87-8     C-4 H-9 N O-3 S   1_8       Bulbus Allii Cepae
(-)-methylephedrine     552-79-4     C-11 H-17 N O     1_148     Herba Ephedrae
methyleugenol           93-15-2      C-11 H-14 O-2     2_209     Folium Ocimi Sancti
N-methyliso-            18747-42-7 C-9 H-17 N O        4_111     Cortex Granati
pelletierine
methylisopunicine (see N-methylisopelletierine)
3´-methylmyricetin      53472-37-0 C-16 H-12 O-8       1_157     Folium Ginkgo
(+)-methylpseu-         51018-28-1 C-11 H-17 N O       1_148     Herba Ephedrae
doephedrine
O-methylpsychotrine 523-01-3         C-29 H-38 N-2 O-4 3_208     Radix Ipecacuanhae
methysticin             495-85-2     C-15 H-14 O-5     2_234     Rhizoma Piperis
                                                                 Methystici



420
                                                                              Annex 5


Name                    CAS RN         Mol. form.        Volume Monograph name
mitraphylline           509-80-8       C-21 H-24 N-2 O-4 3_352    Cortex Uncariae
mitrinermine (see rhynchophylline)
momordicoside F1        81348-81-4     C-37 H-60 O-8     4_195    Fructus Momordicae
momordicoside F2        81348-82-5     C-36 H-58 O-8     4_195    Fructus Momordicae
momordicoside G         81371-54-2     C-37 H-60 O-8     4_195    Fructus Momordicae
momordicoside I         81371-55-3     C-36 H-58 O-8     4_195    Fructus Momordicae
momordicoside K         81348-84-7     C-37 H-60 O-9     4_195    Fructus Momordicae
momordicoside L         81348-83-6     C-36 H-58 O-9     4_195    Fructus Momordicae
monomelittoside         20633-72-1     C-15 H-22 O-10    3_286    Radix Rehmanniae
mukulol                 41943-03-7     C-20 H-34 O       3_172    Gummi Gugguli
myricetin               529-44-2       C-15 H-10 O-8     1_157;   Folium Ginkgo
                                                         4_152    Fructus
                                                                  Macrocarponii
myricetol (see myricetin)
myrtillin (see delphinidin 3-monoglucoside)
neoandrographolide        27215-14-1 C-26 H-40 O-8       2_15     Herba
                                                                  Andrographidis
neocarthamin              519-54-0     C-21 H-22 O-11    3_117    Flos Carthami
neoolivil                 77790-55-7   C-20 H-24 O-7     2_333    Radix Urticae
neprotine (see jatrorrhizine)
neral                     106-26-3     C-10 H-16 O       2_183    Folium Melissae
nerol                     106-25-2     C-10 H-18 O       2_183    Folium Melissae
nimbin                    5945-86-8    C-30 H-36 O-9     3_91;    Folium Azadirachti
                                                         3_104    Oleum Azadirachti
nopinene (see B-pinene)
(-)-norephedrine        492-41-1       C-9 H-13 N O      1_148    Herba Ephedrae
(+)-norpseu-            492-39-7       C-9 H-13 N O      1_148    Herba Ephedrae
doephedrine
cis-B-ocimene           3338-55-4      C-10 H-16         2_28     Radix Angelicae
                                                                  Sinensis
oleanolic acid          508-02-1       C-30 H-48 O-3     2_333;   Radix Urticae
                                                         4_130    Folium Guavae
oleic acid              112-80-1       C-18 H-34 O-2     2_248    Cortex Pruni
                                                                  Africanae
olmelin (see biochanin A)
orientin                28608-75-5 C-21 H-20 O-11        3_261    Herba Passiﬂorae
11-oxo-B-boswellic      17019-92-0 C-30 H-46 O-4         4_51     Gummi Boswellii
acid
paeoniﬂorin             23180-57-6 C-23 H-28 O-11        1_197    Radix Paeoniae
palmatine               3486-67-7    C-21 H-22 N O-4     4_247    Cortex Phellodendron
panaxadiol              19666-76-3 C-30 H-52 O-3         1_171    Radix Ginseng
panaxatriol             32791-84-7 C-30 H-52 O-4         1_171    Radix Ginseng
panaxoside A (see ginsenoside Rg1)
panaxoside Rb1 (see ginsenoside Rb1)


                                                                                     421
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Name                    CAS RN         Mol. form.         Volume Monograph name
panaxoside Rc (see ginsenoside Rc)
panaxoside Re (see ginsenoside Re)
parthenolide            20554-84-1     C-15 H-20 O-3      2_320    Herba Tanaceti
                                                                   Parthenii
patrinoside             53962-20-2     C-21 H-34 O-11     4_369    Cortex Viburni
                                                                   Prunifolii
pelletierine            2858-66-4      C-8 H-15 N O       4_111    Cortex Granati
peonidin                134-01-0       C-16 H-13 Cl O-6   4_152    Fructus
                                                                   Macrocarponii
peonidin 3-mono-         6906-39-4     C-22 H-23 Cl O-11 4_213     Fructus Myrtilli
glucoside
peonidol chloride (see peonidin)
petunidin 3-mono-        6988-81-4     C-22 H-23 Cl O-12 4_213     Fructus Myrtilli
glucoside
(-)-A-phellandrene       4221-98-1     C-10 H-16          3_36;    Fructus Anethi
                                                          3_139    Fructus Foeniculi
phellodendrine            6873-13-8    C-20 H-24 N O-4    4_247    Cortex Phellodendron
physcione                 521-61-9     C-16 H-12 O-5      1_234    Rhizoma Rhei
picrocrocin               138-55-6     C-16 H-26 O-7      3_129    Stigma Croci
picrosalvin (see carnosol)
picroside I               27409-30-9   C-24 H-28 O-11     4_262    Rhizoma Picrorhizae
picroside II              39012-20-9   C-23 H-28 O-13     4_262    Rhizoma Picrorhizae
picroside III             64461-95-6   C-25 H-30 O-13     4_262    Rhizoma Picrorhizae
A-pinene                  80-56-8      C-10 H-16          3_36;    Fructus Anethi
                                                          3_139;   Fructus Foeniculi
                                                          4_130;   Folium Guavae
                                                          4_184    Herba Millefolii
B-pinene                 127-91-3      C-10 H-16          4_184    Herba Millefolii
platycodin A             66779-34-8 C-59 H-94 O-29        1_216    Radix Platycodi
platycodin C             66779-35-9 C-59 H-94 O-29        1_216    Radix Platycodi
platycodin D             58479-68-8 C-57 H-92 O-28        1_216    Radix Platycodi
platycodin D2            66663-90-9 C-63 H-102 O-33       1_216    Radix Platycodi
plenolin (see 11A, 13-dihydrohelenalin)
polygalacin D            66663-91-0 C-57 H-92 O-27        1_216    Radix Platycodi
polygalacin D2           66663-92-1 C-63 H-102 O-32       1_216    Radix Platycodi
proanthocyanidin                       C-45 H-38 O-18     4_152    Fructus
trimer                                                             Macrocarponii
proanthocyanidins                      C-30 H-26 O-14     2_129    Folium et Cortex
                                                                   Hamamelidis
procumbide              20486-27-5     C-15 H-22 O-10     3_185    Radix Harpagophyti
procyanidin             15514-06-4     C-30 H-26 O-12     2_129    Folium et Cortex
                                                                   Hamamelidis
procyanidin B1          20315-25-7     C-30 H-26 O-12     2_70     Folium cum Flore
                                                                   Crataegi


422
                                                                                Annex 5


Name                    CAS RN         Mol. form.         Volume Monograph name
procyanidin B2          29106-49-8     C-30 H-26 O-12     2_70     Folium cum Flore
                                                                   Crataegi
procyanidin B3          23567-23-9     C-30 H-26 O-12     2_70     Folium cum Flore
                                                                   Crataegi
procyanidin B4          29106-51-2     C-30 H-26 O-12     2_70     Folium cum Flore
                                                                   Crataegi
prodelphinidin                         C-30 H-26 O-14     2_129    Folium et Cortex
                                                                   Hamamelidis
propenylcysteine oxide                 C-6 H-11 N O-3 S   1_8      Bulbus Allii Cepae
propylcysteine S-oxide 17795-24-3      C-6 H-13 N O-3 S   1_8      Bulbus Allii Cepae
protoaescigenin          20853-07-0    C-30 H-50 O-6      2_140    Semen Hippocastani
protodioscin             55056-80-9    C-51 H-84 O-22     4_326    Fructus Tribuli
protoescigenin (see protoaescigenin)
(+)-protolichesterinic   1448-96-0     C-19 H-32 O-4      4_143    Lichen Islandicus
acid
prunetol (see genistein)
(+)-pseudoephedrine      90-82-4       C-10 H-15 N O      1_148    Herba Ephedrae
pseudoginsenoside F11 69884-00-0       C-42 H-72 O-14     4_230    Radix Panacis
                                                                   Quinquefolii
pseudohypericin            55954-61-5 C-30 H-16 O-9       2_153    Herba Hyperici
pseudopelletierine         552-70-5     C-9 H-15 N O      4_111    Cortex Granati
pseudopinene (see B-pinene)
pseudopunicine (see pseudopelletierine)
pseudo-G-schisandrin B (see gomisin N)
pseudotaraxasterol (see Y-taraxasterol)
psychotrine                7633-29-6    C-28 H-36 N-2 O-4 3_208    Radix Ipecacuanhae
psyllium                   8063-16-9                      1_208    Semen Plantaginis
pteropodine                5629-60-7    C-21 H-24 N-2 O-4 3_352    Cortex Uncariae
puddumetin (see genkwanin)
punicalagin                65995-63-3 C-48 H-28 O-30      4_111    Cortex Granati
punicalin                  65995-64-4 C-34 H-22 O-22      4_111;   Cortex Granati
                                                          4_120    Pericarpium Granati
punicine (see pelletierine)
quassin                    76-78-8      C-22 H-28 O-6     1_62     Fructus Bruceae
quercetin                  117-39-5     C-15 H-10 O-7     2_272;   Flos Sambuci
                                                          4_130    Folium Guavae
quercetin diglycoside      143061-65-8 C-36 H-36 O-18     1_157    Folium Ginkgo
coumarate
quercitrin                 522-12-3     C-21 H-20 O-11    2_153    Herba Hyperici
rehmannioside A            81720-05-0 C-21 H-32 O-15      3_286    Radix Rehmanniae
rehmannioside B            81720-06-1 C-21 H-32 O-15      3_286    Radix Rehmanniae
rehmannioside C            81720-07-2 C-21 H-34 O-14      3_286    Radix Rehmanniae
rehmannioside D            81720-08-3 C-27 H-42 O-20      3_286    Radix Rehmanniae
rescinnamine               24815-24-5 C-35 H-42 N-2 O-9 1_225      Radix Rauwolﬁae


                                                                                       423
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Name                     CAS RN          Mol. form.        Volume Monograph name
reserpine                  50-55-5       C-33 H-40 N-2 O-9 1_225    Radix Rauwolﬁae
rhein                      478-43-3      C-15 H-8 O-6      1_234    Rhizoma Rhei
rheinoside A               111545-28-9   C-27 H-30 O-17    1_234    Rhizoma Rhei
rheinoside B               111614-10-9   C-27 H-30 O-17    1_234    Rhizoma Rhei
rheinoside C               111545-29-0   C-27 H-30 O-16    1_234    Rhizoma Rhei
rheinoside D               111614-11-0   C-27 H-30 O-16    1_234    Rhizoma Rhei
rhimantin (see aucubin)
rhodinal (see citronellal)
rhynchophylline            76-66-4       C-22 H-28 N-2 O-4 4_356    Ramulus cum Uncis
                                                                    Uncariae
$-18-rhyncophylline (see corynoxeine)
ricinic acid (see ricinoleic acid)
ricinoleic acid             141-22-0   C-18 H-34 O-3       4_274    Oleum Ricini
ricinolic acid (see ricinoleic acid)
rosemaric acid (see rosmarinic acid)
rosmarinic acid             20283-92-5 C-18 H-16 O-8       2_183;   Folium Melissae
                                                           4_297    Folium Rosmarini
rutin                    153-18-4        C-27 H-30 O-16    2_39;    Flos Calendulae
                                                           2_70;    Folium cum Flore
                                                                    Crataegi
                                                           2_153;   Herba Hyperici
                                                           2_272    Flos Sambuci
sabinene                    3387-41-5  C-10 H-16           4_184    Herba Millefolii
safﬂor yellow A             85532-77-0 C-27 H-30 O-15      3_117    Flos Carthami
safﬂor yellow B             91574-92-4 C-48 H-54 O-27      3_117    Flos Carthami
safranal                    116-26-7   C-10 H-14 O         3_129    Stigma Croci
saikogenin A                5092-09-1  C-30 H-48 O-4       1_70     Radix Bupleuri
saikogenin D                5573-16-0  C-30 H-48 O-4       1_70     Radix Bupleuri
saikogenin F                14356-59-3 C-30 H-48 O-4       1_70     Radix Bupleuri
saikogenin G                18175-79-6 C-30 H-48 O-4       1_70     Radix Bupleuri
saikosaponin A              20736-09-8 C-42 H-68 O-13      1_70     Radix Bupleuri
saikosaponin B1             58558-08-0 C-42 H-68 O-13      1_70     Radix Bupleuri
saikosaponin B2             58316-41-9 C-42 H-68 O-13      1_70     Radix Bupleuri
saikosaponin B3             58316-42-0 C-43 H-72 O-14      1_70     Radix Bupleuri
saikosaponin B4             58558-09-1 C-43 H-72 O-14      1_70     Radix Bupleuri
saikosaponin D              20874-52-6 C-42 H-68 O-13      1_70     Radix Bupleuri
salicin                     138-52-3   C-13 H-18 O-7       4_312    Cortex Salicis
salicin 6´-acetate (see fragilin)
salicortin                  29836-41-7 C-20 H-24 O-10      4_312    Cortex Salicis
salicoside (see salicin)
sanchinoside C1 (see ginsenoside Rg1)
sanchinoside Rb1 (see ginsenoside Rb1)
sanchinoside Re (see ginsenoside Re)


424
                                                                                Annex 5


Name                     CAS RN         Mol. form.        Volume Monograph name
saponaretin (see isovitexin)
schaftoside               51938-32-0    C-26 H-28 O-14    3_261    Herba Passiﬂorae
schisandrin A             61281-38-7    C-24 H-32 O-6     3_299    Fructus Schisandrae
schisandrin B             61281-37-6    C-23 H-28 O-6     3_299    Fructus Schisandrae
schisandrol A             7432-28-2     C-24 H-32 O-7     3_299    Fructus Schisandrae
schisandrol B             58546-54-6    C-23 H-28 O-7     3_299    Fructus Schisandrae
schizandrin (see schisandrol A)
(±)-G-schizandrin (see schisandrin B)
sciadopitysin             521-34-6      C-33 H-24 O-10    1_157    Folium Ginkgo
scolymoside               20633-84-5    C-27 H-30 O-15    4_95     Folium Cynarae
scopoletin                92-61-5       C-10 H-8 O-4      2_333    Radix Urticae
senecionine               130-01-8      C-18 H-25 N O-5   1_130;   Radix Echinaceae
                                                          1_139    Herba Echinaceae
                                                                   Purpureae
(E)-senegasaponin A      162762-97-2    C-74 H-110 O-35   2_279    Radix Senegae
(Z)-senegasaponin A      162613-72-1    C-74 H-110 O-35   2_279    Radix Senegae
(E)-senegasaponin B      162870-58-8    C-69 H-102 O-31   2_279    Radix Senegae
(Z)-senegasaponin B      162613-71-0    C-69 H-102 O-31   2_279    Radix Senegae
senegin II               34366-31-9     C-70 H-104 O-32   2_279    Radix Senegae
(Z)-senegin II           162681-52-9    C-70 H-104 O-32   2_279    Radix Senegae
(E)-senegin III          35906-36-6     C-75 H-112 O-35   2_279    Radix Senegae
(Z)-senegin III          162681-53-0    C-75 H-112 O-35   2_279    Radix Senegae
sennoside A              81-27-6        C-42 H-38 O-20    1_244;   Folium Sennae
                                                          1_253    Fructus Sennae
sennoside B              128-57-4       C-42 H-38 O-20    1_244;   Folium Sennae
                                                          1_253    Fructus Sennae
sennoside C              37271-16-2     C-42 H-40 O-19    1_244;   Folium Sennae
                                                          1_253    Fructus Sennae
sennoside D              37271-17-3     C-42 H-40 O-19    1_244;   Folium Sennae
                                                          1_253    Fructus Sennae
sennoside E              11137-63-6     C-44 H-38 O-23    1_244;   Folium Sennae
                                                          1_253    Fructus Sennae
sennoside F              52842-23-6     C-44 H-38 O-23    1_244;   Folium Sennae
                                                          1_253    Fructus Sennae
(+)-sesamin              607-80-7       C-20 H-18 O-6     2_86     Radix Eleutherococci
[6]-shogaol              23513-13-5     C-17 H-24 O-3     1_280    Rhizoma Zingiberis
[7]-shogaol              99742-07-1     C-18 H-26 O-3     1_280    Rhizoma Zingiberis
[9]-shogaol              99742-08-2     C-20 H-30 O-3     1_280    Rhizoma Zingiberis
[11]-shogaol             99742-09-3     C-22 H-34 O-3     1_280    Rhizoma Zingiberis
[12]-shogaol             99742-10-6     C-23 H-36 O-3     1_280    Rhizoma Zingiberis
silybin                  22888-70-6     C-25 H-22 O-10    2_303    Fructus Silybi Mariae
silychristin             33889-69-9     C-25 H-22 O-10    2_303    Fructus Silybi Mariae


                                                                                    425
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Name                      CAS RN         Mol. form.        Volume Monograph name
silydianin                29782-68-1     C-25 H-22 O-10    2_303    Fructus Silybi Mariae
B-sitosterol              83-46-5        C-29 H-50 O       2_86;    Radix Eleutherococci
                                                           2_249;   Cortex Pruni
                                                                    Africanae
                                                           2_333    Radix Urticae
sitosterone               1058-61-3      C-29 H-48 O       2_249    Cortex Pruni
                                                                    Africanae
sophoricol (see genistein)
speciophylline            4697-68-1      C-21 H-24 N-2 O-4 3_352    Cortex Uncariae
spinacene (see squalene)
spiraeoside               20229-56-5     C-21 H-2O O-12    2_70     Folium cum Flore
                                                                    Crataegi
squalene                    111-02-4     C-30 H-50         4_86     Semen Cucurbitae
stictin (see cetraric acid)
sweroside                   14215-86-2   C-16 H-22 O-9     3_153;   Radix Gentianae
                                                                    Luteae
                                                           3_162    Radix Gentianae
                                                                    Scabrae
sylvapine A (see A-pinene)
(+)-syringaresinol      21453-69-0       C-22 H-26 O-8     2_86     Radix Eleutherococci
syringenin              20675-96-1       C-11 H-14 O-4     2_86     Radix Eleutherococci
taraxacolide glucoside 75911-12-5        C-21 H-32 O-9     3_331    Radix cum Herba
                                                                    Taraxaci
taraxacoside              98449-40-2     C-18 H-22 O-10    3_331    Radix cum Herba
                                                                    Taraxaci
taraxasterol              1059-14-9      C-30 H-50 O       3_331    Radix cum Herba
                                                                    Taraxaci
G-taraxasterol            464-98-2       C-30 H-50 O       3_331    Radix cum Herba
                                                                    Taraxaci
taraxinic acid glucoside 75911-14-7      C-21 H-28 O-9     3_331    Radix cum Herba
                                                                    Taraxaci
taxifolin                 480-18-2       C-15 H-12 O-7     2_303    Fructus Silybi Mariae
terebenthene (see B-pinene)
terminalic acid (see chebulanin)
terpan (see 1,8-cineole)
terpinen-4-ol             562-74-3       C-10 H-18 O       2_174    Aetheroleum
                                                                    Melaleucae
                                                                    Alternifoliae
A-terpinene               99-86-5        C-10 H-16         2_174;   Aetheroleum
                                                                    Melaleucae
                                                                    Alternifoliae
                                                           3_36     Fructus Anethi
G-terpinene               99-85-4        C-10 H-16         2_174    Aetheroleum
                                                                    Melaleucae
                                                                    Alternifoliae
4-terpineol (see terpinen-4-ol)


426
                                                                                 Annex 5


Name                    CAS RN         Mol. form.        Volume Monograph name
A-terpineol               98-55-5       C-10 H-18 O      4_64     Semen Cardamomi
(+)-A-terpinyl acetate 7785-54-8        C-12 H-20 O-2    4_64     Semen Cardamomi
(R)-A-terpinyl acetate (see (+)-A-terpinyl acetate)
tetracosanol              506-51-4      C-24 H-50 O      2_248    Cortex Pruni
                                                                  Africanae
1-tetracosanol (see tetracosanol)
tetracosyl (E)-ferulate 101927-25-7 C-34 H-58 O-4        2_248    Cortex Pruni
                                                                  Africanae
(3S,9R)-                 75991-58-1    C-15 H-24 O-4     3_331    Radix cum Herba
tetrahydroridentin B                                              Taraxaci
thalictrine (see magnoﬂorine)
thalsine (see berberine)
4(10)-thujene (see sabinene)
thymol                   89-83-8       C-10 H-14 O       1_262    Herba Thymi
tinctormine              149475-43-4   C-27 H-31 N O-14 3_117     Flos Carthami
tribulosaponin A         311310-49-3   C-51 H-84 O-21    4_326    Fructus Tribuli
tribulosaponin B         311310-52-8   C-51 H-84 O-22    4_326    Fructus Tribuli
tribulosin               79974-46-2    C-55 H-90 O-25    4_326    Fructus Tribuli
tribulusamide A          218622-84-5   C-36 H-36 N-2 O-8 4_326    Fructus Tribuli
tribulusamide B          218622-86-7   C-36 H-34 N-2 O-9 4_326    Fructus Tribuli
trigonelline             535-83-1      C-7 H-7 N O-2     3_341    Semen Trigonellae
                                                                  Foenugraeci
A-turmerone             82508-15-4     C-15 H-22 O       1_118    Rhizoma Curcumae
                                                                  Longae
ar-turmerone            532-65-0       C-15 H-20 O       1_118    Rhizoma Curcumae
                                                                  Longae
B-turmerone             82508-14-3     C-15 H-22 O       1_118    Rhizoma Curcumae
                                                                  Longae
(-)-tussilagine         80151-77-5     C-10 H-17 N O-3   1_130;   Radix Echinaceae
                                                         1_139    Herba Echinaceae
                                                                  Purpureae
umbellatin (see berberine)
umbelliferone            93-35-6       C-9 H-6 O-3       2_28     Radix Angelicae
                                                                  Sinensis
uncarine C (see pteropodine)
uncarine D (see speciophylline)
uncarine E (see isopteropodine)
uncarine F               14019-66-0 C-21 H-24 N-2 O-4 3_352       Cortex Uncariae
uncarinic acid A         206256-62-4 C-40 H-56 O-7    4_356       Ramulus cum Uncis
                                                                  Uncariae
uncarinic acid B        128748-74-8 C-40 H-56 O-7        4_356    Ramulus cum Uncis
                                                                  Uncariae




                                                                                    427
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Name                      CAS RN         Mol. form.       Volume Monograph name
ursolic acid              77-52-1        C-30 H-48 O-3    2_249;   Cortex Pruni
                                                                   Africanae
                                                          2_272;   Flos Sambuci
                                                          2_345;   Folium Uvae Ursi
                                                          4_130    Folium Guavae
uvaol                     545-46-0       C-30 H-50 O-2    2_345    Folium Uvae Ursi
valerenal                 4176-16-3      C-15 H-22 O      1_271    Radix Valerianae
valerenic acid            3569-10-6      C-15 H-22 O-2    1_271    Radix Valerianae
valerophenone-o-          550-37-8       C-12 H-14 O-3    2_28     Radix Angelicae
carboxylic acid                                                    Sinensis
valtrate                  18296-44-1     C-22 H-30 O-8    1_271    Radix Valerianae
valtroxal                 71013-41-7     C-17 H-22 O-7    1_271    Radix Valerianae
vanillic acid             121-34-6       C-8 H-8 O-4      2_28     Radix Angelicae
                                                                   Sinensis
6-vanilloylcatalpol (see picroside II)
vicenin (see vicenin-2)
vicenin-2                 23666-13-9     C-27 H-30 O-15   3_261    Herba Passiﬂorae
3-vinyl-1,2-dithiin       62488-53-3     C-6 H-8 S-2      1_19     Bulbus Alli Sativi
2-vinyl-1,3-dithiin       80028-57-5     C-6 H-8 S-2      1_19     Bulbus Alli Sativi
visnadin                  477-32-7       C-21 H-24 O-7    3_26     Fructus Ammi
                                                                   Visnagae
visnagin                  82-57-5        C-13 H-10 O-4    3_26     Fructus Ammi
                                                                   Visnagae
vitexicarpin (see casticin)
vitexilactone               61263-49-8   C-22 H-34 O-5    4_13     Fructus Agni Casti
vitexin                     3681-93-4    C-21 H-20 O-10   2_70;    Folium cum Flore
                                                                   Crataegi
                                                          3_261    Herba Passiﬂorae
vitexin 2´´-rhamnoside    64820-99-1     C-27 H-30 O-14   2_70     Folium cum Flore
                                                                   Crataegi
vitexlactam A            459167-05-6 C-22 H-35 N O-4      4_13     Fructus Agni Casti
withaferin A             5119-48-2    C-28 H-38 O-6       4_376    Radix Withaniae
withanolide D            30655-48-2 C-28 H-38 O-6         4_376    Radix Withaniae
withasomniferol A        194413-09-7 C-28 H-38 O-7        4_376    Radix Withaniae
wogonin                  632-85-9     C-16 H-12 O-5       3_316    Radix Scutellariae
wuweizi alcohol B (see schisandrol B)
wuweizichun A (see schisandrol A)
wuweizichun B (see schisandrol B)
wuweizisu B (see schisandrin B)
xanthohumol              6754-58-1    C-21 H-22 O-5       3_239    Strobilus Lupuli
xanthotoxin              298-81-7     C-12 H-8 O-4        3_12     Fructus Ammi
                                                                   Majoris
yangonin                  500-62-9       C-15 H-14 O-4    2_234    Rhizoma Piperis
                                                                   Methystici



428
                                                                             Annex 5


Name                     CAS RN        Mol. form.       Volume Monograph name
yatrorizine (see jatrorrhizine)
zingiberene               495-60-3     C-15 H-24        1_118;   Rhizoma Curcumae
                                                                 Longae
                                                        1_280    Rhizoma Zingiberis
zizyphus saponin I       77943-56-7    C-47 H-76 O-17   3_362    Fructus Zizyphi
zizyphus saponin II      77943-83-0    C-47 H-76 O-17   3_362    Fructus Zizyphi
zizyphus saponin III     77943-54-5    C-52 H-84 O-21   3_362    Fructus Zizyphi
zwiebelanes              126038-52-6   C-6 H-10 O S-2   1_8      Bulbus Allii Cepae




                                                                                 429
                                     Annex 6
          Cumulative index of major chemical constituents
                    (ordered by CAS number)




Cumulative index of major chemical compounds whose chemical structure
drawings were presented in four volumes of WHO monographs on se-
lected medicinal plants

CAS RN       Name                        CAS RN     Name
50-55-5      reserpine                   104-55-2   cinnamaldehyde
60-33-3      linoleic acid               106-23-0   citronellal
76-22-2      camphor                     106-24-1   geraniol
76-50-6      bornyl isovalerate          106-25-2   nerol
76-66-4      rhynchophylline             106-26-3   neral
76-78-8      quassin                     111-02-4   squalene
77-52-1      ursolic acid                112-80-1   oleic acid
78-70-6      linalool (B-linalool)       115-18-4   2-methylbut-3-en-2-ol
80-56-8      A-pinene                    115-95-7   linalyl acetate
81-27-6      sennoside A                 116-26-7   safranal
82-02-0      khellin                     117-39-5   quercetin
82-57-5      visnagin                    118-08-1   hydrastine
83-46-5      B-sitosterol                118-34-3   eleutheroside B
87-44-5      B-caryophyllene             118-71-8   maltol
89-83-8      thymol                      121-34-6   vanillic acid
90-82-4      (+)-pseudoephedrine         123-08-0   p-hydroxybenzaldehyde
91-64-5      coumarin                    123-11-5   p-anisaldehyde
92-61-5      scopoletin                  123-31-9   hydroquinone
93-15-2      methyleugenol               127-91-3   B-pinene
93-28-7      eugenol acetate             128-57-4   sennoside B
93-35-6      umbelliferone               130-01-8   senecionine
97-53-0      eugenol                     134-01-0   peonidin
98-55-5      A-terpineol                 138-52-3   salicin
99-49-0      carvone                     138-55-6   picrocrocin
99-85-4      G-terpinene                 140-67-0   estragole
99-86-5      A-terpinene                 140-67-0   methylchavicol
99-87-6      p-cymene                    141-22-0   ricinoleic acid


430
                                                              Annex 6


CAS RN     Name                CAS RN     Name
141-27-5   geranial            485-72-3   formononetin
143-07-7   lauric acid         486-21-5   isofraxidin
149-91-7   gallic acid         486-66-8   daidzein
153-18-4   rutin               486-84-0   harman
154-23-4   catechin            489-49-6   cetraric acid
298-81-7   xanthotoxin         489-50-9   fumarprotocetraric acid
299-42-3   (-)-ephedrine       490-46-0   epi-catechin
305-01-1   esculetin           491-60-1   frangula emodin anthrone
327-97-9   chlorogenic acid    491-67-8   baicalein
331-39-5   caffeic acid        491-80-5   biochanin A
437-64-9   genkwanin           492-39-7   (+)-norpseudoephedrine
446-72-0   genistein           492-41-1   (-)-norephedrine
454-14-8   cuscohygrine        495-60-3   zingiberene
458-37-7   curcumin            495-85-2   methysticin
463-40-1   linolenic acid      497-76-7   arbutin
464-92-6   asiatic acid        498-02-2   apocynine
464-98-2   G-taraxasterol      499-75-2   carvacrol
468-28-0   lupulone            500-62-9   yangonin
469-32-9   hamamelitannin      500-64-1   kawain
470-82-6   1,8-cineole         506-26-3   G-linolenic acid
471-53-4   glycyrrhetic acid   506-51-4   tetracosanol
471-66-9   A-boswellic acid    507-70-0   borneol
472-15-1   betulinic acid      508-02-1   oleanolic acid
474-58-8   daucosterol         509-80-8   mitraphylline
476-66-4   ellagic acid        518-82-1   frangula emodin
477-32-7   visnadin            519-54-0   neocarthamin
478-42-2   khellinol           520-36-5   apigenin
478-43-3   rhein               521-32-4   bilobetin
478-61-5   berbamine           521-34-6   sciadopitysin
478-79-5   khellol             521-61-9   physcione
479-91-4   casticin            521-62-0   frangulin A
479-98-1   aucubin             522-12-3   quercitrin
480-10-4   astragalin          523-01-3   O-methylpsychotrine
480-18-2   taxifolin           523-47-7   B-cadinene
480-19-3   isorhamnetin        528-43-8   magnolol
481-46-9   ginkgetin           528-58-5   cyanidin
481-72-1   aloe-emodin         529-05-5   chamazulene
481-74-3   chrysophanol        529-44-2   myricetin
482-36-0   hyperoside          532-65-0   ar-turmerone
482-44-0   imperatorin         535-83-1   trigonelline
483-17-0   cephaeline          537-73-5   (E)-isoferulic acid
483-18-1   emetine             539-86-6   allicin
484-20-8   bergapten           545-46-0   uvaol


                                                                     431
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


CAS RN      Name                              CAS RN      Name
548-04-9    hypericin                         3569-10-6   valerenic acid
548-19-6    isoginkgetin                      3621-36-1   columbamine
550-37-8    valerophenone-o-carboxylic acid   3621-38-3   jatrorrhizine
551-08-6    (Z)-butylidenephtalide            3681-93-4   vitexin
551-15-5    liquiritin                        3779-59-7   cimigenol
552-70-5    pseudopelletierine                3877-86-9   cucurbitacin D
552-79-4    (-)-methylephedrine               4128-17-0   farnesyl acetate
556-27-4    alliin                            4176-16-3   valerenal
559-74-0    friedelin                         4180-23-8   trans-anethole
562-74-3    terpinen-4-ol                     4221-98-1   (-)-A-phellandrene
578-86-9    liquiritigenin                    4261-42-1   iso-orientin
587-63-3    dihydrokawain                     4373-41-5   maslinic acid
607-80-7    (+)-sesamin                       4396-01-4   isopelletierine
630-94-4    corynoxeine                       4431-01-0   (Z)-ligustilide
631-69-6    B-boswellic acid                  4697-68-1   speciophylline
632-85-9    wogonin                           4963-01-3   isomitraphylline
638-95-9    A-amyrin                          5041-81-6   isoliquiritin
661-19-8    docosanol                         5092-09-1   saikogenin A
668-10-0    ammiol                            5096-57-1   A-canadine
961-29-5    isoliquiritigenin                 5119-48-2   withaferin A
1058-61-3   sitosterone                       5171-37-9   isopteropodine
1059-14-9   taraxasterol                      5373-11-5   cynaroside
1135-24-6   (E)-ferulic acid                  5508-58-7   andrographolide
1195-79-5   fenchone                          5573-16-0   saikogenin D
1259-86-5   glaucarubinone                    5629-60-7   pteropodine
1405-86-3   glycyrrhizin                      5892-54-6   G-crocetin
1415-73-2   aloin A                           5939-57-1   cucurbitacin F
1448-96-0   (+)-protolichesterinic            5945-86-8   nimbin
1617-53-4   amentoﬂavone                      5948-04-9   dihydrocarvone
1898-13-1   cembrene                          5957-80-2   carnosol
2050-87-5   diallyl trisulﬁde                 5968-70-7   3-O-acetyl-B-boswellic acid
2086-83-1   berberine                         5989-27-5   (+)-limonene
2086-96-6   B-canadine                        6199-67-3   cucurbitacin B
2141-09-5   magnoﬂorine                       6537-80-0   chicoric acid
2179-57-9   diallyl disulﬁde                  6753-98-6   humulene (A-caryophyllene)
2216-51-5   menthol                           6754-13-8   helenalin
2222-07-3   cucurbitacin I                    6754-58-1   xanthohumol
2380-78-1   homovanillyl alcohol              6801-40-7   magnocurarine
2415-24-9   catalpol                          6807-92-7   cucurbitine
2858-66-4   pelletierine                      6853-87-8   methylcysteine S-oxide
3338-55-4   cis-B-ocimene                     6859-01-4   isorhynchophylline
3387-41-5   sabinene                          6873-13-8   phellodendrine
3486-67-7   palmatine                         6906-38-3   delphinidin 3-monoglucoside


432
                                                                           Annex 6


CAS RN       Name                        CAS RN       Name
6906-39-4    peonidin 3-monoglucoside    18262-45-8   (-)-11-deoxyaloin
6926-08-5    harpagide                   18296-44-1   valtrate
6988-81-4    petunidin 3-monoglucoside   18444-66-1   cucurbitacin E
7084-24-4    cyanidin 3-monoglucoside    18449-41-7   madecassic acid
7228-78-6    malvidin 3-monoglucoside    18609-16-0   deacetylnimbin
7374-79-0    eleutheroside E1            18642-44-9   actein
7432-28-2    schisandrol A               18747-42-7   N-methylisopelletierine
7633-29-6    psychotrine                 18942-26-2   chebulinic acid
7785-54-8    (+)-A-terpinyl acetate      19210-12-9   harpagoside
8063-16-9    psyllium                    19467-03-9   melittoside
10219-75-7   eremophilene                19533-92-7   alphitolic acid
11006-91-0   aloinoside B                19666-76-3   panaxadiol
11021-13-9   ginsenoside Rb2             19764-02-4   fragilin
11021-14-0   ginsenoside Rc              19902-91-1   dihydromethysticin
11027-63-7   agnuside                    19912-61-9   (5E,9Z)-furanodiene
11079-53-1   hyperforin                  20229-56-5   spiraeoside
11137-63-6   sennoside E                 20283-92-5   rosmarinic acid
11141-17-6   azadirachtin                20315-25-7   procyanidin B1
13844-01-4   barringtogenol C            20347-65-3   bornyl acetate
14019-66-0   uncarine F                  20486-27-5   procumbide
14062-59-0   glucofrangulin B            20493-56-5   curzerenone
14073-97-3   menthone                    20554-84-1   parthenolide
14101-04-3   frangulin B                 20633-72-1   monomelittoside
14215-86-2   sweroside                   20633-84-5   scolymoside
14356-59-3   saikogenin F                20675-96-1   syringenin
14907-98-3   brusatol                    20736-09-8   saikosaponin A
14965-20-9   chrysosplenol D             20831-76-9   gentiopicroside
15291-75-5   ginkgolide A                20853-07-0   protoaescigenin
15291-76-6   ginkgolide C                20874-52-6   saikosaponin D
15291-77-7   ginkgolide B                21018-84-8   amarogentin
15291-78-8   ginkgolide M                21133-53-9   glucofrangulin A
15345-89-8   demethoxyyangonin           21453-69-0   (+)-syringaresinol
15401-60-2   ipecoside                   21499-66-1   brucein D
15486-24-5   eleutheroside C             21637-25-2   isoquercitrin
15514-06-4   procyanidin                 21967-41-9   baicalin
16830-15-2   asiaticoside                22255-13-6   guajaverin
16845-16-2   eleutheroside B1            22427-39-0   ginsenoside Rg1
17019-92-0   11-oxo-B-boswellic acid     22608-11-3   desmethoxycurcumin
17226-75-4   khellinin                   22888-70-6   silybin
17795-24-3   propylcysteine S-oxide      23089-26-1   (-)-A-bisabolol
17910-09-7   curzerene                   23094-71-5   chebulagic acid
18175-79-6   saikogenin G                23180-57-6   paeoniﬂorin
18234-46-3   baldrinal                   23513-08-8   [8]-gingerol


                                                                                433
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


CAS RN       Name                        CAS RN       Name
23513-13-5   [6]-shogaol                 36338-96-2   carthamin
23513-14-6   [6]-gingerol                37271-16-2   sennoside C
23513-15-7   [10]-gingerol               37271-17-3   sennoside D
23567-23-9   procyanidin B3              37719-98-5   angelicone
23666-13-9   vicenin-2                   38953-85-4   isovitexin
24815-24-5   rescinnamine                39012-20-9   picroside II
24959-84-0   canin                       39025-23-5   (Z)-guggulsterone
25161-41-5   acevaltrate                 39025-24-6   (E)-guggulsterone
25368-09-6   B-crocetin                  39025-25-7   guggulsterol I
25514-29-8   brucein B                   39025-26-8   guggulsterol-II
25514-30-1   brucein C                   39025-27-9   guggulsterol-III
25514-31-2   brucein A                   39432-56-9   eleutheroside E
26020-14-4   calenduloside E             41451-75-6   bruceantin
26020-29-1   calenduloside H             41743-67-3   [3]-gingerol
26472-41-3   humulone                    41743-68-4   [4]-gingerol
27208-74-8   acteol                      41743-69-5   [5]-gingerol
27215-14-1   neoandrographolide          41753-43-9   ginsenoside Rb1
27409-30-9   picroside I                 41943-03-7   mukulol
27876-94-4   A-crocetin                  42553-65-1   A-crocin
28371-16-6   aloin B                     51014-29-0   isocorynoxeine
28608-75-5   orientin                    51018-28-1   (+)-methylpseudoephedrine
29106-49-8   procyanidin B2              51415-02-2   calenduloside F
29106-51-2   procyanidin B4              51938-32-0   schaftoside
29428-58-8   lucenin-2                   52012-29-0   isoschaftoside
29431-84-3   artecanin                   52286-58-5   ginsenoside Rf
29782-68-1   silydianin                  52286-59-6   ginsenoside Re
29836-41-7   salicortin                  52286-74-5   ginsenoside Rg2
29883-15-6   amygdalin                   52705-93-8   ginsenoside Rd
30655-48-2   withanolide D               52842-23-6   sennoside F
30964-13-7   cynarin                     52949-83-4   ajugol
31078-10-1   isovaltrate                 53472-37-0   3´-methylmyricetin
32725-74-9   calenduloside A             53683-73-1   ailanthinone
32791-84-7   panaxatriol                 53823-08-8   cascaroside A
33171-05-0   bisdesmethoxycurcumin       53823-09-9   cascaroside C
33570-04-6   bilobalide                  53861-34-0   cascaroside B
33889-69-9   silychristin                53861-35-1   cascaroside D
34257-95-9   11A,13-dihydrohelenalin     53962-20-2   patrinoside
34366-31-9   senegin II                  55056-80-9   protodioscin
34540-22-2   madecassoside               55466-05-2   jujuboside B
35354-74-6   honokiol                    55750-84-0   B-crocin
35730-78-0   cynaropicrin                55750-85-1   C-crocin
35906-36-6   (E)-senegin III             55903-92-9   cucurbitacin R
35988-27-3   kutkoside                   55954-61-5   pseudohypericin


434
                                                                             Annex 6


CAS RN       Name                           CAS RN       Name
56645-88-6   aloinoside A                   77790-55-7   neoolivil
57710-64-2   D-crocin                       77943-54-5   zizyphus saponin III
58050-17-2   E-crocin                       77943-56-7   zizyphus saponin I
58316-41-9   saikosaponin B2                77943-83-0   zizyphus saponin II
58316-42-0   saikosaponin B3                78281-02-4   hydroxysafﬂor yellow A
58479-68-8   platycodin D                   79484-75-6   eleutheroside D
58546-54-6   schisandrol B                  79974-46-2   tribulosin
58558-08-0   saikosaponin B1                80028-57-5   vinyl-1,3-dithiin (2-)
58558-09-1   saikosaponin B4                80151-77-5   (-)-tussilagine
59440-97-0   (+)-echinolone                 81348-81-4   momordicoside F1
61263-49-8   vitexilactone                  81348-82-5   momordicoside F2
61281-37-6   schisandrin B                  81348-83-6   momordicoside L
61281-38-7   schisandrin A                  81348-84-7   momordicoside K
62488-53-3   3-vinyl-1,2-dithiin            81371-54-2   momordicoside G
63644-62-2   coniferyl ferulate             81371-55-3   momordicoside I
64461-95-6   picroside III                  81720-05-0   rehmannioside A
64820-99-1   vitexin 2´´-rhamnoside         81720-06-1   rehmannioside B
65995-63-3   punicalagin                    81720-07-2   rehmannioside C
65995-64-4   punicalin                      81720-08-3   rehmannioside D
66176-93-0   cimicifugoside                 82209-72-1   andropanoside
66663-90-9   platycodin D2                  82209-76-5   andrographiside
66663-91-0   polygalacin D                  82508-14-3   B-turmerone
66663-92-1   polygalacin D2                 82508-15-4   A-turmerone
66779-34-8   platycodin A                   82854-37-3   echinacoside
66779-35-9   platycodin C                   82901-10-8   (5E,8S,9E)-2-
67416-61-9   3-O-acetyl-11-oxo-B-                        methoxyfuranodiene
             boswellic acid                 83199-38-6   angelol G
67910-07-0   homobaldrinal                  84638-55-1   acetoxyvalerenic acid
69176-52-9   gomisin N                      84676-88-0   isoastragaloside I
69884-00-0   pseudoginsenoside F11          84676-89-1   astragaloside II
69980-49-0   (+)-11-deoxyaloin              84680-75-1   astragaloside I
71013-41-7   valtroxal                      84687-42-3   astragaloside III
71616-00-7   achillicin                     84687-43-4   astragaloside IV
73543-67-6   A-dimorphecolic acid           84687-44-5   astragaloside V
73889-54-0   chrysaloin                     84687-45-6   astragaloside VI
75911-12-5   taraxacolide glucoside         84687-46-7   astragaloside VII
75911-14-7   taraxinic acid glucoside       85532-77-0   safﬂor yellow A
75917-90-7   (10E)-N-                       86764-11-6   isoastragaloside II
             isobutyldodecatetraenamide     87605-93-4   furanoeudesma-1,3-diene
75991-58-1   (3S,9R)-tetrahydroridentin B   88010-65-5   (9E)-4,5-dihydrofuranodien-
77053-35-1   5´-methoxybilobetin                         6-one
77448-63-6   (10Z)-N-                       89913-60-0   3-O-acetyl-A-boswellic acid
             isobutyldodecatetraenamide



                                                                                 435
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


CAS RN        Name                       CAS RN        Name
91108-32-6    isotussilagine             162681-52-9   (Z)-senegin II
91574-92-4    safﬂor yellow B            162681-53-0   (Z)-senegin III
92284-99-6    (E)-ajoene                 162762-97-2   (E)-senegasaponin A
92285-00-2    (Z)-ajoene                 162870-58-8   (E)-senegasaponin B
92935-94-9    angelicide                 163589-51-3   desacylsenegin II
98449-40-2    taraxacoside               164178-32-9   cascaroside E
99742-03-7    [1]-gingerol               164322-83-2   cascaroside F
99742-07-1    [7]-shogaol                166833-80-3   chebulanin
99742-08-2    [9]-shogaol                173557-02-3   desacylsenegasaponin A
99742-09-3    [11]-shogaol               180572-65-0   desacylsenegin III
99742-10-6    [12]-shogaol               194413-09-7   withasomniferol A
101927-24-6   docosyl (E)-ferulate       206256-62-4   uncarinic acid A
101927-25-7   tetracosyl (E)-ferulate    218622-84-5   tribulusamide A
104404-17-3   ceramides                  218622-86-7   tribulusamide B
107438-79-9   ginkgolide J               311310-49-3   tribulosaponin A
108376-98-3   (5E,8R,9E)-2-              311310-52-8   tribulosaponin B
              methoxyfuranodiene         333332-41-5   goyaglycoside a
111545-28-9   rheinoside A               333332-48-2   goyaglycoside b
111545-29-0   rheinoside C               333332-49-3   goyaglycoside c
111614-10-9   rheinoside B               333332-50-6   goyaglycoside d
111614-11-0   rheinoside D               333333-12-3   goyaglycoside e
111957-48-3   kaempferol diglycoside     333333-13-4   goyaglycoside f
              coumarate
                                         333333-14-5   goyaglycoside g
126038-52-6   zwiebelanes
                                         333333-19-0   goyaglycoside h
128748-74-8   uncarinic acid B
                                         333333-20-3   goyasaponin I
143061-65-8   quercetin diglycoside
              coumarate                  333333-23-6   goyasaponin II
143183-63-5   adhyperforin               333333-27-0   goyasaponin III
149475-43-4   tinctormine                360762-35-2   N-isobutyldodecatetraenamide
162613-71-0   (Z)-senegasaponin B        459167-05-6   vitexlactam A
162613-72-1   (Z)-senegasaponin A




436
                                 Annex 7
        Cumulative index of major chemical constituents
                (ordered by molecular formula)




Cumulative index of major chemical compounds whose chemical structure
drawings were presented in four volumes of WHO monographs on se-
lected medicinal plants



Mol. form.         Name                   Mol. form.       Name
C-4 H-9 N O-3 S  methylcysteine S-oxide   C-9 H-6 O-4      esculetin
C-5 H-10 N-2 O-2 cucurbitine              C-9 H-8 O        cinnamaldehyde
C-5 H-10 O       2-methylbut-3-en-2-ol    C-9 H-8 O-4      caffeic acid
C-6 H-6 O-2      hydroquinone             C-9 H-10 O-3     apocynine
C-6 H-6 O-3      maltol                   C-9 H-12 O-3     homovanillyl alcohol
C-6 H-8 S-2      2-vinyl-1,3-dithiin      C-9 H-13 N O     (-)-norephedrine
C-6 H-8 S-2      3-vinyl-1,2-dithiin      C-9 H-13 N O     (+)-norpseudo-
C-6 H-10 O S-2   allicin                                   ephedrine
C-6 H-10 O S-2   zwiebelanes              C-9 H-14 O S-3   (E)-ajoene
C-6 H-10 S-2     diallyl disulﬁde         C-9 H-14 O S-3   (Z)-ajoene
C-6 H-10 S-3     diallyl trisulﬁde        C-9 H-15 N O     pseudopelletierine
C-6 H-11 N O-3 S alliin                   C-9 H-17 N O     N-methylisopelletierine
C-6 H-11 N O-3 S 1-propenylcysteine       C-10 H-8 O-4     scopoletin
                 oxide                    C-10 H-10 O-4    (E)-ferulic acid
C-6 H-13 N O-3 S propylcysteine S-oxide   C-10 H-10 O-4    (E)-isoferulic acid
C-7 H-6 O-2      p-hydroxybe-             C-10 H-12 O      trans-anethole
                 nzaldehyde               C-10 H-12 O      estragole
C-7 H-6 O-5      gallic acid              C-10 H-12 O      methylchavicol
C-7 H-7 N O-2    trigonelline             C-10 H-12 O-2    eugenol
C-8 H-8 O-2      p-anisaldehyde           C-10 H-14        p-cymene
C-8 H-8 O-4      vanillic acid            C-10 H-14 O      carvacrol
C-8 H-15 N O     isopelletierine          C-10 H-14 O      carvone
C-8 H-15 N O     pelletierine             C-10 H-14 O      safranal
C-8 H-16 O-6     eleutheroside C          C-10 H-14 O      thymol
C-9 H-6 O-2      coumarin                 C-10 H-15 N O    (-)-ephedrine
C-9 H-6 O-3      umbelliferone            C-10 H-15 N O    (+)-pseudoephedrine


                                                                             437
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Mol. form.        Name                     Mol. form.         Name
C-10 H-16         (+)-limonene             C-12 H-20 O-2      linalyl acetate
C-10 H-16         cis-B-ocimene            C-12 H-20 O-2      (+)-A-terpinyl acetate
C-10 H-16         (-)-A-phellandrene       C-12 H-24 O-2      lauric acid
C-10 H-16         A-pinene                 C-13 H-10 O-4      visnagin
C-10 H-16         B-pinene                 C-13 H-10 O-5      khellinol
C-10 H-16         sabinene                 C-13 H-10 O-5      khellol
C-10 H-16         A-terpinene              C-13 H-18 O-7      salicin
C-10 H-16         G-terpinene              C-13 H-24 N-2 O    cuscohygrine
C-10 H-16 O       camphor                  C-14 H-6 O-8       ellagic acid
C-10 H-16 O       dihydrocarvone           C-14 H-12 O-3      demethoxyyangonin
C-10 H-16 O       fenchone                 C-14 H-12 O-5      khellin
C-10 H-16 O       geranial                 C-14 H-12 O-6      ammiol
C-10 H-16 O       neral                    C-14 H-14 O-3      kawain
C-10 H-17 N O-3   isotussilagine           C-14 H-16          chamazulene
C-10 H-17 N O-3   (-)-tussilagine          C-14 H-16 O-3      dihydrokawain
C-10 H-18 O       borneol                  C-14 H-16 O-8      bilobalide
C-10 H-18 O       1,8-cineole              C-14 H-20 O-4      [3]-gingerol
C-10 H-18 O       citronellal              C-14 H-24 O-2      (+)-echinolone
C-10 H-18 O       geraniol                 C-15 H-8 O-6       rhein
C-10 H-18 O       linalool (B-linalool)    C-15 H-10 O-4      chrysophanol
C-10 H-18 O       menthone                 C-15 H-10 O-4      daidzein
C-10 H-18 O       nerol                    C-15 H-10 O-5      aloe-emodin
C-10 H-18 O       terpinen-4-ol            C-15 H-10 O-5      apigenin
C-10 H-18 O       A-terpineol              C-15 H-10 O-5      baicalein
C-10 H-20 O       menthol                  C-15 H-10 O-5      frangula emodin
C-11 H-10 O-5     isofraxidin              C-15 H-10 O-5      genistein
C-11 H-14 O-2     methyleugenol            C-15 H-10 O-7      quercetin
C-11 H-14 O-4     syringenin               C-15 H-10 O-8      myricetin
C-11 H-17 N O     (-)-methylephedrine      C-15 H-11 Cl O-6   cyanidin
C-11 H-17 N O     (+)-methylpse-           C-15 H-12 O-4      frangula emodin
                  udoephedrine                                anthrone
C-12 H-8 O-4      bergapten                C-15 H-12 O-4      isoliquiritigenin
C-12 H-8 O-4      xanthotoxin              C-15 H-12 O-4      liquiritigenin
C-12 H-10 N-2     harman                   C-15 H-12 O-7      taxifolin
C-12 H-10 O-4     baldrinal                C-15 H-14 O-4      yangonin
C-12 H-12 O-2     (Z)-butylidenephtalide   C-15 H-14 O-5      methysticin
C-12 H-14 O-2     (Z)-ligustilide          C-15 H-14 O-6      catechin
C-12 H-14 O-3     eugenol acetate          C-15 H-14 O-6      epi-catechin
C-12 H-14 O-3     valerophenone-o-         C-15 H-16 O-4      homobaldrinal
                  carboxylic acid          C-15 H-16 O-5      dihydromethysticin
C-12 H-16 O-4     [1]-gingerol             C-15 H-18 O        furanoeudesma-
C-12 H-16 O-7     arbutin                                     1,3-diene
C-12 H-20 O-2     bornyl acetate           C-15 H-18 O-2      curzerenone


438
                                                                      Annex 7


Mol. form.        Name                 Mol. form.        Name
C-15 H-18 O-4    helenalin             C-16 H-14 O-4     imperatorin
C-15 H-18 O-5    artecanin             C-16 H-16 O-5     angelicone
C-15 H-18 O-5    canin                 C-16 H-18 O-9     chlorogenic acid
C-15 H-20 O      curzerene             C-16 H-20 O-9     gentiopicroside
C-15 H-20 O      (5E,9Z)-furanodiene   C-16 H-22 O-2     (5E,8R,9E)-2-methoxy-
C-15 H-20 O      ar-turmerone                            furanodiene
C-15 H-20 O-2    (9E)-4,5-dihydro-     C-16 H-22 O-2     (5E,8S,9E)-2-methoxy-
                 furanodien-6-one                        furanodiene
C-15 H-20 O-3    parthenolide          C-16 H-22 O-9     sweroside
C-15 H-20 O-4    11A,13-dihydro-       C-16 H-24 O-4     [5]-gingerol
                 helenalin             C-16 H-25 N O     N-isobutyldode-
C-15 H-20 O-4    3B-hydroxy-                             catetraenamide
                 parthenolide          C-16 H-25 N O     (10E)-N-isobutyldode-
C-15 H-20 O-8    fragilin                                catetraenamide
C-15 H-22 O      A-turmerone           C-16 H-25 N O     (10Z)-N-isobutyldode-
                                                         catetraenamide
C-15 H-22 O      B-turmerone
                                       C-16 H-26 O-7     picrocrocin
C-15 H-22 O      valerenal
                                       C-17 H-20 O-10    eleutheroside B1
C-15 H-22 O-2    valerenic acid
                                       C-17 H-22 O-5     achillicin
C-15 H-22 O-4    [4]-gingerol
                                       C-17 H-22 O-7     valtroxal
C-15 H-22 O-9    aucubin               C-17 H-24 O-3     [6]-shogaol
C-15 H-22 O-10   catalpol              C-17 H-24 O-4     acetoxyvalerenic acid
C-15 H-22 O-10   monomelittoside       C-17 H-24 O-9     eleutheroside B
C-15 H-22 O-10   procumbide            C-17 H-26 O-4     [6]-gingerol
C-15 H-24        B-cadinene            C-17 H-28 O-2     farnesyl acetate
C-15 H-24        B-caryophyllene       C-18 H-16 O-8     chrysosplenol D
C-15 H-24        eremophilene          C-18 H-16 O-8     rosmarinic acid
C-15 H-24        humulene              C-18 H-18 O-2     honokiol
                 (A-caryophyllene)
                                       C-18 H-18 O-2     magnolol
C-15 H-24        zingiberene
                                       C-18 H-22 O-10    taraxacoside
C-15 H-24 O-4    (3S,9R)-tetrahy-
                                       C-18 H-25 N O-5   senecionine
                 droridentin B
                                       C-18 H-26 O-3     [7]-shogaol
C-15 H-24 O-9    ajugol
                                       C-18 H-30 O-2     linolenic acid
C-15 H-24 O-10   harpagide
                                       C-18 H-30 O-2     G-linolenic acid
C-15 H-26 O      (-)-A-bisabolol
                                       C-18 H-32 O-2     linoleic acid
C-15 H-26 O-2    bornyl isovalerate
                                       C-18 H-32 O-3     A-dimorphecolic acid
C-16 H-12 O-4    formononetin
                                       C-18 H-34 O-2     oleic acid
C-16 H-12 O-5    biochanin A
                                       C-18 H-34 O-3     ricinoleic acid
C-16 H-12 O-5    genkwanin
                                       C-19 H-16 O-4     bisdesme-
C-16 H-12 O-5    physcione                               thoxycurcumin
C-16 H-12 O-5    wogonin               C-19 H-18 O-8     casticin
C-16 H-12 O-7    isorhamnetin          C-19 H-20 O-10    khellinin
C-16 H-12 O-8    3´-methylmyricetin    C-19 H-22 O-6     cynaropicrin
C-16 H-13 Cl O-6 peonidin              C-19 H-24 N O-3   magnocurarine


                                                                          439
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Mol. form.        Name                     Mol. form.         Name
C-19 H-30 O-4     [8]-gingerol             C-21 H-20 O-12    isoquercitrin
C-19 H-32 O-4     (+)-protolichesterinic   C-21 H-20 O-12    spiraeoside
                  acid                     C-21 H-21 Cl O-11 cyanidin 3-mono-
C-20 H-18 N O-4   berberine                                  glucoside
C-20 H-18 O-5     desmethoxycurcumin       C-21 H-21 Cl O-12 delphinidin
C-20 H-18 O-6     (+)-sesamin                                3-monoglucoside
C-20 H-18 O-9     cetraric acid            C-21 H-21 N O-6 hydrastine
C-20 H-18 O-9     frangulin B              C-21 H-22 N O-4 palmatine
C-20 H-18 O-11    guajaverin               C-21 H-22 O-5     xanthohumol
C-20 H-20 N O-4   columbamine              C-21 H-22 O-8     chrysaloin
C-20 H-20 N O-4   jatrorrhizine            C-21 H-22 O-8     (-)-11-deoxyaloin
C-20 H-20 O-6     coniferyl ferulate       C-21 H-22 O-8     (+)-11-deoxyaloin
C-20 H-20 O-14    hamamelitannin           C-21 H-22 O-9     aloin A
C-20 H-21 N O-4   A-canadine               C-21 H-22 O-9     aloin B
C-20 H-21 N O-4   B-canadine               C-21 H-22 O-9     isoliquiritin
C-20 H-24 N O-4   magnoﬂorine              C-21 H-22 O-9     liquiritin
C-20 H-24 N O-4   phellodendrine           C-21 H-22 O-11    neocarthamin
C-20 H-24 O-4     A-crocetin               C-21 H-24 N-2 O-4 isomitraphylline
C-20 H-24 O-7     angelol G                C-21 H-24 N-2 O-4 isopteropodine
C-20 H-24 O-7     neoolivil                C-21 H-24 N-2 O-4 mitraphylline
C-20 H-24 O-9     ginkgolide A             C-21 H-24 N-2 O-4 pteropodine
C-20 H-24 O-10    ginkgolide B             C-21 H-24 N-2 O-4 speciophylline
C-20 H-24 O-10    ginkgolide J             C-21 H-24 N-2 O-4 uncarine F
C-20 H-24 O-10    ginkgolide M             C-21 H-24 O-7     visnadin
C-20 H-24 O-10    salicortin               C-21 H-26 O-4     B-crocetin
C-20 H-24 O-11    ginkgolide C             C-21 H-27 N O-11 amygdalin
C-20 H-26 O-4     carnosol                 C-21 H-28 O-2     (E)-guggulsterone
C-20 H-26 O-9     brucein D                C-21 H-28 O-2     (Z)-guggulsterone
C-20 H-30 O-3     [9]-shogaol              C-21 H-28 O-9     taraxinic acid glucoside
C-20 H-30 O-5     andrographolide          C-21 H-30 O-5     humulone
C-20 H-32         cembrene                 C-21 H-32 O-9     taraxacolide glucoside
C-20 H-34 O       mukulol                  C-21 H-32 O-15    melittoside
C-21 H-18 O-11    baicalin                 C-21 H-32 O-15    rehmannioside A
C-21 H-20 O-6     curcumin                 C-21 H-32 O-15    rehmannioside B
C-21 H-20 O-9     frangulin A              C-21 H-34 O-4     [10]-gingerol
C-21 H-20 O-10    isovitexin               C-21 H-34 O-11    patrinoside
C-21 H-20 O-10    vitexin
                                           C-21 H-34 O-14    rehmannioside C
C-21 H-20 O-11    astragalin
                                           C-22 H-16 O-12    fumarprotocetraric acid
C-21 H-20 O-11    cynaroside
                                           C-22 H-18 O-12    chicoric acid
C-21 H-20 O-11    iso-orientin
                                           C-22 H-23 Cl O-11 peonidin 3-mono-
C-21 H-20 O-11    orientin                                   glucoside
C-21 H-20 O-11    quercitrin               C-22 H-23 Cl O-12 petunidin 3-mono-
C-21 H-20 O-12    hyperoside                                 glucoside


440
                                                                           Annex 7


Mol. form.         Name                   Mol. form.         Name
C-22 H-26 N-2 O-4 corynoxeine             C-26 H-34 O-9     E-crocin
C-22 H-26 N-2 O-4 isocorynoxeine          C-26 H-34 O-11    brucein A
C-22 H-26 O-8     (+)-syringaresinol      C-26 H-38 O-4     lupulone
C-22 H-26 O-11    2´-O-acetylsalicortin   C-26 H-40 O-8     neoandrographolide
C-22 H-26 O-11    agnuside                C-26 H-40 O-9     andropanoside
C-22 H-28 N-2 O-4 isorhynchophylline      C-26 H-40 O-10    andrographiside
C-22 H-28 N-2 O-4 rhynchophylline         C-27 H-24 O-19    chebulanin
C-22 H-28 O-4     G-crocetin              C-27 H-30 O-14    glucofrangulin A
C-22 H-28 O-6     quassin                 C-27 H-30 O-14    vitexin 2´´-rhamnoside
C-22 H-30 O-8     isovaltrate             C-27 H-30 O-15    safﬂor yellow A
C-22 H-30 O-8     valtrate                C-27 H-30 O-15    scolymoside
C-22 H-34 O-3     [11]-shogaol            C-27 H-30 O-15    vicenin-2
C-22 H-34 O-5     vitexilactone           C-27 H-30 O-16    lucenin-2
C-22 H-35 N O-4 vitexlactam A             C-27 H-30 O-16    rheinoside C
C-22 H-46 O       docosanol               C-27 H-30 O-16    rheinoside D
C-23 H-25 Cl O-12 malvidin 3-mono-        C-27 H-30 O-16    rutin
                  glucoside               C-27 H-30 O-17    rheinoside A
C-23 H-28 O-6     gomisin N               C-27 H-30 O-17    rheinoside B
C-23 H-28 O-6     schisandrin B           C-27 H-31 N O-14 tinctormine
C-23 H-28 O-7     schisandrol B           C-27 H-32 O-13    aloinoside A
C-23 H-28 O-11    brucein B               C-27 H-32 O-13    aloinoside B
C-23 H-28 O-11    paeoniﬂorin             C-27 H-32 O-13    cascaroside C
C-23 H-28 O-13    kutkoside               C-27 H-32 O-13    cascaroside D
C-23 H-28 O-13    picroside II            C-27 H-32 O-14    cascaroside A
C-23 H-36 O-3     [12]-shogaol            C-27 H-32 O-14    cascaroside B
C-24 H-28 O-4     angelicide              C-27 H-32 O-14    cascaroside E
C-24 H-28 O-11    picroside I             C-27 H-32 O-14    cascaroside F
C-24 H-30 O-11    harpagoside             C-27 H-32 O-16    hydroxysafﬂor
C-24 H-32 O-6     schisandrin A                             yellow A
C-24 H-32 O-7     schisandrol A           C-27 H-35 N O-12 ipecoside
C-24 H-32 O-10    acevaltrate             C-27 H-42 O-20    rehmannioside D
C-24 H-50 O       tetracosanol            C-27 H-44 O-3     guggulsterol-III
C-25 H-22 O-10    silybin                 C-27 H-44 O-4     guggulsterol I
C-25 H-22 O-10    silychristin            C-27 H-46 O-3     guggulsterol-II
C-25 H-22 O-10    silydianin              C-28 H-34 O-8     deacetylnimbin
C-25 H-24 O-12    cynarin                 C-28 H-36 N-2 O-4 psychotrine
C-25 H-30 O-13    picroside III           C-28 H-36 O-11    bruceantin
C-25 H-34 O-9     ailanthinone            C-28 H-36 O-13    brucein C
C-25 H-34 O-10    glaucarubinone          C-28 H-36 O-13    eleutheroside E1
C-26 H-28 O-14    glucofrangulin B        C-28 H-38 N-2 O-4 cephaeline
C-26 H-28 O-14    isoschaftoside          C-28 H-38 O-6     withaferin A
C-26 H-28 O-14    schaftoside             C-28 H-38 O-6     withanolide D
C-26 H-32 O-12    brusatol                C-28 H-38 O-7     withasomniferol A


                                                                               441
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Mol. form.        Name                      Mol. form.         Name
C-29 H-30 O-13    amarogentin               C-30 H-50 O       G-taraxasterol
C-29 H-38 N-2 O-4 O-methylpsychotrine       C-30 H-50 O-2     uvaol
C-29 H-40 N-2 O-4 emetine                   C-30 H-50 O-5     barringtogenol C
C-29 H-48 O       sitosterone               C-30 H-50 O-6     protoaescigenin
C-29 H-50 O       B-sitosterol              C-30 H-52 O-3     panaxadiol
C-30 H-16 O-8     hypericin                 C-30 H-52 O-4     panaxatriol
C-30 H-16 O-9     pseudohypericin           C-31 H-20 O-10    bilobetin
C-30 H-18 O-10    amentoﬂavone              C-32 H-22 O-10    ginkgetin
C-30 H-26 O-12    procyanidin               C-32 H-22 O-10    isoginkgetin
C-30 H-26 O-12    procyanidin B1            C-32 H-22 O-11    5´-methoxybilobetin
C-30 H-26 O-12    procyanidin B2            C-32 H-44 O-8     cucurbitacin E
C-30 H-26 O-12    procyanidin B3            C-32 H-44 O-14    C-crocin
C-30 H-26 O-12    procyanidin B4            C-32 H-44 O-14    D-crocin
C-30 H-26 O-14    proanthocyanidins         C-32 H-46 O-8     cucurbitacin B
C-30 H-26 O-14    prodelphinidin            C-32 H-48 O-5     3-O-acetyl-11-oxo-
                                                              B-boswellic acid
C-30 H-36 O-9     nimbin
                                            C-32 H-50 O-4     3-O-acetyl-A-boswellic
C-30 H-42 O-7     cucurbitacin I                              acid
C-30 H-44 O-7     cucurbitacin D            C-32 H-50 O-4     3-O-acetyl-B-boswellic
C-30 H-46 O-4     glycyrrhetic acid                           acid
C-30 H-46 O-4     11-oxo-B-boswellic acid   C-32 H-54 O-4     docosyl (E)-ferulate
C-30 H-46 O-6     acteol                    C-33 H-24 O-10    sciadopitysin
C-30 H-46 O-7     cucurbitacin F            C-33 H-40 N-2 O-9 reserpine
C-30 H-46 O-7     cucurbitacin R            C-34 H-22 O-22    punicalin
C-30 H-48 O-3     betulinic acid            C-34 H-46 O-18    eleutheroside D
C-30 H-48 O-3     A-boswellic acid          C-34 H-46 O-18    eleutheroside E
C-30 H-48 O-3     B-boswellic acid          C-34 H-58 O-4     tetracosyl (E)-ferulate
C-30 H-48 O-3     oleanolic acid            C-35 H-42 N-2 O-9 rescinnamine
C-30 H-48 O-3     ursolic acid              C-35 H-44 O-16    azadirachtin
C-30 H-48 O-4     alphitolic acid           C-35 H-46 O-20    echinacoside
C-30 H-48 O-4     maslinic acid             C-35 H-52 O-4     hyperforin
C-30 H-48 O-4     saikogenin A              C-35 H-60 O-6     daucosterol
C-30 H-48 O-4     saikogenin D              C-36 H-34 N-2 O-9 tribulusamide B
C-30 H-48 O-4     saikogenin F              C-36 H-36 N-2 O-8 tribulusamide A
C-30 H-48 O-4     saikogenin G              C-36 H-36 O-17    kaempferol diglycoside
                                                              coumarate
C-30 H-48 O-5     asiatic acid
                                            C-36 H-36 O-18    quercetin diglycoside
C-30 H-48 O-5     cimigenol                                   coumarate
C-30 H-48 O-6     madecassic acid           C-36 H-54 O-4     adhyperforin
C-30 H-50         squalene                  C-36 H-56 O-9     calenduloside E
C-30 H-50 O       A-amyrin                  C-36 H-58 O-8     momordicoside F2
C-30 H-50 O       friedelin                 C-36 H-58 O-8     momordicoside I
C-30 H-50 O       taraxasterol              C-36 H-58 O-9     momordicoside L


442
                                                                          Annex 7


Mol. form.        Name                    Mol. form.        Name
C-37 H-40 N-2 O-6 berbamine               C-44 H-38 O-23    sennoside E
C-37 H-54 O-11    cimicifugoside          C-44 H-38 O-23    sennoside F
C-37 H-56 O-11    actein                  C-44 H-64 O-24    A-crocin
C-37 H-60 O-8     momordicoside F1        C-45 H-38 O-18    proanthocyanidin
C-37 H-60 O-8     momordicoside G                           trimer
C-37 H-60 O-9     goyaglycoside a         C-45 H-72 O-16    astragaloside I
C-37 H-60 O-9     goyaglycoside b         C-45 H-72 O-16    isoastragaloside I
C-37 H-60 O-9     momordicoside K         C-47 H-76 O-17    zizyphus saponin I
C-38 H-54 O-19    B-crocin                C-47 H-76 O-17    zizyphus saponin II
C-38 H-62 O-9     goyaglycoside c         C-47 H-78 O-19    astragaloside V
C-38 H-62 O-9     goyaglycoside d         C-47 H-78 O-19    astragaloside VI
C-40 H-56 O-7     uncarinic acid A        C-47 H-78 O-19    astragaloside VII
C-40 H-56 O-7     uncarinic acid B        C-48 H-28 O-30    punicalagin
C-41 H-30 O-27    chebulagic acid         C-48 H-54 O-27    safﬂor yellow B
C-41 H-32 O-27    chebulinic acid         C-48 H-76 O-19    calenduloside H
C-41 H-68 O-14    astragaloside III       C-48 H-78 O-19    asiaticoside
C-41 H-68 O-14    astragaloside IV        C-48 H-78 O-20    madecassoside
C-42 H-38 O-20    sennoside A             C-48 H-82 O-18    ginsenoside Rd
C-42 H-38 O-20    sennoside B             C-48 H-82 O-18    ginsenoside Re
C-42 H-40 O-19    sennoside C             C-49 H-76 O-19    goyasaponin III
C-42 H-40 O-19    sennoside D             C-51 H-84 O-21    tribulosaponin A
C-42 H-62 O-16    glycyrrhizin            C-51 H-84 O-22    protodioscin
C-42 H-66 O-14    calenduloside F         C-51 H-84 O-22    tribulosaponin B
C-42 H-68 O-13    calenduloside A         C-52 H-84 O-21    jujuboside B
C-42 H-68 O-13    goyaglycoside e         C-52 H-84 O-21    zizyphus saponin III
C-42 H-68 O-13    goyaglycoside f         C-53 H-90 O-22    ginsenoside Rb2
C-42 H-68 O-13    saikosaponin A          C-53 H-90 O-22    ginsenoside Rc
C-42 H-68 O-13    saikosaponin B1         C-54 H-92 O-23    ginsenoside Rb1
C-42 H-68 O-13    saikosaponin B2         C-55 H-90 O-25    tribulosin
C-42 H-68 O-13    saikosaponin D          C-57 H-92 O-27    polygalacin D
C-42 H-70 O-15    goyaglycoside h         C-57 H-92 O-28    platycodin D
C-42 H-72 O-13    ginsenoside Rg2         C-59 H-94 O-29    desacylsenegin II
C-42 H-72 O-14    ginsenoside Rf          C-59 H-94 O-29    platycodin A
C-42 H-72 O-14    ginsenoside Rg1         C-59 H-94 O-29    platycodin C
C-42 H-72 O-14    pseudoginsenoside F11   C-63 H-102 O-32   polygalacin D2
C-43 H-42 O-22    carthamin               C-63 H-102 O-33   platycodin D2
C-43 H-70 O-14    goyaglycoside g         C-64 H-102 O-33   desacylsenegasaponin A
C-43 H-70 O-15    astragaloside II        C-65 H-102 O-31   goyasaponin I
C-43 H-70 O-15    isoastragaloside II     C-65 H-104 O-33   desacylsenegin III
C-43 H-72 O-14    saikosaponin B3         C-69 H-102 O-31   (E)-senegasaponin B
C-43 H-72 O-14    saikosaponin B4         C-69 H-102 O-31   (Z)-senegasaponin B



                                                                              443
WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants


Mol. form.        Name
C-70 H-104 O-32   senegin II
C-70 H-104 O-32   (Z)-senegin II
C-70 H-110 O-35   goyasaponin II
C-74 H-110 O-35   (E)-senegasaponin A
C-74 H-110 O-35   (Z)-senegasaponin A
C-75 H-112 O-35   (E)-senegin III
C-75 H-112 O-35   (Z)-senegin III




444
445
446
          Selected WHO publications of related interest


                               Information on medicinal plants:
                     WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants, Volume 3
                            (ISBN 978 92 4 154702 4), 2007

                     WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants, Volume 2
                              (ISBN 92 4 154537 2), 2002

                     WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants, Volume 1
                              (ISBN 92 4 154517 8), 1999

                     Quality assurance and control of herbal medicines:
    WHO Guidelines on good agricultural and collection practices (GACP) for medicinal plants
                               (ISBN 92 4 154627 1), 2003

    WHO good agricultural and collection practices (GACP) monograph on Artemisia annua L.
                             (ISBN 978 92 4 159443 1), 2006

                       Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials
                                  (ISBN 92 4 154510 0), 1998

    Basic tests for drugs: pharmaceutical substances, medicinal plant materials and dosage forms
                                   (ISBN 92 4 154513 5), 1998

WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues
                               (ISBN 978 92 4 159444 8), 2007

          WHO guidelines for good manufacturing practices (GMP) for herbal medicines
                              (ISBN 978 92 4 154716 1), 2007

             Regulation, evaluation and safety monitoring of herbal medicines:
        Summary report of the global survey on national policy on traditional medicine and
            complementary/alternative medicine and regulation of herbal medicines
                                 (ISBN 92 4 159323 7), 2005

         WHO guidelines on safety monitoring and pharmacovigilance of herbal medicines
                                 (ISBN 92 4 159221 4), 2004

     General Guidelines for Methodologies on Research and Evaluation of Traditional Medicine
                              (WHO/EDM/TRM/2000.1), 2000

                                    Consumer information:
            WHO guidelines on development of consumer information on proper use of
               traditional medicine and complementary/alternative medicine
                               (ISBN 92 4 159170 6), 2004




    Further information on WHO technical documents in the ﬁeld of traditional medicine
                including those listed above, can be found at the address below:
                    http://www.who.int/medicinedocs/en/cl/CL1.1.1.11/
WHO published Volume 1 of the WHO monographs on selected
medicinal plants, containing 28 monographs, in 1999, Volume
2 including 30 monographs in 2002, and the third volume
presenting 31 monographs in 2007. This fourth volume contains
an additional collection of 28 monographs describing the quality
control and use of selected medicinal plants.

Each monograph contains two parts, the ﬁrst of which provides
pharmacopoeial summaries for quality assurance purposes,
including botanical features, identity tests, purity requirements,
chemical assays and major chemical constituents. The second part,
drawing on an extensive review of scientiﬁc research, describes
the clinical applications of the plant material, with detailed
pharmacological information and sections on contraindications,
warnings, precautions, adverse reactions and dosage. Also included
are six cumulative indexes to the four volumes, listing the
monographs, the medicinal plant names, and the major chemical
constituents.

The WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants aim to provide
scientiﬁc information on the safety, efﬁcacy, and quality control
of widely used medicinal plants; provide models to assist Member
States in developing their own monographs or formularies for
these and other herbal medicines; and facilitate information
exchange among Member States. WHO monographs, however, are
not pharmacopoeial monographs, rather they are comprehensive
scientiﬁc references for drug regulatory authorities, physicians,
traditional health practitioners, pharmacists, manufacturers,
research scientists and the general public.
                                                         ISBN 978 92 4 154705 5
