         WHO guidelines on
safety monitoring of herbal medicines
    in pharmacovigilance systems




        World Health Organization
                Geneva
                  2004
                                                                                                                             Contents




                                                                                                            Contents

Foreword ........................................................................................................................... v

Acknowledgements ......................................................................................................vii

Part I WHO Guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in
pharmacovigilance systems

1. General introduction .............................................................................................. 1
1.1 Introduction .......................................................................................................... 1
1.2 Background ........................................................................................................... 1
1.3 Objectives .............................................................................................................. 5
1.4 Glossary ................................................................................................................. 5

2. Pharmacovigilance and the WHO International Drug Monitoring
Programme ....................................................................................................................... 9
2.1   What is pharmacovigilance?............................................................................... 9
2.2   How does pharmacovigilance operate?.......................................................... 10

3. Challenges in monitoring the safety of herbal medicines ............................ 13
3.1 Regulation, quality assurance and control ..................................................... 13
3.2 Appropriate use ................................................................................................. 14

4. Safety monitoring of herbal medicines ............................................................ 17
4.1  Sources of reports............................................................................................... 17
4.2  Herbal products targeted for safety monitoring............................................ 19
4.3  Reporting of suspected adverse reactions ...................................................... 19
4.4  Assessment of case reports ............................................................................... 22
4.5  Data management .............................................................................................. 25

5. Communication ..................................................................................................... 27
5.1 General................................................................................................................. 27
5.2 Risk communication .......................................................................................... 28

6.     References............................................................................................................... 29

7. Selected bibliography .......................................................................................... 31
Safety monitoring and pharmacovigilance ................................................................ 31
Regulation of herbal medicines/traditional medicines............................................ 31
Quality assurance/control of herbal medicines ........................................................ 32
Rational use of herbal medicines ................................................................................ 32

Annex 1: List of participants in the WHO Consultation on Safety Monitoring of
Herbal Medicines, Vancouver, Canada, 1–3 February 2004 .................................... 33

Annex 2: The Erice Declaration on Communicating Drug Safety Information,
1997 .................................................................................................................................. 37

                                                                                                                                      iii
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems




          Annex 3: Privacy and the confidentiality of personal health data.......................... 39

          Annex 4: Spontaneous reports from persons other than health-care
          professionals ................................................................................................................... 41

          Annex 5: Model reporting form................................................................................... 45

          Annex 6: Proposed database management and classification for coding herbal
          products (the Uppsala Monitoring Centre, Uppsala, Sweden) ............................... 47

          Part II Safety monitoring of medicinal products: Guidelines for setting up and
          running a pharmacovigilance centre (The Uppsala Moniroring Centre,
          Uppsala, Sweden, 2000




          iv
                                                                         Foreward




                                                               Foreword

The use of herbal medicines continues to expand rapidly across the world. Many
people now take herbal medicines or herbal products for their health care in
different national health-care settings. However, mass media reports of adverse
events tend to be sensational and give a negative impression regarding the use of
herbal medicines in general rather than identifying the causes of these events,
which may relate to a variety of issues. The safety of herbal medicines has
become a major concern to both national health authorities and the general
public.

The World Health Organization (WHO) received an urgent request from its
Member States, through the national pharmacovigilance centres participating in
the WHO International Drug Monitoring Programme and drug regulatory
authorities, to assist Member States to strengthen national capacity in monitoring
the safety of herbal medicines and in analysing the causes of adverse events, and
to share safety information at national, regional and global levels. These
guidelines have been developed as WHO’s immediate response to this request,
and to support Member States’ efforts in this area in the context of the WHO
International Drug Monitoring Programme, which has been in operation since
the 1970s. Thus, development of the guidelines has been carried out as a joint
project between the Traditional Medicine Team (TRM) and the Quality, Safety:
Medicines Team (QSM) in the Department of Essential Drugs and Medicines
Policy (EDM) at WHO headquarters.

The recommended approach is to include herbal medicines in existing national
pharmacovigilance systems or, where such systems have not yet been developed,
to establish comprehensive national pharmacovigilance systems which
incorporate coverage of herbal medicines. As described in the Introduction to the
guidelines, it is not WHO’s intention to suggest that different systems should be
instituted for this purpose. However, in view of the unique characteristics of the
provision and use of herbal medicines, there are several technical issues that
need to be addressed if adequate and effective monitoring is to be introduced.
The guidelines therefore identify the particular challenges posed in monitoring
the safety of herbal medicines effectively and propose approaches for
overcoming them. Special attention is also given to the reporting system for
adverse reactions to herbal medicines, and to the analysis of the causes of the
reported adverse reactions.

In order to handle herbal medicines, in particular, to analyse the causes of
adverse events, national pharmacovigilance centres (or equivalent institutions)
will need to acquire specific technical expertise. This will include trained
personnel in relevant technical areas and facilities to analyse the products
concerned, for which there is often insufficient information and lack of access to
reliable information support. Many countries currently lack this expertise, in
particular, access to suitable analytical laboratories. Member States have
therefore recommended the establishment of regional laboratories specializing in
                                                                                v
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



          the analysis of herbal products. WHO encourages Member States to explore the
          feasibility of this proposal.

          To further the implementation of these guidelines, WHO plans to organize a
          series of training workshops for Member States, in collaboration with the WHO
          Collaborating Centres for International Drug Monitoring and for Traditional
          Medicine. National capacity in monitoring the safety of herbal medicines will be
          further strengthened through national training workshops on topics such as,
          broadening reporting schemes, acquiring technical expertise at national
          pharmacovigilance centres, and promoting awareness. Training of practitioners
          who provide herbal medicines will also be crucial.

          The guidelines also articulate technical issues relating to data management and
          communication. The Uppsala Monitoring Centre, Uppsala, Sweden (UMC) has
          proposed the herbal anatomical-therapeutic-chemical classification (HATC) as a
          coding tool to permit the inclusion of individual herbal products in the global
          WHO database of adverse drug reaction (ADR) reports for pharmacovigilance
          purposes. The summary explanation of the proposed system by UMC is annexed
          to the guidelines. Although the system represents a valuable attempt at coding
          herbal medicines, it may not be perfect for covering all types of herbal products,
          in particular, traditional medicines that are used under unique concepts and with
          unique terminologies. Member States are encouraged to offer suggestions, on the
          basis of their national experience in the day-to-day operation of national
          pharmacovigilance, as to how classification could be approached in a more
          comprehensive manner and in a way that meets their national circumstances.
          WHO, in collaboration with UMC, will work with Member States to continue
          development of the system.

          Currently, the majority of adverse events related to the use of herbal products
          and herbal medicines that are reported are attributable either to poor product
          quality or to improper use. Inadequate regulatory measures, weak quality control
          systems and largely uncontrolled distribution channels (including mail order and
          Internet sales) may have been contributing to the occurrence of such events. In
          order to expand knowledge about genuine adverse reactions to herbal medicines,
          and to avoid wasting scare resources for identifying and analysing adverse
          events, events resulting from such situations will need to be reduced or
          eliminated. Member States are therefore encouraged to strengthen national
          regulation, registration and quality assurance and control of herbal medicines. In
          addition, national health authorities should give greater attention to consumer
          education and to qualified practice in the provision of herbal medicines.

          WHO has welcomed the active participation of drug regulatory authorities and
          national pharmacovigilance centres, among others, in the development of these
          guidelines. This has provided a useful starting point for strengthening
          communication between these authorities, which will be needed to ensure
          progress towards the common goal – the safety of herbal medicines.


          Dr Xiaorui Zhang
          Coordinator, Traditional Medicine
          Department of Essential Drugs and Medicines Policy
          World Health Organization

          vi
                                                                Acknowledgements




                                          Acknowledgements

The World Health Organization (WHO) wishes to express its sincere
appreciation to Health Canada, in particular the Natural Health Products
Directorate, for kindly hosting the WHO Consultation on Safety Monitoring of
Herbal Medicines in Vancouver, Canada, in February 2004 (Annex 1), with its
financial support.

WHO also wishes to thank the Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sports,
Netherlands for its generous financial contribution to WHO in support of the
WHO Working Group Meeting on Safety Monitoring and Pharmacovigilance of
Herbal Medicines held in Amsterdam, Netherlands in October 2002, and the
WHO Consultation on Safety Monitoring of Herbal Medicines held in
Vancouver, Canada, in February 2004. Special thanks are extended to Dr Kees
van Grootheest, Director, Netherlands Pharmacovigilance Foundation (LAREB),
and his team, for their assistance in organizing the 2002 meeting.

WHO acknowledges the valuable contribution of Dr Ralph Edwards, Director,
WHO Collaborating Centre for International Safety Monitoring at the Uppsala
Monitoring Centre, Uppsala, Sweden, and his team, and Professor David
Coulter, Intensive Medicines Monitoring Programme, Department of Preventive
and Social Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Otago, Dunedin, New
Zealand, to the preparation of the draft guidelines.

The Organization is grateful to the participants in the two consultative meetings
for their work in reviewing the draft guidelines. Thanks are also due to the more
than 400 experts in over 102 countries, including those at the national
pharmacovigilance centres participating in the WHO International Drug
Monitoring Programme, national drug regulatory authorities, poisons centres
and national health authorities, as well as, WHO Collaborating Centres for
Traditional Medicines, and members of WHO Advisory Panel on Traditional
Medicines, who reviewed and provided comments and advice on the draft
guidelines. Preparation of the guidelines has also benefited from technical
support from relevant international and nongovernmental organizations,
including associations of health professions and of manufacturers of herbal
medicines, and consumer associations.

Finally, WHO expresses its appreciation to The Council for International
Organizations of Medical Sciences and the Uppsala Monitoring Centre, Uppsala,
Sweden for permission to reproduce the material included in Annexes 3 and 4,
and Part II of the guidelines, respectively.




                                                                              vii
                         Part I

WHO Guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in
              pharmacovigilance systems
                                                                        General introduction




                                           1. General introduction


1.1   Introduction

      Safety is a fundamental principle in the provision of herbal medicines and herbal
      products for health care, and a critical component of quality control. These
      guidelines provide practical technical guidance for monitoring the safety of
      herbal medicines within pharmacovigilance systems. The safety monitoring of
      herbal medicines is compared and contrasted with that of other medicines
      currently undertaken in the context of the WHO International Drug Monitoring
      Programme. While there are regulatory and cultural differences in the
      preparation and use of different types of medicines, they are all equally
      important from a pharmacovigilance perspective.

      The guidelines were developed with the view that, within current
      pharmacovigilance systems, monitoring of the safety of medicines should be
      enhanced and broadened in ways that will allow the successful monitoring of
      herbal medicines. It is not the intention to suggest that different systems should
      be instituted for this purpose. The guidelines should therefore be considered in
      conjunction with the publication entitled, Safety monitoring of medicinal products:
      guidelines for setting up and running a pharmacovigilance centre (1), which is
      reproduced as Part II of this publication.

      The inclusion of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems is becoming
      increasingly important given the growing use of herbal products and herbal
      medicines globally. For example, in the United States of America, some US$ 17
      billion was spent by more than 158 million Americans in 2000 (2). Further, a
      recent study indicated that more than 70% of the German population reported
      using “natural medicines” and that, for most of them, herbal medicinal products
      were the first choice in the treatment of minor diseases or disorders (3). The
      worldwide consumption of herbal medicines is enormous, so that, in terms of
      population exposure alone, it is essential to identify the risks associated with
      their use. Safety of herbal medicines is therefore an important public health issue.
      Herbal medicines are frequently used in conjunction with other medicines, and it
      is essential to understand the consequences of such combined use and monitor
      whether any adverse effects are arising. This can be achieved most readily within
      existing pharmacovigilance systems.


1.2   Background

      Problems
      Among consumers, there is a widespread misconception that “natural” always
      means “safe”, and a common belief that remedies from natural origin are
      harmless and carry no risk. However, some medicinal plants are inherently toxic.
                                                                                          1
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



          Further, as with all medicines, herbal medicines are expected to have side effects,
          which may be of an adverse nature. Some adverse events reported in association
          with herbal products are attributable to problems of quality. Major causes of such
          events are adulteration of herbal products with undeclared other medicines and
          potent pharmaceutical substances, such as corticosteroids and non-steroidal anti-
          inflammatory agents. Adverse events may also arise from the mistaken use of the
          wrong species of medicinal plants, incorrect dosing, errors in the use of herbal
          medicines both by health-care providers and consumers, interactions with other
          medicines, and use of products contaminated with potentially hazardous
          substances, such as toxic metals, pathogenic microorganisms and agrochemical
          residues.

          The following examples demonstrate the range of problems encountered with the
          use of herbal medicines and products.

          ♦   Some herbal products were found to contain 0.1–0.3 mg of betamethasone per
              capsule after some patients developed corticosteroid-like side effects.
          ♦   Owing to misidentification of the medicinal plant species, plant materials
              containing aristolochic acid were used for manufacturing herbal products,
              which caused severe kidney failure in patients in several countries.
          ♦   Reports have been received by drug safety monitoring agencies of prolonged
              prothrombin times, increased coagulation time, subcutaneous haematomas
              and intracranial haemorrhage associated with the use of Ginkgo biloba.
          ♦   One of the most well known traditionally used herbal medicines caused
              severe, sometimes fatal cases of interstitial pneumonia when used in
              conjunction with interferon.

          Adverse events thus far reported in relation to herbal products are frequently
          attributable either to poor quality or to improper use, and it is therefore difficult
          to distinguish genuine adverse reactions to herbal medicines and herbal products
          until the cause of such events has been identified.

          Current situation
          Despite the growing interest in the safety of herbal medicines, national
          surveillance systems to monitor and evaluate adverse reactions associated with
          herbal medicines are rare, even among the more than 70 Member States
          participating in the WHO International Drug Monitoring Programme. Moreover,
          there is a lack of effective communication on this subject at all levels, from
          international to local. A recent WHO survey showed that around 90 countries,
          less than half of WHO’s Member States, currently regulate herbal medicines, and
          an even smaller proportion has systems in place for the regulation/qualification
          of providers of herbal medicines. Moreover, there are disparities in regulation
          between countries, and this has serious implications for international access to
          and distribution of such products.

          National pharmacovigilance systems should be closely linked to national drug
          regulatory systems. To function properly, a national safety monitoring
          programme for herbal medicines should be operated alongside an effective
          national drug regulatory system with the will and the potential to react to signals
          emanating from reports of adverse effects of herbal medicines and to take proper
          regulatory measures.


          2
                                                                 General introduction



At the national level, the capacity for reporting adverse events on herbal
medicines, analysing their causes and learning from past experience is seriously
hampered in many Member States by the lack of methodological uniformity in
identification and measurement, the lack of information on adverse effects of
herbal medicines, inadequate reporting schemes, fear of professional liability,
and inadequate information systems relating to the use of herbal medicines.
Current knowledge of the epidemiology of adverse reactions to herbal medicines,
such as frequency of occurrence and causes, is very limited.

Action required
For the safety of those using herbal medicines, four complementary actions are
needed:

♦   clear identification of the nature of adverse events
♦   management of the risks
♦   institution of measure to prevent adverse events
♦   good communication of the risks and benefits of herbal medicines.

These require:

♦   increased ability to learn from identified adverse events through better
    reporting systems, skilful technical investigation of incidents and responsible
    sharing of data
♦   greater capacity to anticipate adverse events and to probe systemic
    weaknesses that might lead to problems
♦   identification of existing knowledge resources, within and outside the health
    sector
♦   improvements in the health-care delivery system, so that structures are
    reconfigured, incentives are realigned, and safety and quality are placed at
    the core of the system

In 2000 and 2001, the annual meetings of national pharmacovigilance centres
participating in the WHO International Drug Monitoring Programme requested
WHO to provide urgent support to Member States in developing national
systems for the safety monitoring of herbal and traditional medicines. This was
echoed by a recommendation made at the Third WHO Consultation on Selected
Medicinal Plants, and at the WHO Informal Meeting on Methodologies for
Quality Control of Finished Herbal Products, both held in Ottawa, Canada, in
July 2001. The International Conference of Drug Regulatory Authorities (ICDRA)
also made recommendations to WHO in 1999 and 2002 that it should support
Member States in strengthening their capacity in these areas. In addition,
resolution WHA56.31 on traditional medicine, adopted at the Fifty-Sixth World
Health Assembly in May 2003, urged Member States to set up or expand and
strengthen existing national drug safety monitoring systems to monitor herbal
medicines and other traditional practices.

Action needed by WHO to respond to these requests includes:

♦   provision of technical guidance to facilitate the expansion of existing systems
    to monitor and report adverse drug reactions to herbal medicines or the
    establishment of comprehensive national drug safety monitoring systems that


                                                                                   3
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



              incorporate the safety monitoring of herbal medicines, where these do not yet
              exist
          ♦   support to countries in strengthening their pharmacovigilance system for
              herbal medicines, allowing for the involvement of health-care providers,
              consumers and manufacturers.

          WHO has taken the lead in tackling the need for drug safety monitoring since
          1970 (resolution WHA23.13 on international monitoring of adverse reactions to
          drugs, 1970). The WHO International Drug Monitoring Programme, together
          with the WHO Collaborating Centre in Sweden, the Uppsala Monitoring Centre
          (UMC), has instituted a coherent programme of action for pharmacovigilance,
          which includes the establishment of a programme for exchange of safety
          information, maintenance of the global WHO database of adverse drug reaction
          (ADR) reports (hereafter referred to as the global WHO database), and the
          provision of numerous guidelines on monitoring drug safety. It also seeks to
          bridge the gap between industry and regulatory authorities. As an immediate
          response to the need for pharmacovigilance for herbal medicines, WHO has
          increased its efforts to promote their safety monitoring within the context of the
          WHO International Drug Monitoring Programme.

          Where there is a national drug safety monitoring system in place, there is a clear
          need to expand its scope to include herbal medicines. If no such system exists,
          there is an urgent need to establish such a system, which should include
          monitoring of herbal medicines. However, adding herbal medicines to a list of
          target substances for a national drug safety monitoring activities is not enough in
          itself. Because of the particular nature of the distribution and use of herbal
          medicines, adequate and effective monitoring demands special requirements,
          including:

          ♦   expanding the source of case reports, for example by:
               – involving all providers of herbal medicines, including providers of
                  traditional medicine and complementary/alternative medicine, according
                  to national circumstances
               – strengthening the role of providers, such as pharmacists and health-care
                  professionals, working in the community
               – involving manufacturers of herbal medicines
               – facilitating consumer reporting
               – developing systems of information exchange involving drug information
                  centres, poisons centres, consumer organizations and manufacturers
          ♦   establishing a system for the exchange of regulatory and quality information
              on herbal medicines among national pharmacovigilance centres and national
              drug regulatory authorities
          ♦   strengthening capacity to carry out monitoring of herbal medicines at
              national pharmacovigilance centres by:
              – training staff in relevant technical areas
              – ensuring access to facilities for analysing products suspected of causing
                  adverse reactions
              – providing access to reliable information
          ♦   developing a standard classification and/or coding system for herbal
              medicines, with standardized terms and definitions
          ♦   strengthening communication and awareness at all levels (global, regional,
              national, local and community) and among key players (international bodies,

          4
                                                                         General introduction



          regulatory authorities, national pharmacovigilance centres, health-care
          providers and consumers).

      In response to these needs, WHO has developed these guidelines. It also plans to
      organize a series of training workshops to strengthen national capacity in safety
      monitoring of herbal medicines within pharmacovigilance systems in Member
      States.


1.3   Objectives

      The objectives of these guidelines are to:

      ♦   support Member States, in the context of the WHO International Drug
          Monitoring Programme, to strengthen national pharmacovigilance capacity in
          order to carry out effective safety monitoring of herbal medicines
      ♦   provide technical guidance on the principles of good pharmacovigilance and
          the inclusion of herbal medicines in existing national drug safety monitoring
          systems; and where these systems are not in place, to facilitate the
          establishment of an inclusive national drug safety monitoring system
      ♦   provide standard definitions of terms relating to pharmacovigilance, and
          safety monitoring of herbal medicines
      ♦   promote and strengthen internationally coordinated information exchange on
          pharmacovigilance, and safety monitoring of herbal medicines among
          Member States
      ♦   promote the safe and proper use of herbal medicines.

      The regulation of herbal medicines and their place in national health-care
      systems differs from country to country, and these guidelines will therefore need
      to be adapted to meet the needs of the local situation.


1.4   Glossary

      The terms used in Part I of these guidelines are defined below.


      Terms relating to herbal medicines
      These terms and their definitions have been selected and adapted from other
      WHO documents and guidelines that are widely used by the WHO Member
      States, such as the General guidelines for methodologies on research and evaluation of
      traditional medicine (4). These definitions may differ from those included in
      national regulations, and are therefore, for reference only.

      Herbal medicines include herbs, herbal materials, herbal preparations and finished
      herbal products. In some countries herbal medicines may contain, by tradition,
      natural organic or inorganic active ingredients that are not of plant origin (e.g.
      animal and mineral materials).




                                                                                           5
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



               Herbs include crude plant material, such as leaves, flowers, fruit, seeds,
               stems, wood, bark, roots, rhizomes or other plant parts, which may be entire,
               fragmented or powdered.

               Herbal materials include, in addition to herbs, fresh juices, gums, fixed oils,
               essential oils, resins and dry powders of herbs. In some countries, these
               materials may be processed by various local procedures, such as steaming,
               roasting or stir-baking with honey, alcoholic beverages or other materials.

               Herbal preparations are the basis for finished herbal products and may include
               comminuted or powdered herbal materials, or extracts, tinctures and fatty
               oils of herbal materials. They are produced by extraction, fractionation,
               purification, concentration, or other physical or biological processes. They
               also include preparations made by steeping or heating herbal materials in
               alcoholic beverages and/or honey, or in other materials.

               Finished herbal products consist of herbal preparations made from one or more
               herbs. If more than one herb is used, the term “mixture herbal product” can
               also be used. Finished herbal products and mixture herbal products may
               contain excipients in addition to the active ingredients. However, finished
               products or mixture herbal products to which chemically defined active
               substances have been added, including synthetic compounds and/or
               isolated constituents from herbal materials, are not considered to be herbal.

          Traditional use of herbal medicines refers to the long historical use of these
          medicines. Their use is well established and widely acknowledged to be safe and
          effective, and may be accepted by national authorities.

          Therapeutic activity refers to the successful prevention, diagnosis and treatment
          of physical and mental illnesses. Treatment includes beneficial alteration or
          regulation of the physical and mental status of the body and development of a
          sense of general well-being as well as improvement of symptoms.

          Active ingredients refer to ingredients of herbal medicines with therapeutic
          activity. Where the active ingredients have been identified, the preparation of the
          finished herbal product should be standardized to ensure that it always contains
          a defined amount of the active ingredients, providing adequate analytical
          methods are available. In cases where it is not possible to identify the active
          ingredients, the whole herbal medicine may be considered as one active
          ingredient.

          Traditional medicine is the sum total of the knowledge, skills and practices
          based on the theories, beliefs and experiences indigenous to different cultures,
          whether explicable or not, used in the maintenance of health and in the
          prevention, diagnosis, improvement or treatment of physical and mental illness.
          The terms “complementary medicine”, “alternative medicine” and “non-
          conventional medicine” are used interchangeably with “traditional medicine” in
          some countries.

          Terms relating to safety monitoring of medicinal products
          The terms and definitions below have been adopted by the national
          pharmacovigilance centres participating in the WHO International Drug

          6
                                                                  General introduction



Monitoring Programme. Different medical paradigms may view clinical events
differently in their relationship to herbal medicines, whether they are expected
therapeutic outcomes or adverse reactions.

Side effect. Any unintended effect of a pharmaceutical product occurring at
doses normally used in humans that is related to the pharmacological properties
of the drug.

Adverse event/experience. Any untoward medical occurrence that may present
during treatment with a pharmaceutical product but that does not necessarily
have a causal relationship with this treatment.

    Serious adverse event. Any untoward medical occurrence that, at any dose:
     ♦ results in death
     ♦ requires inpatient hospitalization or prolongation of existing
       hospitalization
     ♦ results in persistent or significant disability/incapacity
     ♦ is life-threatening.


Adverse reaction. A response to a drug that is noxious and unintended, and that
occurs at doses normally used in humans for the prophylaxis, diagnosis or
therapy of disease, or for the modification of physiological function.

    Unexpected adverse reaction. An adverse reaction, the nature or severity of
    which is not consistent with domestic labelling or market authorization, or
    expected from the characteristics of the drug.

Signal. Reported information on a possible causal relationship between an
adverse event and a drug, the relationship being unknown or incompletely
documented previously. Usually, more than a single report is required to
generate a signal, depending upon the seriousness of the event and the quality of
the information.

Spontaneous reporting. A system whereby case reports of adverse drug events
are voluntarily submitted by health professionals and pharmaceutical
manufacturers to the national regulatory authority.

Pharmacovigilance is the science and activities relating to the detection,
assessment, understanding and prevention of adverse effects or any other
possible drug-related problems (see also section 2).

National pharmacovigilance centre. A single, governmentally recognized centre
(or part of an integrated system) within a country with the clinical and scientific
expertise to collect, collate, analyse and give advice on all information related to
drug safety.




                                                                                    7
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems




          8
                        Pharmacovigilance and the WHO International Drug Monitoring Programme




                   2. Pharmacovigilance and the WHO
                         International Drug Monitoring
                                           Programme


2.1   What is pharmacovigilance?

      The WHO publication entitled The importance of pharmacovigilance: safety
      monitoring of medicinal products (5), describes pharmacovigilance as follows.

          Pharmacovigilance is the science and activities relating to the detection,
          assessment, understanding and prevention of adverse effects of drugs or any
          other possible drug-related problems.
          Recently, its concerns have been widened to include:
          ♦ herbals
          ♦ traditional and complementary medicines
          ♦ blood products
          ♦ biologicals
          ♦ medical devices
          ♦ vaccines.


          Many other issues are also of relevance to the science:
          ♦ substandard medicines
          ♦ medication errors
          ♦ lack of efficacy reports
          ♦ use of medicines for indications that are not approved and for which there is
            inadequate scientific basis
          ♦ case reports of acute and chronic poisoning
          ♦ assessment of drug-related mortality
          ♦ abuse and misuse of medicines
          ♦ adverse interactions of medicines with chemicals, other medicines and food.


          The specific aims of pharmacovigilance are to:
          ♦ improve patient care and safety in relation to the use of medicines and all
            medical and paramedical interventions
          ♦ improve public health and safety in relation to the use of medicines
          ♦ contribute to the assessment of benefit, harm, effectiveness and risk of
            medicines, encouraging their safe, rational and more effective (including
            cost-effective) use
          ♦ promote       understanding,    education     and    clinical   training in
            pharmacovigilance and its effective communication to the public.



      These aims of pharmacovigilance can be achieved (1) by:

      ♦   early detection of hitherto unknown adverse reactions and interactions
      ♦   detection of increases in frequency of (known) adverse reactions

                                                                                            9
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



          ♦    identification of risk factors and possible mechanisms underlying adverse
               reactions
          ♦    estimation of the quantitative aspects of benefit/risk, and analysis and
               dissemination of the information needed to improve the prescription,
               dispensing, provision and regulation of medicines.

          The ultimate goal of pharmacovigilance is the safe and proper use of effective
          medicines of all types.


2.2       How does pharmacovigilance operate?

          It must be emphasized that there is no difference in principle between the safety
          monitoring of herbal medicines and that of other medicines.

          The WHO International Drug Monitoring Programme
          Under the WHO International Drug Monitoring Programme, national
          pharmacovigilance centres designated by the competent health authorities are
          responsible for the collection, processing and evaluation of case reports of
          suspected adverse reactions supplied by health-care professionals (mainly
          spontaneous reporting by physicians of reactions associated with the use of
          prescribed medicines). The Programme is described in two publications: Safety
          monitoring of medicinal products: guidelines for setting up and running a
          pharmacovigilance centre (1), chapters 7 and 8; and The importance of
          pharmacovigilance: safety monitoring of medicinal products (5), especially chapters 3
          and 4.

          The Programme currently comprises a network of more than 70 national
          pharmacovigilance centres that operate independently, but whose functions are
          coordinated and facilitated by WHO and UMC. UMC manages the global WHO
          database to which all case reports received by the national pharmacovigilance
          centres are sent. UMC uses the global WHO database to identify/detect signals
          of new adverse reactions from the cumulative data and to communicate risk
          assessments back to the national pharmacovigilance centres and to others
          concerned with drug safety.

          The core functions in this collaborative international programme can be
          summarized as follows.

          Functions of national pharmacovigilance centres
          ♦  Continuous collection of reports of suspected adverse reactions for medicines
             on the market
          ♦ Assessment of case reports in respect of:
              – quality of documentation
              – causality assessment
              – coding to international standards using the appropriate medicine
                 classification (the anatomical-therapeutic-chemical (ATC) classification),
                 adverse reaction classification (WHO Adverse Reaction Terminology
                 (WHO-ART)) and the Medical Dictionary for Drug Regulatory Activities
                 (MedDRA)
              – clinical relevance
              – quality control, in particular identification of duplicate reports

          10
                  Pharmacovigilance and the WHO International Drug Monitoring Programme



♦   Transmission in suitable format of the assessed reports to UMC
♦   Generation of hypotheses or the identification of signals. These activities may
    be strengthened by a search of the global WHO database (managed by UMC)
    for similar reports
♦   Communication of relevant safety information to the national and regional
    regulatory authorities, health professionals, pharmaceutical companies and
    other players as appropriate
♦   Further investigation of signals, risk factors or pharmacological mechanisms
♦   Receipt and communication as appropriate of safety information resulting
    from analyses by UMC and from regulatory agencies, case reports and the
    literature
♦   Provision of feedback to reporters
♦   Timely advice to health-care professionals and consumers on drug safety
    issues
♦   Education and training
♦   Information sharing at regional and global levels.

Functions of UMC
♦ Receipt and storage of reports from national pharmacovigilance centres
♦ Provision of facilities to enable national pharmacovigilance centres to search
   the global WHO database
♦ Generation of signals from the global WHO database
♦ Communication of signal analyses to national pharmacovigilance centres and
   clinical review of the analyses by experts
♦ Provision of technical assistance to national pharmacovigilance centres
♦ Facilitation of communication between countries
♦ Maintenance and development of WHO-ART and the use of MedDRA within
   the WHO International Drug Monitoring Programme
♦ Training of national pharmacovigilance centre personnel
♦ Standardization of procedures relating to pharmacovigilance activities
♦ Publication of relevant documents
♦ Provision of data as appropriate to other parties.


Among the many players that need to be involved in pharmacovigilance systems
at different levels are: qualified health professionals such as providers of
medicines (physicians, dentists, pharmacists) and nurses, researchers and
academics, media writers, the pharmaceutical industry, national and regional
drug regulatory authorities, patients/consumers, lawyers, poisons centres, drug
information centres, and international and regional health organizations (6).
In collaboration with UMC, national pharmacovigilance centres have already
achieved a great deal in the following areas (5):

♦   collecting and analysing case reports of adverse drug reactions
♦   distinguishing signals from “background noise”
♦   making regulatory decisions based on strengthened signals
♦   alerting prescribers, manufacturers and the public to new risks of adverse
    reactions.

The framework of values and practice for the collection, analysis and subsequent
communication of drug safety issues is provided by the Erice Declaration (Annex
2). Issues of privacy and confidentiality in relation to personal health data are
covered in Annex 3.

                                                                                    11
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems




          12
                                          Challenges in monitoring the safety of herbal medicines




        3. Challenges in monitoring the safety of
                               herbal medicines


3.1   Regulation, quality assurance and control


      Regulation
      National regulation and registration of herbal medicines vary from country to
      country. Where herbal medicines are regulated, they may be categorized as either
      prescription or non-prescription medicines. Herbal products may also be
      categorized other than as medicines. Moreover, the regulatory status of a
      particular herbal product may differ in different countries. The national
      regulatory framework usually also includes involved qualified providers and
      distributors of respective substances. Regulatory status consequently determines
      the access to or distribution route of these products.

      If trade in a particular herbal product is made between countries where different
      regulatory status is given, reclassification of the regulatory status in the
      importing country depends not on the nature or characteristics (medical or
      therapeutic value) of the product itself, but on the regulatory framework of the
      importing country. Further, herbal products categorized other than as medicines
      and foods are becoming increasingly popular, and there is potential for adverse
      reactions due to lack of regulation, weaker quality control systems and loose
      distribution channels (including mail order and Internet sales).

      National regulatory information on herbal medicines is not fully shared among
      national regulatory authorities, and is often not shared between national
      regulatory authorities and national safety monitoring/pharmacovigilance
      centres.

      Almost all new medicines are introduced to the market as prescription
      medicines, and a significant volume of post-marketing safety data from
      spontaneous reporting will have been realized over time. At some stage, some of
      these medicines will subsequently be reclassified as non-prescription medicines
      and will become major sources of self-medication. However, in many countries, a
      significant proportion of herbal products enters directly into the non-prescription
      medicines category rather than by reclassification from the prescription
      medicines category.

      Quality assurance and control
      Quality assurance and control measures, such as national quality specification
      and standards for herbal materials, good manufacturing practices (GMP) for
      herbal medicines, labelling, and licensing schemes for manufacturing, imports
      and marketing, should be in place in every country where herbal medicines are
      regulated. These measures are vital for ensuring the safety and efficacy of herbal

                                                                                              13
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



          medicines. Weak regulation and quality control may result in a high incidence of
          adverse reactions attributable to poor quality of herbal medicines, in particular
          resulting from adulteration with undeclared potent substances and/or
          contamination with potentially hazardous substances and residues.

          Requirements and methods for quality control of finished herbal products,
          particularly for mixture herbal products, are far more complex than for other
          pharmaceuticals. The quality of such products is influenced by the quality of the
          raw material used. Good agricultural and good collection practices (GACP) for
          medicinal plants, including plant selection and cultivation, are therefore
          important measures (7).

          National/regional pharmacopoeias
          National and regional pharmacopoeias define quality specifications and
          standards for herbal materials and some herbal preparations, such as essential
          oils and powdered herbal materials. Use and inclusion of herbal materials in such
          pharmacopoeias are based on local availability of these products. Availability is
          dependent on the original medicinal plants, which have ecologically and
          environmentally specific habitats. Therefore, even if the same pharmacopoeial
          monograph name is given to a herbal material, its listing in one pharmacopoeia
          may refer to a different original medicinal plant and/or processing method from
          that defined in another (see also section 4.3, Reporting of suspected adverse
          reactions, under Recording and coding the identity of herbal medicines).

          Action required
          As with other medicines for human use, herbal medicines should be covered by a
          drug regulatory framework to ensure that they conform to required standards of
          safety, quality and efficacy.



3.2       Appropriate use


          Providers of herbal medicines
          A variety of health-care professionals serve as qualified providers of herbal
          medicines, according to each country’s national health-care delivery system and
          legislative framework. In those countries where herbal medicines are classified as
          prescription medicines, prescribers and dispensers other than physicians,
          dentists and pharmacists are sometimes excluded from current reporting
          systems.

          In many countries, prescriptions are not required to obtain herbal medicines
          since these are categorized as non-prescription medicines or products suitable for
          self-care. Providers of herbal medicines in this category are not normally
          physicians. They include providers of traditional and complementary or
          alternative medicine as well as community pharmacists and nurses.

          Action required
          All providers of herbal medicines should play a role in monitoring the safety of
          non-prescription herbal medicines. Nurses are becoming increasingly involved in
          this area and are making a valuable contribution to safety monitoring. For

          14
                                     Challenges in monitoring the safety of herbal medicines



providers of herbal medicines to be effectively involved, it is essential to create
an atmosphere of trust to enable the sharing of knowledge about the use and
safety of herbal medicines.

Lack of proper knowledge of herbal medicines
Providers of medicines, such as physicians, nurses and pharmacists, may have
little training in and understanding of how herbal medicines affect the health of
their patients, who are often also taking other medicines, prescription or non-
prescription. An appropriate knowledge base is also relevant to diagnostic and
treatment decision-making. Other health-care professionals who are not
providers of herbal medicines are also likely to be poorly informed about these
products and how they are being used. If they see patients who are taking herbal
medicines, they should ask about their use. Health professionals who work in
poisons centres and health information services also need to be informed about
herbal medicines.

The use of medicinal plants is the most common form of traditional medication,
worldwide. Herbal medicines are used within many different healing traditions
with different knowledge bases and so there is still a question as to the suitability
of the categories defined in section 4.2.

Traditional medicines are increasingly being used outside the confines of
traditional cultures and far beyond traditional geographical areas without proper
knowledge of their use and the underlying principles. They are also being used
in different doses, extracted in different ways and used for non-traditional
indications. The concomitant use of traditional medicines with other medicines,
which is now quite frequent, is quite outside the traditional context and has
become a particular safety concern.

Patient/consumer attitudes to herbal medicines
As mentioned in section 1, there is often a misconception that “natural” means
“safe” and many consumers believe that remedies of natural origin carry no risk.
Patients who use herbal medicines and other medicines together, as is often the
case, will often not mention the use of herbal medicines to their physician.
Likewise, patients commonly fail to mention the use of other medicines to their
providers of herbal medicines.

Health-care professionals and providers of herbal medicines should ask patients
directly, respectfully and persistently what other medicines they are taking,
including prescription medicines, herbal medicines and other health products for
self-care.

Action required
The education of health-care professionals, providers of herbal medicines and
patients/consumers is vital for the prevention of potentially serious risks from
misuse of herbal medicines.




                                                                                         15
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems




          16
                                                        Safety monitoring of herbal medicines




        4. Safety monitoring of herbal medicines


4.1   Sources of reports

      The Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS)
      Working Group V has recommended that, as a general guiding principle,
      emphasis should be placed on the quality of a report and not on its source. Thus,
      the value of a report lies not in who made it, but in the care and thoroughness
      with which it is prepared, documented, received, recorded, followed-up, clarified
      and analysed (8). However, the source of a report can be an important factor in
      evaluating the report as it may affect the quality and value of the information.
      The nature, degree and even feasibility of any follow-up will also be highly
      dependent on the source.

      The most common sources of information on adverse events and reactions to
      medicines are clinical trials and spontaneous reports (voluntary, unsolicited
      communications on marketed medicinal products). The latter ordinarily far
      exceed the former in numbers and type, especially serious reports, over the
      lifetime of a product. In some countries, adverse reaction reporting by physicians
      is mandatory; such reports are regarded as spontaneous.

      In many countries, providers of herbal medicines other than physicians, dentists,
      pharmacists and nurses are excluded from reporting systems. If adequate
      coverage of herbal medicines is to be achieved, national reporting schemes
      should be developed to include all providers of herbal medicines (both
      prescribers and dispensers), and providers of traditional, complementary and
      alternative medicine, according to national circumstances.

      Reports from health-care professionals
      Internationally, adverse drug reaction reporting systems in the post-marketing
      safety surveillance setting depend primarily on voluntary reporting by health-
      care professionals, preferably those directly associated with the care of the
      patient/consumer (i.e. the patient’s primary health-care provider or specialist).
      This is appropriate, since the understanding of adverse drug reactions depends
      on medical knowledge and such professionals should be aware of the patient’s
      medical history and attuned to the subtleties of clinical differential diagnosis.

      A substantial proportion of herbal medicines are non-prescription medicines, and
      many come directly into this category without prior post-marketing safety
      monitoring as prescription medicines. It is therefore most important to take
      measures to strengthen pharmacovigilance activity in the non-prescription
      medicines setting. Community pharmacists and nurses can play a particularly
      useful role in monitoring the safety of non-prescription medicines, although
      many such products are sold outside pharmacies.


                                                                                          17
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



          Reports from consumers
          The involvement of consumers in the use of herbal medicines and herbal
          products in health care, and their concern regarding possible adverse effects
          should be valued positively. Consumer reports on adverse reactions should be
          accepted as a serious source of information, which can contribute to the
          identification of signals for unknown effects of herbal medicines.

          For non-prescription medicines, often taken without health professional
          involvement, reports received directly from consumers may provide the only
          source of signals. With herbal medicines in the non-prescription medicines
          setting, there is clearly an essential role for consumer reporting.

          Consumer reporting, in one form or another, is therefore an essential
          development if adequate information on risk is to be obtained. However, only a
          few national regulatory authorities currently explicitly require collection of direct
          reports from consumers. The CIOMS Working Group proposes several policy
          approaches and practices aimed at ensuring that consumer reports are treated
          with appropriate respect and that there is a rational approach for handling them
          (Annex 4).

          Manufacturers1
          Manufacturers of herbal medicines could be a source of information on adverse
          events associated with their products. Some countries include reporting of
          adverse events by manufacturers as part of their regulatory framework.

          Consumers may report directly to companies or their representatives. However,
          there are reasons other than concern about an adverse effect that might prompt a
          consumer to contact a company. These include legal concerns and, most
          frequently, requests for further information about the product. Another source of
          consumer reports derives from a variety of industry programmes in which
          adverse reaction information may be solicited; such cases are not regarded as
          spontaneous reports.

          Reports from other sources
          Problems associated with herbal medicines may be reported as toxicity to the
          following.

          ♦    National poisons centres. Where resources are very limited in the national
               situation and where no pharmacovigilance centre has been established, a
               poisons centre could play a core role in pharmacovigilance for and safety
               monitoring of herbal medicines.
          ♦    Drug information centres may also be a first point of contact and may provide a
               wealth of clinical information. National pharmacovigilance centres should
               have a good level of communication with such centres.
          ♦    Consumer organizations receive complaints about any type of product in the
               marketplace and may obtain relevant information about herbal medicines
          ♦    Clinical trials and studies can also be a source of information (see section 4.2).


          1 For the purpose of these guidelines, the term "manufacturer" refers to the producer,

          importer, distributor or marketer of a finished herbal product and, where applicable, to
          the holder of the marketing authorization or registration for that product in the country
          in question.

          18
                                                          Safety monitoring of herbal medicines



4.2   Herbal products targeted for safety monitoring

      In order to obtain comprehensive coverage, it is useful to think of herbal
      products in the following categories:

      ♦   according to their regulatory status
           – herbal medicines in the prescription medicines category
           – herbal medicines in the non-prescription medicines category
           – other herbal products intended for use in health care
      ♦   according to their registration/marketing status
           – herbal medicines undergoing the new drug development process: in
              clinical trials prior to national drug regulatory approval
           – herbal medicines undergoing the new drug development process: under
              post-marketing safety surveillance
           – herbal medicines undergoing re-evaluation under the current protocol: in
              clinical trials
           – herbal medicines undergoing re-evaluation under the current protocol:
              under post-marketing safety surveillance
           – herbal medicines on the market: under post-marketing safety surveillance
           – other herbal products marketed for health care, such as dietary
              supplements.

      Recommendations on how to record and report adverse events occurring during
      clinical trials should be covered by national guidelines on good clinical practice
      for trials on pharmaceutical products (GCP) (9).


4.3   Reporting of suspected adverse reactions


      Who should report and to whom?
      The setting (see section 4.2) in which an adverse reaction is noted and the status
      of the person noting the reaction will determine the most appropriate means of
      reporting. Although the term “national pharmacovigilance centre” has been used
      in these guidelines, it is recognized that in some countries the national
      pharmacovigilance system consists of a network of national and regional centres.
      Reports should be sent to the appropriate centre in accordance with the
      particular national reporting scheme. The following should provide reports.

      ♦   Health professionals who are providers of herbal medicines, including physicians,
          pharmacists and nurses, should report to the national pharmacovigilance
          centre.
      ♦   Patients/consumers should normally report to their physicians or providers of
          herbal medicines. They may also report directly to the national
          pharmacovigilance centre, consumer organizations or manufacturers.
      ♦   Manufacturers should report directly to the national pharmacovigilance centre
          or national regulatory authority.




                                                                                            19
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



          What information should be requested?
          Any suspected adverse reaction associated with the use of a herbal medicines
          should be reported. A case report should contain information on the following
          elements:

          ♦    where it is permitted by the country health information privacy code, and
               with appropriate confidentiality, some form of identification of the
               patient/consumer in order to avoid duplications and facilitate follow-up
          ♦    age, sex and a brief medical history of the consumer/patient (when relevant);
               in some countries, ethnicity may need to be specified
          ♦    details of suspected herbal product(s) if known: species name (Latin binomial
               name and common vernacular name of medicinal plant) and/or brand or
               ingredient name(s), including the part of medicinal plant used, preparation
               methods; manufacturer, country of origin, batch number, expiry date and
               provider
          ♦    administration details: dose and quantity supplied, dosage form, route,
               start/stop dates
          ♦    indication or reason for use
          ♦    adverse reaction data: date of onset (or duration from first administration to
               onset of event), description with symptoms and signs, severity and
               seriousness, results of clinical investigations and tests, course and outcome,
               and dechallenge/rechallenge with the same product, where appropriate
          ♦    all other medicines used (including self-medication), with administration
               details
          ♦    risk factors, e.g. age, impaired renal function, previous exposure to the herbal
               medicine(s) concerned, previous allergies, drug misuse or abuse, the social
               use of drugs
          ♦    name and address of reporter (to be considered confidential and to be used
               only for data verification, completion and case follow-up).

          Details of the factors to consider when developing a report are provided in
          Annex 5, together with an example of a reporting form.

          How to report
          A single reporting form covering all medicines, including herbal medicines,
          should be used. For health-care providers already included in a national
          pharmacovigilance system, a familiar form will facilitate reporting; the
          introduction of a second type of reporting form may cause confusion. It is
          desirable to use a standard printed or electronic reporting form and to ensure
          that forms are widely available. It should also be acceptable to receive reports by
          telephone, letter or e-mail. If possible, a sample of the herbal product and its
          packaging should be submitted with the report.

          Consideration should be given to the distribution of reporting forms to those
          involved in the provision of herbal medicines, such as providers of traditional
          medicine and of complementary/alternative medicine, who may not previously
          have been part of the national pharmacovigilance system. It may be necessary to
          design a special reporting form for those not familiar with the reporting of
          suspect reactions to medicines. Educational materials, including a list of simple
          terminology that can be understood by all parties, should be developed to inform
          and assist those not familiar with reporting.


          20
                                                   Safety monitoring of herbal medicines



Recording and coding the identity of herbal medicines
Use of a standardized classification and identification for transmitting reports to
UMC is desirable. Coding of adverse events/adverse reactions to herbal
medicines should be compatible with that for other medicines. UMC therefore
proposes the use of the WHO Drug Dictionary (WHO-DD) (10), as it has been
developed to store structured, classified information on the names of herbal
products and their ingredients in the same way as similar information on other
medicines. For the therapeutic classification of herbal products, UMC proposes
the herbal anatomical-therapeutic-chemical (HATC) classification, which is
structurally equivalent to the anatomical-therapeutic-chemical (ATC)
classification used for chemical substances in other medicines. HATC is being
implemented within the WHO-DD structure as part of the global WHO database.
A combination of the use of the HATC classification and the expanded global
WHO database structure can manage all levels of data input, however imprecise
(Annex 6). In addition, UMC also proposes a system checklist for cross-
referencing of botanical and vernacular names used as names of ingredients.
UMC suggests that the WHO-DD, the HATC classification and the checklist
should prove useful tools for national pharmacovigilance centres when asking
questions of the reporter to increase the clarity and accuracy of reports.

Herbal medicines usually contain multiple ingredients and it is not always
possible to identify them all. In such cases, the product name should be recorded
and referred to UMC, which will assist with identification. If the product is not
already in the global WHO database, it will be added, together with the available
information. A particular herbal product may have a number of indications and
therefore appear in several places in the HATC classification.

Local input by the reporter as to the precision or otherwise of the information on
the product is most useful. This can be provided in free text, as a commentary on
the report, or by the submission of manufacturer’s information or the original
packaging. A national inventory or catalogue of medicinal plants may also serve
as a reference on medicinal plants and their use in the community. In many
countries, however, knowledge of medicinal plants and their medicinal use has
not been documented. The establishment of a national inventory or catalogue
should therefore be encouraged.

If the finished herbal product concerned or its raw materials were imported from
other countries, the drug regulatory authority of the exporting country may be
able to provide helpful information.

The precise Latin binomial botanical name (genus, species, author; as well as
name of family) of the medicinal plants concerned should be used whenever
possible, together with information about the plant parts used and the extraction
and preparation methods employed. This information allows accurate
comparison with other reports. A common vernacular name may be used in
order not to delay or cancel submission of a report. National pharmacovigilance
centres should collaborate with the pharmacognosy departments of universities
and with botanists, zoologists and botanical garden staff regarding taxonomic
(botanical and chemical) identification and botanical and vernacular
nomenclature.



                                                                                     21
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



          Further classification systems may need to be specially developed in order to
          cover additional products used in traditional medicine.

          Other reporting issues
          Under no circumstances should information obtained during pharmacovigilance
          activities be divulged for commercial purposes. The identity of both the patient
          and the reporter should remain confidential unless their written permission to
          reveal this information is obtained (Annex 3).

          Reporting on herbal medicines should be as accurate and complete as possible.
          On the other hand, that fact that information is less than optimal should not deter
          reporting.


4.4       Assessment of case reports


          Individual case reports
          Assessment of reports on adverse reactions to herbal medicines should be
          undertaken by national pharmacovigilance centres in the same way as for other
          medicines. Each data element in the report should be considered and a causality
          assessment made using a standard approach. The assessment is usually based on:

          ♦    the association in time between administration of the herbal product and the
               event
          ♦    the outcome of dechallenge and rechallenge
          ♦    known pharmacology (including current knowledge of the nature and
               frequency of adverse reactions)
          ♦    medical or pharmacological plausibility (the sequence of symptoms, signs
               and laboratory tests and also pathological findings and knowledge of
               mechanisms)
          ♦    likelihood of other causes or their exclusion
          ♦    testing for adulterants or contaminants that could be the source of adverse
               events.
          ♦    inappropriate use.

          The WHO causality categories benefit from long and extensive use and have the
          advantage of being internationally agreed and easy to use. The causality
          categories are listed in Table 1 (1).

          It is most important to determine whether a reaction is caused by the way a
          herbal medicine has been used or prepared. Particular attention to these factors
          should be given when an adverse reaction is suspected in connection with the
          use of herbal medicines usually employed in a traditional medicine.
          Misdiagnosis and use outside an established tradition by poorly trained
          providers and practitioners can be unsafe and may lead to overdose and adverse
          reactions. A change in the procurement sources of herbal materials,
          misidentification of the medicinal plant(s) and/or herbal material(s) used, or a
          change in the mode of preparation may lead to entirely preventable and
          sometimes serious adverse reactions. This should be taken into account when
          assessing individual cases. The best evidence should be sought to determine the
          established standards of practices.

          22
                                                                   Safety monitoring of herbal medicines



    Table 1. Causality categories

The causality categories described by the Uppsala Monitoring Centre
1 Certain:                              a clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality, occurring
                                        in a plausible time relationship to drug administration, and which
                                        cannot be explained by concurrent disease or other drugs or
                                        chemicals. The response to withdrawal of the drugs (dechallenge)
                                        should be clinically plausible. The event must be definitive
                                        pharmacologically or phenomenologically, using a satisfactory
                                        rechallenge procedure if necessary.
2 Probably/Likely:                      a clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality, with a
                                        reasonable time sequence to administration of the drug, unlikely
                                        to be attributed to concurrent disease or other drugs or chemicals,
                                        and which follows a clinically reasonable response on withdrawal
                                        (dechallenge). Rechallenge information is not required to fulfil
                                        this definition.
3 Possible:                             a clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality, with a
                                        reasonable time sequence to administrations of the drug, but
                                        which could also be explained by concurrent disease or other
                                        drugs or chemicals. Information on drug withdrawal may be
                                        lacking or unclear.
4 Unlikely:                             a clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality, with a
                                        temporal relationship to drug administration which makes a
                                        causal relationship improbable, and in which other drugs,
                                        chemicals or underlying disease provide plausible explanations.
5 Conditional/Unclassified:             a clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality, reported as
                                        an adverse reaction, about which more data is essential for a
                                        proper assessment, or the additional data is under examination.
6 Unassessable/Unclassifiable:          a report suggesting an adverse reaction which cannot be judged
                                        because information is insufficient or contradictory, and which
                                        cannot be supplemented or verified.
As a step towards harmonization in drug regulation in the countries of the European Union (EU), three
causality categories were proposed by the EU pharmacovigilance working parties
Category A:          "Reports including good reasons and sufficient documentation to assume a causal
                     relationship, in the sense of plausible, conceivable, likely, but not necessarily highly
                     probable".
Category B:          "Reports containing sufficient information to accept the possibility of a causal
                     relationship, in the sense of not impossible and not unlikely, although the
                     connection is uncertain and may be even doubtful, e.g. because of missing data,
                     insufficient evidence or the possibility of another explanation".
Category C:          "Reports where causality is, for one or another reason, not assessable, e.g. because of
                     missing or conflicting data".




    Feedback to reporters
    The receipt of each report should be acknowledged and a new reporting form
    supplied to the reporter. The reporter will also appreciate receiving further
    information about the reaction concerned, for example, on experience held at the
    national pharmacolovigilance centre or that may be helpful in further use of the
    medicines, unless the provision of such information is in conflict with regulatory
    policy. Such feedback will motivate the reporter to send in further reports.

    Detection of signals at national level
    The national pharmacovigilance centre should, at regular intervals, analyse the
    case reports in its database by class of organ system and in smaller groups of
    clinically related events. This may reveal case series of similar events that could
    constitute a signal and/or indicate the need for further study or regulatory
    action. Such signals should be communicated to UMC. Weak signals may be

                                                                                                       23
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



          strengthened by examination of reports from other countries held in the global
          WHO database.

          Detection of signals at international level
          The major aim of pharmacovigilance is the early detection of signals of
          previously unrecognized adverse reactions. Early signals may be strengthened
          by combining the experiences reported in various countries. Regional studies
          may be of particular value in the monitoring of herbal medicines. Data-mining
          techniques can be helpful in individual countries, but are most effective in the
          global WHO database managed by UMC.

          Use of an advisory committee
          Each national pharmacovigilance centre should have an advisory committee
          composed of experts to give advice on:

          ♦    maintaining quality standards in data collection and assessment procedures
          ♦    data interpretation
          ♦    publication of information
          ♦    follow-up action required.

          The committee should be selected according to the expertise available but it
          should not be too large, so that it may not be possible to have all of the relevant
          disciplines represented. A committee might be selected from the following
          disciplines: general medicine, pharmacy, pharmaceutics, clinical pharmacology,
          clinical toxicology, pharmacogenetics, epidemiology, pharmacoepidemiology,
          pathology, drug regulation and quality assurance, drug information, information
          science,    medical   anthropology,     communications,      ethnopharmacology,
          pharmacognosy,        phytochemistry,       traditional     medicine        and/or
          complementary/alternative medicine.

          Investigation and analysis of the cause of suspected adverse reactions
          Some adverse reactions, particularly serious ones should be further investigated
          scientifically. The investigations may include the following:

          ♦    medical investigation of the adverse reactions: pathology, clinical
               pharmacology, clinical toxicology, pharmacogenetic studies
          ♦    pharmaceutical investigation of the adverse reactions: pharmacokinetics,
               pharmaco-dynamics and pharmaceutical, pharmacological and toxicological
               analysis
          ♦    pharmacognosical/phytochemical investigation (including authentification)
               of the herbal medicines
          ♦    physicochemical analysis to identify the constituents of the herbal medicines
          ♦    pharmacoepidemiology.

          Technical expertise and basic equipment
          Where possible, national pharmacovigilance centres should have the necessary
          technical expertise to handle herbal medicines. This might include:

          ♦    access to reliable information support on herbal medicines
          ♦    trained personnel in relevant technical areas (e.g. pharmacognosy,
               phytochemistry, ethnobotany, ethnopharmacology) and in the use and
               provision of herbal medicines


          24
                                                          Safety monitoring of herbal medicines



      ♦   access to facilities for analysis of potentially causative products about which
          there is often insufficient information.

      Not all countries have access to suitable analytical laboratories. The
      establishment of regional laboratories specializing in the analysis of herbal
      products should be considered.


4.5   Data management

      ♦   Data quality. Strenuous efforts should be made to ensure that there are quality
          controls on data processing and that the data elements of reports are as
          complete and accurate as possible. Mechanisms to check for duplications
          should be instituted.
      ♦   Data storage. Computer databases should be managed to as high a standard as
          possible to facilitate access to and use of the data. Software should be selected
          with expert advice so that analytical needs can be met.
      ♦   Data analysis. Programmes should be developed to provide for regular
          analyses and data output appropriate for local needs.
      ♦   Analysis of the global WHO database. The global WHO database managed by
          UMC is being improved on the basis of the proposed “Database management
          and classification for coding of herbal medicines”, of which the previously
          mentioned HATC is one part (Annex 6). Data-mining techniques that have
          proved effective on the very large numbers of reports for other medicines will
          be used for signal detection on reports for herbal medicines. The success of
          these techniques depends on the volume and quality of data submitted by
          national pharmacovigilance centres.
      ♦   Support on technical and data management is available from the WHO
          Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring, UMC
          (http://www.who-umc.org/).




                                                                                            25
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems




          26
                                                                           Communication




                                                    5. Communication


5.1   General

      The successful safety monitoring of herbal medicines depends on good
      communication (Annex 2). There are many barriers to be broken down if all the
      players in this field are to be involved. There is distrust between some and
      ignorance of the work and function of different groups. Transparent
      communication is essential to overcome these problems and ensure that all
      players collaborate to meet the goal of the safe and effective use of herbal
      medicines.

      National pharmacovigilance centres should ensure that manufacturers receive
      timely information so that they can take appropriate action regarding their
      products. Effective communication of the results of monitoring is also essential so
      that pharmacovigilance activities can have a positive impact on the health of the
      people.

      If there is no national pharmacovigilance centre, consideration should be given to
      designating other relevant organizations, such as the national regulatory
      authority, poisons centres, drug information centres and consumer complaints
      authorities as the focal point.

      Communication should be established at many different levels, for example,
      between:

      ♦   the national pharmacovigilance centre and health professionals
      ♦   the national pharmacovigilance centre and providers of herbal medicines
      ♦   health professionals and providers of herbal medicines, and consumers and
          patients
      ♦   providers of herbal medicines and those for other medicines
      ♦   the national pharmacovigilance centre and consumers
      ♦   the national pharmacovigilance centre and the regulatory authority
      ♦   the national pharmacovigilance centre and such centres in other countries,
          within the region or in other regions
      ♦   the national pharmacovigilance centre and UMC
      ♦   the national pharmacovigilance centre and the mass media.

      The development of effective communication needs to be adequately resourced.
      It is likely that this most important part of the safety monitoring programme for
      herbal medicines will require proportionately greater resources than is the case
      for other medicines.




                                                                                      27
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



5.2       Risk communication

          Communication strategies should be established to effectively reach all relevant
          target audiences, such as providers of herbal medicines, other health
          professionals, manufacturers and patients/consumers.

          Communication of safety information is a shared responsibility between national
          pharmacovigilance centres, national regulatory agencies, manufacturers and
          health professionals. Different risk communication vehicles can be considered,
          including:

          ♦    adverse reaction bulletins or articles distributed in reputable journals
          ♦    public advisories or warnings
          ♦    “Dear Health Professional” letters.

          Various methods of information dissemination can be considered, such as:

          ♦    Internet posting
          ♦    direct mass mailing to providers of herbal medicines and health professionals
          ♦    briefings to the mass media
          ♦    briefings to patient/consumer associations
          ♦    education sessions at health professional society meetings.

          In order to reach consumers and the wide range of providers of herbal medicines
          successfully, messages should be tailored to suit the recipients, including
          translation into local languages where appropriate.




          28
                                                                         References




                                                      6. References

1. Safety monitoring of medicinal products: guidelines for setting up and running a
    pharmacovigilance centre. Uppsala, Uppsala Monitoring Centre, 2000
    (reproduced in Part II of this publication).
2. US report calls for tighter controls on complementary medicine. British
    Medical Journal, 2002, 324:870.
3. Three out of four Germans have used complementary or natural
    remedies. British Medical Journal, 2002, 325:990.
4. General guidelines for methodologies on research and evaluation of traditional
    medicine.      Geneva,       World       Health       Organization,       2000
    (WHO/EDM/TRM/2000.1).
5. The importance of pharmacovigilance: safety monitoring of medicinal products.
    Geneva, World Health Organization, 2002.
6. Bowdler J. Effective communications in pharmacovigilance: the Erice report.
    Birmingham, W Lake, 1997.
7. WHO guidelines on good agricultural and collection practices (GACP) for
    medicinal plants. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003.
8. Current challenges in pharmacovigilance: pragmatic approaches. Report of
    CIOMS Working Group V. Geneva, The Council for International
    Organizations of Medical Sciences, 2001.
9. Guidelines for good clinical practice (GCP) for trials on pharmaceutical
    products. In: The use of essential drugs. Sixth report of the WHO Expert
    Committee. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1995, Annex 3 (WHO
    Technical Report Series, No. 850).
10. WHO Drug Dictionary. Uppsala, Uppsala Monitoring Centre (electronic
    database, updated quarterly; information available at http//www.umc-
    products.com/).




                                                                                29
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems




          30
                                                                             Selected bibliography




                                             7. Selected bibliography


Safety monitoring and pharmacovigilance

    ♦   Bowdler J. Effective communications in pharmacovigilance: the Erice report.
        Birmingham, W Lake, 1997.
    ♦   Current challenges in pharmacovigilance: pragmatic approaches. Report of CIOMS
        Working Group V. Geneva, The Council for International Organizations of
        Medical Sciences, 2001.
    ♦   Edwards IR, Hugman B. The challenge of effectively communicating risk-benefit
        information. Drug Safety, 1999, 17:216–227.
    ♦   Effective communications in pharmacovigilance. Uppsala, Uppsala Monitoring
        Centre, 1998. (Report of the International Conference on Developing Effective
        Communications in Pharmacovigilance, Erice, Sicily, 24–27 September 1997).
    ♦   Elvin-Lewis M. Should we be concerned about herbal remedies? Journal of
        Ethnopharmacology, 2001, 75:141–164.
    ♦   The importance of pharmacovigilance: safety monitoring of medicinal products. Geneva,
        World Health Organization, 2002.
    ♦   Viewpoint, watching for safer medicines, Part 1: issues, controversies and science in the
        search for safer and more rational use of medicines. Uppsala, The Uppsala Monitoring
        Centre, 2002.


Regulation of herbal medicines/traditional medicines
        Global review of regulation of herbal medicines
    ♦   Legal status of traditional medicines and complementary/alternative medicines: a
        worldwide     review.     Geneva,      World      Health      Organization,     2001
        (WHO/EDM/TRM/2001.2).
    ♦   Regulatory situation of herbal medicines: a worldwide review. Geneva, World Health
        Organization, 1998 (WHO/TRM/98.1).
    ♦   WHO global survey on national policy on traditional medicine and
        complementary/alternative medicine and regulation of herbal medicines. Geneva, World
        Health Organization (in preparation).

        Assessment of herbal medicines
    ♦   General guidelines for methodologies on research and evaluation of traditional medicines.
        Geneva, World Health Organization, 2000 (WHO/EDM/TRM/2000.1).
    ♦   Guidelines for assessment of herbal medicines. In: WHO Expert Committee on
        Specifications for Pharmaceutical Preparations. Thirty-fourth report. Geneva, World
        Health Organization, 1996, Annex 11 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 863).
        (These guidelines are also included in: Quality assurance of Pharmaceuticals: a
        compendium of guidelines and related materials, Vol. 1. Geneva, World Health
        Organization, 1997.)




                                                                                               31
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



Quality assurance/control of herbal medicines

      ♦   Good Manufacturing Practices for pharmaceutical products: main principles. In:
          WHO Expert Committee on Specifications for Pharmaceutical Preparations. Thirty-
          seventh report. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003, Annex 4 (WHO
          Technical Report Series, No. 908).
      ♦   Good Manufacturing Practices: supplementary guidelines for manufacture of
          herbal medicinal products. In: WHO Expert Committee on Specification for
          Pharmaceutical Preparations. Thirty-fourth report. Geneva, World Health
          Organization, 1996, Annex 8 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 863). (These
          supplementary guidelines are also included in Quality assurance of
          pharmaceuticals: a compendium of guidelines and related materials, Vol. 2. Good
          manufacturing practices and inspection. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1999.
          They are currently being updated).
      ♦   Good trade and distribution practices (GTDP) for pharmaceutical starting
          materials. In: WHO Expert Committee on Specifications for Pharmaceutical
          Preparations. Thirty-seventh report. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003,
          Annex 2 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 908).
      ♦   Guide to good storage practices for pharmaceuticals. In: WHO Expert Committee
          on Specifications for Pharmaceutical Preparations. Thirty-seventh report. Geneva,
          World Health Organization, 2003, Annex 9 (WHO Technical Report Series, No.
          908).
      ♦   Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health
          Organization, 1998.
      ♦   WHO guidelines for assessing safety and quality of herbal medicines with reference to
          contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health Organization (in preparation).
      ♦   WHO guidelines on good agricultural and collection practices (GACP) for medicinal
          plants. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003.


Rational use of herbal medicines

      ♦   WHO guidelines for developing consumer information on proper use of traditional
          medicines and complementary/alternative medicine. Geneva, World Health
          Organization, 2004.
      ♦   WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants, Vol. 1. Geneva, World Health
          Organization, 1999.
      ♦   WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants, Vol. 2. Geneva, World Health
          Organization, 2002.
      ♦   WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants, Vol. 3. Geneva, World Health
          Organization (in preparation).




          32
                                                                               Annex 1




        Annex 1: List of participants in the WHO Consultation on Safety
 Monitoring of Herbal Medicines, Vancouver, Canada, 1–3 February 2004∗


Participants
       Dr Dora Nkem Akunyili, Director-General, National Agency for Food and Drug
       Administration and Control, Federal Ministry of Health, Abuja, Nigeria

       Dr Abdullah Albedah, Assistant Director General, Hospitals, Ministry of Health,
       Riyadh, Saudi Arabia (Self-supporting)

       Dr M. Hayatie Amal, Director, Inspection and Certification on Cosmetics and
       Complementary Product, National Agency for Drug and Food Control, Jakarta,
       Indonesia

       Mr Benjamin Botwe, Food and Drugs Board, Accra, Ghana

       Dr Mabel Burger, Director, Caterdra y Departamento de Toxicologia, Hospital de
       Clinicas “Dr Manual Quintela”, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de la
       Republica, Montevideo, Uruguay

       Dr Peter Chan, Director, Bureau of Product Review & Assessment, Natural
       Health Products Directorate, Health Products & Food Branch, Health Canada,
       Ottawa, Canada

       Dr Shaw T. Chen, Associate Director, Office of Drug Evaluation V, Center for
       Drug Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Adminstration, Rockville, MD,
       USA (Self-supporting)

       Dr Chen Yixin, Associate Director of ADR Monitoring programme, Division of
       ADR Monitoring, Centre for Drug Administration, State Food and Drug
       Administration, Beijing, China (Self-supporting)

       Dr Julia Djonova, Medical Reviewer, Division of Complementary and Herbal
       Medicines, Swissmedic, Berne, Switzerland (Self-supporting)

       Mr Shekhar Dutt, Secretary to the Government of India, Department of
       Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy, Ministry
       of Health & Family Welfare, New Delhi, India (Self-supporting) (Co-Chairperson)

       Dr Murilo Freitas Dias, Head, Pharmacovigilance Unit, Brazilian Health
       Surveillance Agency, Brasilia, Brazil

       Dr Kheirollah Gholami, Head, Iranian ADR Centre, Research and Development
       Office, Ministry of Health, Tehran, Islamic Republic of Iran



       ∗
           Unable to attend

                                                                                   33
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



          Dr Alberto Giménez Turba, Director, Instituto de Investigaciones Farmaco
          Bioquimicas (IIFB), Universidad Mayor de San Andrés, La Paz, Bolivia

          Dr Daniel Herren, Quality Reviewer, Deputy Head, Division of Complementary
          and Herbal Medicines, Swissmedic, Berne, Switzerland

          Mr Shahzad Hussain, Drugs Control and Traditional Medicine Division,
          National Institute of Health, Islamabad, Pakistan

          Dr Biayi Franck Kanumpepa, Coordinator, National Programme of Traditional
          Medicine and Focal Point for Pharmacovigilance, Ministry of Health, Kinshasa,
          Democratic Republic of Congo

          Dr Abdurakhim Khalimov, Bureau on Registration of the Main Administrative
          Department of Pharmaceutical and Medical Equipment Control, Ministry of
          Health, Tashkent, Uzbekistan

          Ms Jeong-Yeon Kim, Senior Pharmacist, Pharmaceutical Surveillance Division,
          Pharmaceutical Safety Bureau, Korea Food and Drug Administration, Seoul,
          Republic of Korea (Self-supporting)

          Dr Jeong-Seok Lee, Director, Pharmaceutical Surveillance Division,
          Pharmaceutical Safety Bureau, Korea Food and Drug Administration, Seoul,
          Republic of Korea (Self-supporting)

          Dr Gillian Leverkus, President, Herbalist Association of British Columbia, Cobble
          Hill, British Columbia, Canada

          Dr Lin Ruichao, Director, Division of Traditional Chinese Medicine, National
          Institute for the Control of Pharmaceutical and Biological Products, State Food
          and Drug Administration, Beijing, China

          Mr Terrence Man, Chinese Medicine Section, Public Health Laboraty Centre,
          China, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (Self-supporting)

          Dr Susan Morris, Medicines and Healthcare Products Agency, Department of
          Health, London, United Kingdom (Co-Rapporteur)

          Dr Tamás Paál, Director-General, National Institute of Pharmacy, Budapest,
          Hungary

          Dr Ain Raal, Docent of Pharmocognosy, Department of Pharmacy, The
          University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia

          Professor Motoyoshi Satake, Institute of Environmental Science for Human Life,
          Ochanomizu University, Tokyo, Japan

          Dr Pornpit Silkavute, Director, Hazardous Substance Control Group, Bureau of
          Cosmetic and Hazardous Substance Control, Food and Drug Administration,
          Ministry of Public Health, Nonthaburi, Thailand



          34
                                                                               Annex 1



       Dr Souad Skalli, Centre Anti-Poisons et de Pharmacovigilance du Maroc, Rabat,
       Marocco

       Dr Michael J. Smith, Senior Adviser to the Director General, Natural Health
       Products Directorate, Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada, Ottawa,
       Canada (Co-Chairperson)

       Dr Heather Sutcliffe, Director, Marketed Health Products Safety and
       Effectiveness Information Division, Marketed Health Products Directorate,
       Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada, Ottawa, Canada

       *Dr Christopher Turner, Director General, Marketed Health Products Directorate,
       Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada, Ottawa, Canada

       Dr Kees van Grootheest, Director, Netherlands Pharmacovigilance Foundation
       (LAREB), MH’s- Hertogenbosch, Netherlands

       Dr Duc Vu, Acting Director, Marketed Natural Health Products Division,
       Marketed Health Products Directorate, Health Products and Food Branch, Health
       Canada, Ottawa, Canada

       Dr Philip Waddington, Director General, Natural Health Products Directorate,
       Health Products and Food Branch, Health Canada, Ottawa, Canada

       Dr Hashim Yusufu, National Agency for Food and Drug Administration and
       Control, Federal Ministry of Health, Abuja, Nigeria (Self-supporting) (Co-
       Rapporteur)

       Dr Keum-Ryon Ze, Director, Division of Herbal Medicine Standardization, Korea
       Food and Drug Administration, Seoul, Republic of Korea (Self-supporting)

Local Secretariat
       Ms Stacey Croft, Natural Health Products Directorate, Health Products and Food
       Branch, Health Canada, Ottawa, Canada

       Ms Kathleen Lafleur, Marketed Health Products Directorate, Health Products
       and Food Branch, Health Canada, Ottawa, Canada

WHO Secretariat
       Dr Seung-Hoon Choi, Medical Officer, Traditional Medicine, WHO Regional
       Office for the Western Pacific, Manila, Philippines

       Dr David Coulter, Intensive Medicines Monitoring Programme, Department of
       Preventive and Social Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Otago,
       Dunedin, New Zealand (Temporary Adviser)

       Dr Mary Couper, Medical Officer, Quality Assurance and Safety: Medicines,
       Department of Essential Drugs and Medicines Policy, World Health
       Organization, Geneva, Switzerland



                                                                                   35
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



          Ms Rosario D’Alessio, Regional Adviser, Essential Medicines, Vaccines and
          Health Technologies, WHO Regional Office for the Americas, Washington, DC,
          USA

          Dr Ralph Edwards, Director, Uppsala Monitoring Centre, Uppsala, Sweden
          (Temporary Adviser)

          Dr Mohamed Farah, Uppsala Monitoring Centre, Uppsala, Sweden (Temporary
          Adviser)

          *Dr Ossy Kasilo, Regional Adviser, Traditional Medicine, WHO Regional Office
          for Africa, Brazzaville, Republic of Congo

          Ms Yukiko Maruyama, Scientist, Traditional Medicine, Department of Essential
          Drugs and Medicines Policy, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland

          Dr Ren Dequan, Deputy Director-General, State Food and Drug Administration,
          Beijing, China (Temporary Adviser)

          Dr Martijn ten Ham, Senior Adviser, International Affairs, Department of
          Pharmaceutical and Medical Technology, Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sports,
          The Hague, Netherlands (Temporary Adviser)

          Dr Xiaorui Zhang, Coordinator, Traditional Medicine, Department of Essential
          Drugs and Medicines Policy, World Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland




          36
                                                                            Annex 2




    Annex 2: The Erice Declaration on Communicating Drug Safety
                                              Information, 1997

Monitoring, evaluating and communicating drug safety is a public-health activity
with profound implications that depend on the integrity and collective
responsibility of all parties – consumers, health professionals, researchers,
academia, media, pharmaceutical industry, drug regulators, governments and
international organizations – working together. High scientific, ethical and
professional standards and a moral code should govern this activity. The
inherent uncertainty of the risks and benefits of drugs needs to be acknowledged
and explained. Decisions and actions that are based on this uncertainty should be
informed by scientific and clinical considerations and should take into account
social realities and circumstances.

Flaws in drug safety communication at all levels of society can lead to mistrust,
misinformation and misguided actions resulting in harm and the creation of a
climate where drug safety data may be hidden, withheld, or ignored.

Fact should be distinguished from speculation and hypothesis, and actions taken
should reflect the needs of those affected and the care they require. These actions
call for systems and legislation, nationally and internationally, that ensure full
and open exchange of information, and effective standards of evaluation. These
standards will ensure that risks and benefits can be assessed, explained and acted
upon openly and in a spirit that promotes general confidence and trust.

The following statements set forth the basic requirements for this to happen, and
were agreed upon by all participants, from 30 countries at Erice:

   1.      Drug safety information must serve the health of the public. Such
           information should be ethically and effectively communicated in
           terms of both content and method. Facts, hypotheses and conclusions
           should be distinguished, uncertainty acknowledged, and information
           provided in ways that meet both general and individual needs.
   2.      Education in the appropriate use of drugs, including interpretation of
           safety information, is essential for the public at large, as well as for
           patients and health-care providers. Such education requires special
           commitment and resources. Drug information directed to the public
           in whatever form should be balanced with respect to risks and
           benefits.
   3.      All the evidence needed to assess and understand risks and benefits
           must be openly available. Constraints on communication parties,
           which hinder their ability to meet with this goal, must be recognized
           and overcome.
   4.      Every country needs a system with independent expertise to ensure
           that safety information on all available drugs is adequately collected,
           impartially evaluated, and made accessible to all. Adequate
           nonpartisan financing must be available to support the system.
           Exchange of data and evaluation among countries must be
           encouraged and supported.

                                                                                37
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



               5.     A strong basis for drug safety monitoring has been laid over a long
                      period, although sometimes in response to disasters. Innovation in
                      this field now needs to ensure that emergent problems are promptly
                      recognized and efficiently dealt with, and that information and
                      solutions are effectively communicated.

          These ideals are achievable and the participants at the conference commit
          themselves accordingly. Details of what might be done to give effect to this
          declaration have been considered at the conference and form the substance of the
          conference report.

          Erice September 29, 1997




          38
                                                                             Annex 3




   Annex 3: Privacy and the confidentiality of personal health data2

Legislation or rules recently enacted or in progress in the EU, US and elsewhere
in many countries have introduced new data subject rights and the need for
strong safeguards in the collection, processing and transfer (especially across
country borders) of personally identifiable data handled via any media,
electronic or physical (paper, film, etc.). It has particular relevance to health
information, among the more sensitive types of data, and certainly applies to
adverse events reports, which often include data that directly identify the subject
and/or the reporter with name, address, national health number, or other overt
identifiers. Within some legal systems, indirect information that might allow
determination of an individual’s identity must also be protected (i.e. reference to
one or more factors specific to a person’s physical, physiological, mental,
economic, cultural or other characteristics that could facilitate determination of
his/her identity).

Although current practices throughout the pharmaceutical industry and by
regulatory authorities reflect a commitment to protection of personal data, new
laws in many countries necessitate some changes in personal-data handling
practices. Increased rights for data subjects include notification on who is
processing their data, for what purpose, and with whom the data may be shared,
as well as the ability to access their own data and make corrections. Under
appropriate circumstances, this may require enhancement of the ordinary
informed consent process for activities, such as clinical trials. The use of
secondary databases, so important to pharmacoepidemiology and retrospective
studies in general, may also be affected.

There is no intention to cover this complicated topic here in more detail and
those working in pharmacovigilance, and clinical research generally, should
familiarize themselves with applicable data protection laws and regulations.
However, it is important to explain that the term "identifiability" does not have
the same meaning under one of the CIOMS V topics, "Assessing Patient and
Report Idntifiability", as it does within the context of data protection legal
regimes. For adverse event reporting, an identifiable patient of reporter relates to
the existence of a real person that can be verified/vaiadated in some way. Under
data protection schemes, the term refers to an ability to associate a data set with a
particular person ("trace" a person from the data available).




2 Reproduced, by permission, from Current challenges in pharmacovigilance: pragmatic

approach. Report of CIOMS Working Group V. Geneva, The Council for International
Organizations of Medical Sciences, 2001.




                                                                                  39
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems




          40
                                                                            Annex 4




    Annex 4: Spontaneous reports from persons other than health-care
                                                      professionals3

The CIOMS Working group proposes several policy approaches and practices
which aim to ensure that consumer reports are treated with appropriate respect
and that there is a rational approach for handling them. In general, because the
treating healthcare professionals remain vital partners in understanding and
managing treatment emergent adverse events, their involvement in the
confirmation process should take place whenever possible. Because much time
and effort are expended on the management of consumer reports, international
alignment of expectations regarding the handling of consumer-cases is also
needed to assure proper focus on efforts likely to add public health value.
Therefore the following principles and practices are recommended:

Definition of medical confirmation
A situation in which a healthcare professional, preferably one directly involved
in the care of the patient (primary healthcare provider), confirms (i.e., agrees)
that the circumstances as reported by or on behalf of the patient occurred and
that the facts, as amended or updated in the confirmation process, constitute an
adverse event case for which there is a suspicion by that healthcare professional
of drug causality (thus, it should be considered an adverse drug reaction).

The important point in this context is to distinguish between verification of the
facts by the healthcare professional (things did or did not happen as described by
the patient) and the professional’s confirmation that a drug-related adverse event
(i.e., an adverse drug reaction) occurred.

General policy issues
♦ Consumers should be encouraged to report personal adverse experiences to
   healthcare providers, but primarily to their treating physician. Companies
   and regulators should convey this message through educational materials or
   in the course of responding to consumer inquiries or complaints. Consumer
   advocacy groups and disease-specific patient support groups should also be
   encouraged to foster this practice among their constituents.
♦ Neither a company nor a regulator should refer a consumer/patient to a
   specific healthcare professional.
♦ Physicians and other healthcare professionals, as part of any medical
   education, should be sensitized to the importance of listening to their patients
   for circumstances which might constitute a reportable adverse drug reaction.
   When reports about consumers are received from a third party who is not a
   healthcare professional (e.g., a relative or other patient advocate, traditional
   healer, lawyer), that party should be encouraged to have the patient contact
   his/her physician and request that the physician report the case, if
   appropriate, or alternatively (or in addition) to encourage the consumer to
   authorize the sponsor/authority to contact the doctor directly.

3 Reproduced, by permission, from Current challenges in pharmacovigilance: pragmatic
approach. Report of CIOMS Working Group V. Geneva, The Council for International
Organizations of Medical Sciences, 2001.

                                                                                 41
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



          Case management practices for companies and regulators:
          ♦ Regarding all reports directly from consumers or from their non-healthcare-
             professional representatives:

                 During all contacts, attempts should be made to obtain information
                 sufficient to ascertain the nature and seriousness of the complaint. Based
                 upon this understanding, the strategy for documentation and follow-up
                 will be determined (see below).

                 Permission should be sought to contact the consumer’s primary healthcare
                 provider in order to obtain additional medical details when relevant; such
                 permission should be documented. If the patient prefers to obtain and
                 forward supporting/confirmatory medical records, attempts should still be
                 made to obtain physician-contact permission.

                 All such reports should be documented as for any other types of cases and
                 should be taken into consideration when overall safety assessments are
                 conducted.

                 As with the handling of all other individual case reports, patient-specific
                 information (personal data) should be treated confidentially4.
                 Identification of the case should be sufficient to permit recall and cross-
                 linkage with any subsequently obtained medical information, with all
                 requisite steps to assure protection of patient privacy.

          In addition to these general practices, some special considerations apply that
          depend on the perceived serious or non-serious nature of the case. The
          information provided in the initial consumer report will usually permit a
          judgement as to whether the case is “apparently” serious or on-serious; this may
          be the only judgement possible in the absence of subsequent medical
          confirmations.

          ♦    When the event is apparently non-serious and already labeled/expected:

                 No additional effort (follow-up or medical confirmation) is required by the
                 company or regulatory recipient as long as the minimum criteria for a case
                 are satisfied5.

          ♦    When the event is apparently serious, or is non-serious unlabeled/
               unexpected:

                 Special effort should be made to obtain permission to contact the
                 consumer’s physician. If the patient refuses, attempts should be made to
                 encourage the consumer to provide relevant medical records on his/her
                 own.

                 If permission is obtained to contact the patient’s physician or other
                 healthcare professional, who in turn is unwilling to respond to company

          4 See Annex 3, Privacy and the confidentiality of personal health data.
          5 An identifiable reporter; an identifiable patient; a reaction/event; a suspected medicinal

          product.

          42
                                                                           Annex 4



     attempts at follow-up for confirmation, it is possible that regulators in some
     countries may be in a better position to obtain the requisite follow-up or
     confirmatory data.

     Even in the absence of medical confirmation, any report containing
     suspected adverse drug reactions with possible implications for the
     medicine’s benefit-risk relationship should be submitted to regulators on
     an expedited and/or periodic basis.

Although the US and Canadian regulatory authorities appear to be the only ones
currently requiring submission of consumer reports, consideration should be
given to submitting such important cases to regulators.

Considerations on periodic safety reporting
♦  To satisfy current European, Japan and other countries’ requirements,
   medically unconfirmed consumer reports should not be routinely included in
   official international summary reports, such as ICH Periodic Safety Update
   Reports (PSURs). It should be recognized, however, that others (such as the
   US and Canadian regulators) may require that a listing or summary of such
   reports be provided as an appendix to a PSUR.
♦ Nevertheless, all consumer reports regarded as adverse drug reactions should
   be regularly scrutinized for new “signals” or to confirm or extend the safety
   experience derived from all other sources. A statement should be made in the
   PSUR that such unconfirmed reports have been reviewed and either add no
   important new information or, conversely, suggest new findings.
♦ It is possible that unconfirmed consumer reports could contribute new,
   important information; if so, a separate tabulation and comment within the
   formal PSUR should be included.




                                                                                43
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems




          44
                                                                                   Annex 5




                                                    Annex 5: Model reporting form


General considerations
♦   The reporting form for herbal medicines should be the same as that used for other
    medicines.
♦   Countries should modify their national reporting forms to facilitate the reporting of
    suspect reactions to herbal medicines or interactions between herbal medicines and
    other medicines.
♦   Only basic and important information should be requested. A request for great detail
    will result in fewer reports.
♦   The form should have a simple format.
♦   The form should look simple; a design with plenty of “white space” is helpful.
♦   The form should be designed in such a way that it is self-evident how it should be
    filled in. Any instructions for use should be simple; detailed instructions may
    discourage those with little training. Simplicity will encourage the recording of the
    best information available in the circumstances.
♦   The form should include instructions on how it should be completed and where it
    should be sent (i.e. a return address).
♦   The use of reporting forms should be seen as a screening process designed to reveal
    evidence of problems that need further investigation. The information supplied should
    be perfectly adequate, in most cases, to permit adequate identification and evaluation
    of a problem.
♦   Follow-up forms should be available for use when further details are required. These
    should be designed for use by district investigation teams or hospitals.
♦   Several types of follow-up forms may be needed for the investigation of specific
    problems, e.g. liver toxicity, death, inefficacy.
♦   Accurate identification of the patient/consumer is important for follow-up purposes
    and to avoid duplication. Essential information includes: name (or unique health
    facility number), date of birth (if unknown, then approximate age) and sex.

An example of a reporting form on suspected adverse reactions to medicines, including
herbal medicines and vaccines, is shown on the following page. It is designed to support
Member States in establishing a national drug monitoring system for the first time or in
revising their reporting form to include herbal medicines.




                                                                                       45
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems




          Example of Reporting form for suspected adverse reaction to medicines, including
          herbal medicines and vaccines

                        PLEASE NOTE: all consumer/patient and reporter information will remain confidential.

          Patient/consumer identification (please complete or tick boxes below as appropriate)
          Last name                        First name(s)                     Patient/record number
          Ethnicity
          Address (place and region, or health facility may be used)         Date of birth
                                                                             Sex     M     F

          List of all medicines/vaccines/herbal medicines used by the patient. Please indicate suspected medicines
          with an asterisk (*) (please complete boxes below)
          Medicine(s)Vaccine(s) + Daily            Route of         Date          Date         Reason for use
          batch no.                      dose      administration   started       stopped


          For herbal medicines please give detailed information on the product
          Product name:

          How was the product obtained?

          List of product ingredients; attach product label if available:

          Name and address of the manufacturer;

          Name and address of the distributor:

          Other relevant information:

          Description of the suspected adverse reaction (please complete boxes below)
          Date of onset of reaction (dd/mm/yy):
          Description of reaction (please include results of laboratory tests if available):




          Outcome of the suspected adverse reaction (please tick boxes as appropriate)
          Recovered           Not yet recovered        Unknown              Fatal      Date of death
          Severe? Yes        No                        Rechallenge?         Yes        No
                                                       Result:
          Was the patient admitted to hospital?                             Yes        No
          If yes, give name and address of hospital:

          Other factors (please tick box or describe as appropriate)
          Kidney disease           Liver disease           Allergy (please describe) ...........................
                                                           .........................................................................

          Other illnesses (please describe):                                                                                  Malnutrition


          Reporter identification
          Type (please circle): nurse/doctor/pharmacist/other health worker /manufacturer/ distributor/supplier
          Name:
          Address:
          Telephone:
          E-mail address:

          Signature of reporter: ...........................................................   Date: ...........................................

          Please send completed form to: .............................................................................


          46
                                                                                        Annex 6




Annex 6: Proposed database management and classification for coding herbal
               products (the Uppsala Monitoring Centre, Uppsala, Sweden)


Database management structure
   With the aim of capturing data about adverse drug reactions (ADRs) to herbal products in
   the same system as ADRs to other medicines, the WHO Collaborating Centre for
   International Drug Monitoring in Uppsala (the Uppsala Monitoring Centre; UMC) has
   restructured the management of data relating to herbal products. This has mainly
   involved the structure of information held in the substance register of the WHO Drug
   Dictionary (WHO-DD). The register identifies the “preferred names” of ingredients of
   products mentioned on all ADR reports in the global WHO database. The logic for
   identifying “preferred names” for herbal substances follows, as far as possible, that for
   identifying preferred chemical substance names in the WHO-DD.

   The validity of any scientific name (botanical names) that may be used as a “preferred
   name” for herbal products is problematic, since such names may be revised during
   taxonomic review. It is important to stress that the use of valid Latin binomial (scientific)
   names in the substance register of the WHO-DD is not for the purpose of providing a
   botanical reference work. They are the names that UMC has decided to use in order to
   provide unique names for herbal ingredients equivalent to international non-proprietary
   names (INN) for chemical ingredients in the global WHO database. The Royal Botanic
   Gardens, Kew, United Kingdom, has collaborated in ensuring that these names represent
   unique species. If there are other scientific names, they are regarded as synonyms. The
   scientific names comprise the Latin binomial (a genus name and a species epithet), the
   name of the author who described the specific species, and the publication source.

   To determine which botanical names were synonyms, and to find further information on
   each medicinal plant, its major chemical constituents/entities and medical uses, the major
   reference publications that UMC considers relevant were examined. For information on
   ingredients of reported herbal products, a variety of sources was consulted, including the
   scientific literature, summaries of product characteristics (SPCs) from national
   pharmacovigilance centres, and direct input from national pharmacovigilance centres.

   In addition to the preferred name, the list of ingredients should identify which part of the
   plant is used and give an indication of how the “active substances” have been extracted.
   This provides a more complete identification of the “active herbal ingredient”. For
   conventional drugs, all preferred names of single ingredient medicines are either bases or
   salts. For all salts there must be a link to a base, e.g. omeprazole sodium is linked to
   omeprazole. Herbal products are treated in a similar way, in that the “mother herbs”
   (medicinal plants) will be the equivalent of bases and the different plant parts (herbal
   materials) and/or types of extract/herbal preparations are equivalent to the salts.

   As shown in the herbal substance data links (Fig. 1), the herbal ingredients given as valid
   scientific names of medicinal plants are linked to common names of the plants and also to
   plant parts and the extracts or other herbal preparations used. So when retrieving
   information about a specified medicinal plant, starting from any scientific botanical name,
   vernacular, or common name, it will be easy to find all related substances (chemical


                                                                                             47
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



          entities) including those where different parts/herbal materials and/or extracts or other
          herbal preparations are specified, and vice versa.

      Herbal anatomical-therapeutic-chemical classification
          The herbal anatomical-therapeutic-chemical classification (HATC) is a classification
          primarily based on those herbal products that have adverse drug reactions reported in the
          global WHO database and therefore appear in the WHO-DD. They are not necessarily
          categorized in a medicines category in any particular country. The HATC classification,
          unlike the regular ATC system, is based on botanical science, pharmacognosy,
          phytochemistry, literature search and documented traditional use rather than chemistry
          and evidence-based medicine. It is linked to botanical synonyms and vernacular names
          via the substance register of the WHO-DD, which contains all ingredients, herbal and
          chemical, of medicinal products mentioned on reports in the global WHO database.

          In addition to the identification by preferred name and information on the plant parts
          used and methods of preparation, the HATC classification as used in the global WHO
          database, indicates:

          ♦    the suggested anatomical site of pharmaceutical action
          ♦    the range of intended medical uses including traditional therapeutic uses.

          The HATC classification is mainly used as an administrative tool for placing groups of
          herbal products in the coding systems, and to group-related products in signal work and
          other congregated searches

      The storage and management of safety monitoring information on herbal
      medicines

          Principles of the system
          It is often impossible to obtain information on both the traditional product composition
          and the use of such products by patients. No data management system can capture more
          than is known, but the combination of the HATC classification and the current global
          WHO database structure allows any and all information to be entered.

          The basic philosophy behind the data management of herbal products and traditional
          medicines is to achieve a system that is capable of handling all levels of information, at the
          same time being utterly transparent to users over any imprecision, missing data and the
          links that are built into the hierarchies in the system. Precision versus uncertainty, for
          example, can be considered as occurring along several axes:

          ♦    identification of the medicinal plant
          ♦    itemization of the medicinal plant part (herbal material)
          ♦    stipulation of preparation methods (processing including extraction procedures)
          ♦    definition of the major chemical constituents extracted
          ♦    definition of the major ingredients/herbal materials (name and proportion) in mixture
               herbal products (complex preparations and products)
          ♦    note of any variations in product composition (and dosage form)
          ♦    intended medical use, indicating diseases or symptoms that can be treated.




          48
                                                                                            Annex 6



  Detailed descriptions of the HATC classification and the global WHO database system are
  available from UMC.

  Adverse drug reaction terms, and indications, used in ADR reports on herbal products
  and traditional medicines will often be those recommended for other medicines.
  However, additions to WHO-ART and MedDRA may be needed to capture differences in
  expressing ADRs caused by the use of herbal products, especially in the case of traditional
  medicines, in accordance with particular treatment concepts and/or principles. For
  example, “increased/decreased Yin” are possible states of diseases within the Chinese
  medicine system, a concept unique to this particular type of medicine. Such details will be
  added to WHO-ART, as required.

  It is clear that other systems can be devised to accomplish the same ends. The purpose of
  the data management system described above is specifically for pharmacovigilance, and is
  specially designed to allow its use alongside pharmacovigilance activities for other
  medicines. This is an important consideration in view of the increasing likelihood that
  patients/consumers may use both forms of treatment concurrently. Other systems
  developed and used for pharmacovigilance should function in a similar way and it should
  be possible to link them with the global WHO database, to ensure that all international
  data are pooled for global benefit.

Data analysis
  The new structure and classification of herbal substances (entities) within the global WHO
  database will facilitate finding information about finished herbal products containing a
  specified medicinal plant or just a specific part, herbal materials, or extract or other herbal
  preparation of the specified medicinal plant. This is crucial in finding and evaluating
  signals concerning herbal medicines and traditional medicines (more complex than for
  other medicines), as the following example shows.

        A company has for years produced a product containing Senna alexandrina Miller,
        which in the labelling is called “Cassia”. Another company markets a product that
        also lists “Cassia”’ as active ingredient but the product is derived from Senna armata
        Wats, a different botanical species. Then reports of serious ADRs associated with
        “Cassia” appear and they are so serious that a withdrawal from the market is
        considered. It may be that only Senna armata Wats is causing these problems. In this
        case the other species, Senna alexandrina Miller, risks being wrongly accused because
        there is no distinction between the labelled names: “Cassia” is the suspected cause.

  While the use of the global WHO database and, in particular, the proposed HATC
  classification does not solve the problem of missing or inaccurate information, it is hoped
  that it will facilitate proper classification of all herbal product information and, most
  importantly, show where there is a potential for confusion and/or error.

  Another linked benefit is that it will be possible to produce a checklist of common and
  vernacular names covering several different languages, which will be valuable for all
  those seeking to identify the contents of herbal remedies used nationally. It may also
  prove useful at poisons centres and probably also for pharmaceutical companies in
  labelling their herbal products. In the end all involved with herbal products should use
  the valid scientific names, to avoid any confusion.




                                                                                                 49
WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems



          The use of data-mining tools on pooled international data will be particularly valuable in
          trying to find useful patterns within such a large volume of heterogeneous data. Much
          consideration will need to be given to the development of such tools and to the use of
          international expertise in the interpretation of information. As always, epidemiological
          studies, where they can be undertaken, will aid the quantification and validation of early
          signals. However, epidemiological studies on herbal products are difficult because of the
          problems of ascertaining precise information.



          Fig. 1. Data links for herbal substances

                 Valid Latin
                 binomial name                            Scientific and
                 (preferred name)                         common
                                                          name                  Plant part


                                                       Herbal substance
                                                                                Plant extracts,
                                                                                preparations




                  Substance              Ingredients          List of drug         ADR reports
                                                              names                Drug names as
                  register               Only                                      reported by
                  Including              preferred            Linking              national
                  preferred and          substance            preferred and        pharmaco-
                  synonym                names                trade names          vigilance centres




                               Herbal ATC




          50
                                         Part II
Part II of these guidelines reproduces, in its entirety, the publication 'Safety monitoring of
medicinal products: guidelines for setting up and running a pharmacovigilance centre',
issued by the Uppsala Monitoring Centre, Uppsala, Sweden, in 2000, by kind permission
of the Centre. WHO acknowledges the Uppsala Monitoring Centre (namely Dr David
Coulter, Dr Ralph Edwards, Dr Jenny Ericsson and Dr Mohamed Farah) for their
contribution in this respect.
Safety monitoring of medicinal products: guidelines for setting up
and running a pharmacovigilance centre
(The Uppsala Monitoring Centre, Uppsala, Sweden, 2000)



CONTENTS
 INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................... 1
 1. WHY PHARMACOVIGILANCE?........................................................................ 3
 2.     DEFINITION AND AIMS ................................................................................. 4
 3.     HOW TO START A PHARMACOVIGILANCE CENTRE ............................. 4
    3.1   Basic steps in setting up a Pharmacovigilance Centre.................................... 5
 4.     REPORTING OF ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS......................................... 5
    4.1   Reporting form................................................................................................ 5
    4.2   Reporting by whom?....................................................................................... 6
    4.3   What to report? ............................................................................................... 6
    4.4   Mandatory or voluntary reporting? ................................................................. 7
 5.     SPECIAL ISSUES IN REPORTING ................................................................. 7
    5.1   Central or decentralised reporting ?................................................................ 7
    5.2   Stimulation of reporting.................................................................................. 7
    5.3   Under-reporting............................................................................................... 8
 6. PRACTICALITIES IN THE ORGANISATION OF A
 PHARMACOVIGILANCE CENTRE............................................................................ 8
    6.1   Staff................................................................................................................. 8
    6.2   Useful equipment (includes):.......................................................................... 8
    6.3   Continuity ....................................................................................................... 9
    6.4   Advisory Committees ..................................................................................... 9
    6.5   Information service ......................................................................................... 9
    6.6   Communications ............................................................................................. 9
    6.7   Poison control and drug information centres ................................................ 10
 7. ASSESSMENT OF CASE REPORTS ................................................................. 10
    7.1   Data-processing............................................................................................. 11
 8.     USE OF THE DATA ........................................................................................ 11
    8.1   Hypothesis generation and strengthening ..................................................... 11
    8.2   Drug regulation ............................................................................................. 11
    8.3   Information ................................................................................................... 11
    8.4   Education and feedback ................................................................................ 12
    8.5   Limitations regarding the use of the data...................................................... 12
 9.     RELATIONS WITH OTHER PARTIES ......................................................... 12
    9.1   The Drug Regulatory Authority.................................................................... 12
    9.2   Pharmaceutical companies............................................................................ 12
    9.3   Professional medical and pharmaceutical associations................................. 13
    9.4   World Health Organization and WHO Collaborating Centre for International
          Drug Monitoring ........................................................................................... 13
  9.5   National pharmacovigilance centres ............................................................. 13
  9.6   Academia ...................................................................................................... 13
  9.7   Media and consumer organisation ................................................................ 13
10.   OTHER SOURCES OF INFORMATION ....................................................... 13
11.   FUNDING......................................................................................................... 13
REFERENCES ............................................................................................................. 14
GLOSSARY ................................................................................................................. 14
CAUSALITY CATEGORIES ...................................................................................... 16
SOURCES..................................................................................................................... 17
WHO CONTACTS ....................................................................................................... 17
INTRODUCTION
This booklet aims to provide practical guidelines and information for the setting up of new
Pharmacovigilance Centres.

The history of international pharmacovigilance goes back as much as thirty years, when the
twentieth World Health Assembly adopted a resolution to start a project on the feasibility of an
international system of monitoring adverse reactions to drugs. This resolution was the basis of
WHO’s Programme on International Drug Monitoring.

At this moment more than fifty countries participate in this Programme. The world of today no
longer is as it was at the time the Programme was established. New developments challenge our
attention, require adequate reaction, and raise new questions in adverse drug reaction
monitoring.

A few examples may illustrate this: The current financial climate forces national authorities to
find ways to contain the cost of pharmaceutical care. In some countries a strong tendency to self-
medication can be seen, and many pharmaceuticals that used to be on prescription only are now
available over the counter. The question arises: Does this have consequences for the safety of the
patients?

Traditional medication is increasing in the Western world, but the use of herbal medicines risks
escaping control. Nonetheless several herbal medicines are quite active, and may be associated
with adverse effects. Continuing vigilance is needed.

A phenomenon that has received the attention it deserves, in only the last few years, is the
prevalence of counterfeit drugs on the market. Instances of calamities, claiming the lives of
numerous children due to the use of a toxic solvent have been documented. Drug monitoring
programmes may well be instrumental in detecting such products.

The way drugs are being monitored has changed, both internationally as well as on the national
level. The WHO Programme was established with ten countries, all of them highly developed.
Gradually more countries showed interest and eventually joined the Programme, once they felt
that their national systems were sufficiently developed.

Criteria for this development are not only the functioning of the centre in question itself, but also
the presence of an effective drug regulatory body in the country that has the will and the
potential to react to signals emanating from the centre and to take proper regulatory measures.
WHO considers this point as vital: a pharmacovigilance system must be backed up by the
regulatory body.

In particular the last five years have seen an increasing number of countries expressing the wish
to participate in the Programme, and several countries are in contact with WHO and the WHO
Collaborating Centre, the Uppsala Monitoring Centre in Sweden, to receive support with the
development of their national programmes. Practically all industrialised countries already
participate; new countries now are all coming from the developing world. In several cases new
countries have requested WHO's collaboration and assistance in setting up a monitoring system.

At national level also many changes have been taking place. In the original model a
pharmacovigilance system is strongly centralised, and consists of one national centre collecting
reports from health professionals in the country. Many countries, however, now prefer a more



                                                                                                   1
decentralised system, with a national centre functioning as a focal point for some regional or local
centres. Several countries are in the process of starting their systems (conforming to this model),
and countries with a long-standing experience in drug monitoring are changing their
programmes into a decentralised organisation. Both situations are similar in many aspects.

Monitoring Centres always start on a very small scale, often with only one enthusiastic (part-time)
professional. These pioneers in their field need help and guidance. There is a need to provide
such emerging centres with some information:

♦   the material and resources required,
♦   how to operate
♦   what kind of support is needed
♦   where to find adequate literature sources
♦   what kind of assistance can be expected
♦   what is the relationship to be sought with drug information centres and poison information
    systems, and so on.

WHO has reacted to this perceived need by holding a consultative meeting that was asked to
share experience and competence through discussion of a draft guideline, prepared by Dr Ronald
Meyboom. On the basis of this discussion this document has been produced, that is intended to
be used by new monitoring centres, in order to prevent them from losing time and money as a
consequence of the lack of experience. It discusses practical aspects of how to run a
pharmacovigilance centre at the technical level, with down-to-earth recommendations. We hope
that this guideline booklet helps people on the way to a well-organised and well-run
pharmacovigilance centre.

This Guideline booklet is based on the proceedings of a Consultation on Setting up and Running
of a Pharmacovigilance Centre, World Health Organization, Geneva, 26-27 June 1996.

Participants:

Dr T. Kurokawa, Ministry of Health and Welfare, Tokyo, Japan (Chairman)

Dr Ana Maria Corrêa-Nunes, Instituto Nacional de Farmácia e do Medicamento, Lisbon, Portugal

Dr Andrzej Czarnecki, Institute for Drug Research and Control, Centre for Monitoring of Adverse
Effects of Drugs, Warsaw, Poland

Professor Iwan Darmansjah, University of Indonesia, Medical Faculty, Department of
Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Jakarta, Indonesia

Mr Henry Irunde, Tanzania Drug and Toxicology Information Service, Muhimbili Medical Centre,
P.O. Box 65088, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania

Dr Guillermo Lombardo, National Administration of Food, Drugs and Medical Technology,
Buenos Aires, Argentina

Dr Rachida Soulaymani-Bencheikh, Institute National d’Hygiène, Centre Anti-Poison et de
Pharmacovigilance, Rabat, Morocco

Dr Bengt-Erik Wiholm, Division of Epidemiology, Information and Inspection, Medical Products
Agency, Uppsala, Sweden.


2
Secretariat:

Dr Ronald H.B. Meyboom, the Uppsala Monitoring Centre, Uppsala, Sweden (Consultant)

Mr Sten Olsson, the Uppsala Monitoring Centre, Uppsala, Sweden (Rapporteur)

Dr Martijn ten Ham, Division of Drug Management and Policies, World Health Organization,
Geneva, Switzerland.




1.       WHY PHARMACOVIGILANCE?
The information collected during the pre-marketing phase of a medical drug is inevitably
incomplete with regard to possible adverse reactions (for definition see Glossary):

♦    tests in animals are insufficiently predictive of human safety
♦    in clinical trials patients are selected and limited in number, the conditions of use differ from
     those in clinical practice and the duration of trials is limited
♦    information about rare but serious adverse reactions, chronic toxicity, use in special groups
     (such as children, the elderly or pregnant women) or drug interactions is often incomplete or
     not available.

Pharmacovigilance is needed in every country, because there are differences between countries
(and even regions within countries) in the occurrence of adverse drug reactions and other drug-
related problems. This may be because of differences in:

♦    drug production
♦    distribution and use (e.g. indications, dose, availability)
♦    genetics, diet, traditions of the people
♦    pharmaceutical quality and composition (excipients) of locally produced pharmaceutical
     products
♦    the use of non-orthodox drugs (e.g. herbal remedies) which may pose special toxicological
     problems, when used alone or in combination with other drugs.

Data derived from within the country or region may have greater relevance and educational
value and may encourage national regulatory decision-making. Information obtained in a certain
country (e.g. the country of origin of the drug) may not be relevant to other parts of the world,
where circumstances may be different. When information from a region itself is not available, it
may take longer before a problem becomes known to drug regulatory authorities, physicians,
pharmacists, patients and pharmaceutical companies.

On the other hand, international monitoring such as the WHO International Drug Monitoring
Programme may provide information on possible safety issues which may not yet have emerged
within the country’s data. Pharmacovigilance is needed for the prevention of drug-induced
human suffering and to avoid financial risks associated with unexpected adverse effects. In
conclusion, medicines on the market need continuous monitoring in every country.




                                                                                                    3
2.        DEFINITION AND AIMS
Pharmacovigilance is concerned with the detection, assessment and prevention of adverse
reactions to drugs. Major aims of pharmacovigilance are:

     1.   Early detection of hitherto unknown adverse reactions and interactions
     2.   Detection of increases in frequency of (known) adverse reactions
     3.   Identification of risk factors and possible mechanisms underlying adverse reactions
     4.   Estimation of quantitative aspects of benefit/risk analysis and dissemination of
          information needed to improve drug prescribing and regulation.

The ultimate goals of pharmacovigilance are:
    ♦ the rational and safe use of medical drugs
    ♦ the assessment and communication of the risks and benefits of drugs on the market
    ♦ educating and informing of patients.


Spontaneous reporting – a regional or country-wide system for the reporting of suspected
adverse drug reactions – is the primary method in pharmacovigilance. In addition, other methods
of data-collection exist or are under development (see § 8.5 and 10).

3.        HOW TO START A PHARMACOVIGILANCE CENTRE
A new pharmacovigilance centre can start operating very quickly. The development of a
pharmacovigilance system, however, from the first and uncertain stage to becoming an
established and effective organisation, is a process that needs time, vision, dedication, expertise
and continuity. The most promising location for a new pharmacovigilance centre may depend on
the organisation and development of the healthcare system in the country and other local issues.

A governmental department (health authority, drug regulatory agency) can be a good host for a
pharmacovigilance centre. However, any department in a hospital or academic environment,
working in clinical pharmacology, clinical pharmacy, clinical toxicology or epidemiology, may be
a suitable starting point for pharmacovigilance. The reporting of adverse drug reactions may start
locally, perhaps in one hospital, then extend to other hospitals and family practices in the region,
and progress step by step into a national activity. In some countries professional bodies such as
the national medical association may be a good home for the centre.

When the centre is a country-wide organisation from the start, it should be remembered that
much effort, especially in effective communications, will be needed before a substantial
proportion of practitioners are contributing.

When a centre is part of a larger organisation (for example, a poison control unit, a clinical
pharmacology department, or a hospital pharmacy) providing administrative continuity, it can
get going as long as there is one professional (e.g. a physician or pharmacist) available who is
primarily responsible for pharmacovigilance.

Whatever the location of the centre, pharmacovigilance is closely linked to drug regulation.
Governmental support is needed for national co-ordination. Pharmacovigilance is nobody’s
individual privilege. Good collaboration, co-ordination, communications and public relations are
needed for a coherent development and for the prevention of unnecessary competition or
duplication.




4
3.1       Basic steps in setting up a Pharmacovigilance Centre
Prepare a plan according to the points below for the establishment of the pharmacovigilance
system.

     1.   Make contacts with the health authorities and with local, regional or national institutions
          and groups, working in clinical medicine, pharmacology and toxicology, outlining the
          importance of the project and its purpose.
     2.   Design a reporting form (see § 4.1) and start collecting data by distributing it to hospital
          departments, family practitioners, etc.
     3.   Produce printed material to inform health professionals about definitions, aims and
          methods of the pharmacovigilance system.
     4.   Create the centre: staff, accommodation, phone, word processor, database management
          capability, bibliography, etc.
     5.   Take care of the education of pharmacovigilance staff with regard, for example, to:

              ♦   data collection and verification
              ♦   interpreting and coding of adverse reaction descriptions
              ♦   coding of drugs
              ♦   case causality assessment
              ♦   signal detection
              ♦   risk management.

     6.   Establish a database (administrative system for the storage and retrieval of data; see also
          § 7.1).
     7.   Organise meetings in hospitals, academia and professional associations, explaining the
          principles and demands of pharmacovigilance and the importance of reporting.
     8.   Promote the importance of reporting adverse drug reactions through medical journals,
          other professional publications and communications activities.
     9.   Maintain contacts with international institutions working in pharmacovigilance, e.g. the
          WHO Department of Essential Drugs and Medicines Policy (Geneva), and the Uppsala
          Monitoring Centre, Sweden (see page 17 for all contact details).

4.        REPORTING OF ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS
Spontaneous reporting – a regional or country-wide system for the reporting of suspected
adverse drug reactions – is currently the major source of information in pharmacovigilance.

4.1       Reporting form
A case report in pharmacovigilance can be defined as: A notification relating to a patient with
an adverse medical event (or laboratory test abnormality) suspected to be induced by a medicine.

A case report should (as a minimum to aim at) contain information on the following elements:

     1.   The patient: age, sex and brief medical history (when relevant). In some countries ethnic
          origin may need to be specified.
     2.   Adverse event: description (nature, localisation, severity, characteristics), results of
          investigations and tests, start date, course and outcome.
     3.   Suspected drug(s): name (brand or ingredient name + manufacturer), dose, route,
          start/stop dates, indication for use (with particular drugs, e.g. vaccines, a batch number
          is important).
     4.   All other drugs used (including self-medication): names, doses, routes, start/stop dates.



                                                                                                    5
    5.   Risk factors (e.g. impaired renal function, previous exposure to suspected drug, previous
         allergies, social drug use).
    6.   Name and address of reporter (to be considered confidential and to be used only for data
         verification, completion and case follow-up).

Reporting should be as easy and cheap as possible. Special free-post or business reply reporting
forms, containing questions 1-6 mentioned above, can be distributed throughout the target area
to healthcare professionals at regular intervals (for example, four times a year).

It may take the yearly distribution of hundreds of thousands of forms to harvest only some
hundreds of case reports. It may be effective to include reply-paid reporting forms in the national
formulary, drug bulletin and professional journals. Also telephone, fax and electronic mail or
internet may be easy means of reporting where reliable technology is available and accessible.

4.2      Reporting by whom?
Professionals working in healthcare are the preferred source of information in pharmacovigilance,
for example family practitioners, medical specialists and pharmacists. Dentists, midwives, nurses
and other health workers may also administer or prescribe drugs and should report relevant
experiences.

In addition pharmacists and nurses can play an important role in the stimulation of reporting and
in the provision of additional information (for example, on co-medication and previous drug use).

Pharmaceutical manufacturers, being primarily responsible for the safety of their products, have
to ensure that suspected adverse reactions to their products are reported to the competent
authority. If adverse reactions are reported directly by patients to the national or local centre, it is
useful to consider the possibility of communication with their physicians for additional
information and data verification.

4.3      What to report?
In the early stages of any pharmacovigilance system, reports on all suspected adverse reactions -
known or not, serious or not - are welcome and useful, because it is necessary to create a
notification culture in which the instinctive response to any suspected adverse drug reaction is to
report it. Healthcare professionals need to learn how and what to notify, and the staff of the
pharmacovigilance centre need to gain experience in assessment, coding and interpretation.

In established pharmacovigilance systems it is common practice to request the reporting of all
suspected reactions, including minor ones for new drugs. For established drugs the reporting of
serious or unusual suspected adverse reactions is of particular importance, whereas known and
minor reactions are of less interest. (See Glossary for the definition of a serious reaction.) If an
increased frequency of a given reaction is suspected this is also a reason for reporting.

Although pharmacovigilance is primarily concerned with pharmaceutical medicines (including
radiologic contrast media, vaccines and diagnostics), adverse reactions associated with drugs
used in traditional medicine (e.g. herbal remedies) should also be considered. Special fields of
interest are drug abuse and drug use in pregnancy (teratogenicity) and lactation.

In addition, the reporting of lack of efficacy and suspected pharmaceutical defects is
recommended, especially when there is the possibility of manufacturing problems, counterfeit
pharmaceuticals or of the development of resistance (e.g. antibiotics). Pharmacovigilance and




6
poison control are closely related activities, since the problems encountered with accidental or
intentional overdose may cast doubt on the safety of a medical drug.

Also adverse reactions to cosmetics may need to be reported, especially when cosmetics contain
obsolete or toxic ingredients (e.g. mercury compounds or corticoids in bleaching creams). If there
is no other organisation in the country dealing with the issues, a pharmacovigilance centre may
also cover problems related to medical devices and equipment, although different expertise may
be needed.

The reporting of adverse events occurring during clinical trials are not covered by these
guidelines. Recommendations on how to record and report such events are included in
guidelines on good clinical practice for trials on pharmaceutical products (GCP).

4.4      Mandatory or voluntary reporting?
In many countries the reporting of adverse drug reactions is voluntary, but in an increasing
number of countries some legal reporting obligations on healthcare professionals have been
established (although a penalty is not usually associated with failure to report). Little information
is available regarding the advantages and disadvantages of such obligations. In addition, in many
countries it is mandatory for pharmaceutical companies to report suspected adverse drug
reactions to the health authorities.

5.       SPECIAL ISSUES IN REPORTING
5.1      Central or decentralised reporting ?
As a rule spontaneous monitoring aims at country-wide reporting and the use of one central
pharmacovigilance database to obtain a national overview. The collection of data may
nevertheless be more successful in number and quality if reporting is organised regionally,
especially when countries are large or have regional cultural differences. Regional centres with
short lines of communication to healthcare professionals may improve communications and
feedback. When regional centres are used, good collaboration and data-exchange with the
national centre needs to be ensured. Regionalisation requires more staff and facilities and can
therefore be more expensive.

5.2      Stimulation of reporting
The reporting of adverse reactions needs continuous stimulation. It is important to achieve the
development of a positive attitude towards pharmacovigilance among healthcare professionals
so that adverse reaction reporting becomes an accepted and understood routine. In summary, the
following may stimulate reporting:

♦    easy access to pre-paid reporting forms and other means of reporting
♦    acknowledging the receipt of adverse drug reaction reports by personal letter or phone call
♦    providing feedback to reporters in the form of articles in journals, adverse drug reaction
     bulletins or newsletters
♦    participation of the centres staff in pre- and postgraduate education and scientific meetings
♦    collaboration with local drug or pharmacovigilance committees
♦    collaboration with professional associations
♦    integration of pharmacovigilance in the (further) development of clinical pharmacy and
     clinical pharmacology in a country.




                                                                                                   7
5.3      Under-reporting
Under-reporting is a common phenomenon in all countries. Correcting for under-reporting is
difficult, however, because its extent is unknown and very variable. Even at established centres
the reported proportion of serious reactions may not be more than 10%. Several of the countries
participating for many years in the WHO Drug Monitoring Programme receive 200 or more
adverse reactions per million inhabitants annually from about 10% of physicians. In many other
countries, however, the reporting rates are much lower.

Under-reporting may delay signal detection and cause underestimation of the size of a problem.
However, in signal detection not only the quantity but also the relevance of case reports and the
quality of data are important.

There are also a number of more elusive issues which require attention. Sometimes healthcare
professionals fear that the acknowledgement of adverse reactions may reflect negatively on their
competence or put them at risk of litigation. Some are reluctant to report adverse reactions
because of doubts regarding the causal role of the drug (although, of course, it is essential that
suspected reactions are reported). Under-reporting is both a technical and a psychological issue.
Clarity of criteria for reporting, simple procedures and good motivational practice are all
influential in addressing the problem.

6.       PRACTICALITIES IN THE ORGANISATION OF A
         PHARMACOVIGILANCE CENTRE
6.1      Staff
The expertise desirable in the routines of a pharmacovigilance centre includes (see also § 7):

♦    clinical medicine
♦    pharmacology
♦    toxicology, and
♦    epidemiology.

However, a new pharmacovigilance centre often starts with only a part-time expert - usually a
physician or a pharmacist - and some secretarial support. It may soon become necessary to have
one expert who is responsible for pharmacovigilance for most of his/her time and for secretarial
assistance to be expanded (see § 6.3, Continuity). When the reporting of adverse reactions
increases, staff resource requirements may be calculated by assuming that the average assessment
time per case report is about one hour.

6.2      Useful equipment (includes):
♦    multi-connection telephone
♦    computer (database, see § 7.1; word processor)
♦    printer (computer linked)
♦    fax
♦    e-mail
♦    photocopier.




8
6.3     Continuity
Continuity in accessibility and service is a basic feature of a successful pharmacovigilance centre.
The centre therefore needs a permanent secretariat, for phone calls, mail, maintenance of the
database, literature documentation, co-ordination of activities, etc. Secretarial continuity may be
achieved through collaboration with related departments, provided there is sufficient capacity.

6.4     Advisory Committees
A multi disciplinary advisory committee is desirable, to support the pharmacovigilance centre
with regard to the quality of the procedures in:

♦   data collection and assessment
♦   the interpretation of the data
♦   the publication of information.

An advisory committee may represent the following disciplines:

♦   general medicine
♦   pharmaceutics
♦   clinical pharmacology
♦   toxicology
♦   epidemiology
♦   pathology
♦   drug regulation and quality assurance
♦   drug information
♦   phytotherapy.

In addition a network of experienced advisors in various specialisations is helpful. When the
centre is located in a hospital, specialised expertise is usually within easy reach.

6.5     Information service
The provision of a high quality information service to healthcare professionals is a basic task of a
pharmacovigilance centre and a major instrument in the stimulation of reporting. For this
purpose and for the assessment of case reports the centre should have access to a comprehensive
and up-to-date literature information database (a list of relevant literature references may be
obtained from the Uppsala Monitoring Centre).

Location of the centre in a large hospital usually has the advantage of a library within reach.
National pharmacovigilance centres can have on-line access to the database of the UMC and be on
the mailing lists of adverse drug reaction and drug bulletins produced by the World Health
Organization and many national or regional centres throughout the world (ask the UMC for
addresses or see WHO contacts on page 17).

6.6     Communications
A bulletin or newsletter distributed to all healthcare professionals or a regular column in reputed
(medical and pharmaceutical) journals are good means for the dissemination of information.
Prompt data-sheet amendments are important, but data-sheets may be printed infrequently and
their educational impact may not be large. In urgent cases of sufficient importance “Dear Doctor”
letters may alert the profession.




                                                                                                  9
6.7     Poison control and drug information centres
Poison control and drug information centres have much in common with pharmacovigilance
centres, both in organisation and from a scientific point of view. If pharmacovigilance is started in
a country where a poison control or drug information centre is already in place it may be efficient
to develop the pharmacovigilance system in conjunction with it. Expensive facilities such as
secretariat, computer resources and library services can be shared.

In any case close collaboration between these organisations is desirable.

7.      ASSESSMENT OF CASE REPORTS
The assessment of adverse reaction case reports needs combined expertise in clinical medicine,
pharmacology and toxicology, and epidemiology. This expertise can be developed by training the
centre’s staff and by the use of specialised consultants. In the assessment of case reports the
following elements can be recognised:

1.   Quality of documentation (e.g. completeness and integrity of data, quality of diagnosis,
     follow-up). The basic elements of a case report are listed in § 4.1.
2.   Coding. Drug names should be registered in a systematic way, for example by using the
     WHO Drug Dictionary (which is based on the INN nomenclature and the ATC classification).
     For the coding of the adverse events the WHO Adverse Reaction Terminology (WHOART),
     or another internationally recognised terminology (e.g. MedDRA) should be used.
3.   Relevance with regard to the detection of new reactions, drug regulation, or scientific or
     educational value. The following questions especially may be asked:
             ♦ New drug? Products on the market less than five years are usually considered
                 new drugs
             ♦ Unknown reaction? (i.e. not included in the approved Summary of Product
                 Characteristics or ‘unlabelled’). Also important is whether the reaction is
                 described in the literature, e.g. national drug formulary, Martindale, Meyler’s
                 Side Effects of Drugs. (Ask the Uppsala Monitoring Centre for books and other
                 information sources)
             ♦ Serious reaction? (See Glossary).


4. Identification of duplicate reports. Certain characteristics of a case (sex, age or date of birth,
dates of drug exposure, etc.) may be used to identify duplicate reporting.

5. Causality assessment or imputation. With few exceptions, case reports describe suspected
adverse drug reactions. Various approaches have been developed for the structured
determination of the likelihood of a causal relationship between drug exposure and adverse
events, for example by the WHO Drug Monitoring Programme (see Glossary), the European
Commission, and the French national pharmacovigilance programme. These systems are largely
based on four considerations:

            ♦   the association in time (or place) between drug administration and event
                pharmacology (including current knowledge of nature and frequency of adverse
                reactions)
            ♦   medical or pharmacological plausibility (signs and symptoms, laboratory tests,
                pathological findings, mechanism)
            ♦   likelihood or exclusion of other causes.

The WHO causality categories have the advantages of being internationally agreed and easy to
use. Definitions for selected adverse reactions have been worked out and reached by


10
international agreement. For some of these reactions special causality algorithms have also been
developed (Bénichou, 1994).

7.1     Data-processing
In the early stages case-reports can be managed manually. When reporting increases, a computer
system enabling the processing and retrieval of cases according to suspected drugs and adverse
reactions is generally advisable.

The computer system used should include a hierarchical drug file allowing drugs to be recorded
according to product name, generic name and therapeutic category. Similarly a hierarchical
adverse reaction terminology should be employed. Hierarchical systems for the recording of
drugs and adverse reactions are necessary to allow for specific recording of detailed case
information while still permitting retrieval of information at higher levels.

As far as possible internationally recognised terminologies and classifications of drugs (ATC,
INN) and adverse reactions (e.g. WHOART, MedDRA) should be used, to facilitate international
comparisons of results and international transfer of data. Special care should be taken to attain
compatibility with the reporting requirements of the WHO Drug Monitoring Programme.
Detailed instructions on how to organise computerised data for submission to the WHO database
are obtainable from the Uppsala Monitoring Centre. It may not be cost-effective to design a
computer system for the management of adverse reaction reports from scratch. Commercial
programmes are available which have been appropriately tested and can be customised
according to local needs including local languages.

8.      USE OF THE DATA
Data collected in pharmacovigilance can be used in a variety of ways.

8.1     Hypothesis generation and strengthening
A major aim of pharmacovigilance is the early detection of hypotheses or signals (see Glossary)
with regard to possible adverse reactions. Early signals may be too uncertain, however, to justify
firm conclusions and regulatory action, and may need further study (see § 8.5). A signal may be
strengthened by combining the experiences reported in various countries. Therefore international
collaboration is important.

8.2     Drug regulation
After approval of a medicinal product, all available domestic and international safety information
is continuously monitored by the drug regulatory authority and the pharmaceutical company
concerned. Often problems can be solved by adaptation of the approved product information
(inclusion of new adverse effects, warnings, or indication changes). Sometimes stronger
restrictive actions are needed, with withdrawal of the marketing authorisation as the extreme. For
the approval of a given drug in a given country, it may be very helpful to have information on
the experiences with the drug in countries where it is already in use (e.g. through collaboration
with the Uppsala Monitoring Centre).

8.3     Information
For the dissemination of information of current importance or interest to healthcare practitioners,
an adverse drug reactions bulletin or a column in medical and pharmaceutical journals may be
very helpful. In the case of an emergency, a letter directly to all doctors and pharmacists may be
needed. Usually such actions take place in collaboration with the regulatory authority and the
pharmaceutical company’s experts.


                                                                                                11
8.4     Education and feedback
Continuous pre- and postgraduate education of healthcare professionals is an important aspect of
pharmacovigilance. Appropriate educational activities will improve knowledge and awareness of
adverse drug reactions and stimulate reporting. Drug information officers and local or national
Formulary Committees may benefit from close collaboration with the pharmacovigilance centre.

8.5     Limitations regarding the use of the data
Usually case reports of suspected adverse reactions may be influenced by all sorts of bias. The
interpretation of pharmacovigilance data may be difficult. Often signals are unsubstantiated and
require further study for confirmation or refutation (hypothesis testing) and for the assessment of
the reaction frequency, for example, as needed for drug regulatory decision-making.

On the one hand a pharmacovigilance centre has the task to stimulate the use of the collected
data by healthcare professionals, and on the other hand to ensure that the heterogeneous and
largely unproven data are used in a careful and scientifically (and socially) responsible way.

The spontaneous reporting system is especially helpful in the detection of adverse reactions that
are specific or occur in a suggestive time-relationship with drug use (e.g. anaphylactic shock), but
may be less effective in studying other sorts of adverse reactions (e.g. cancer development). The
potential of the spontaneous reporting system to determine the true frequency of adverse
reactions is limited.

The detailed reporting of histories of patients with iatrogenic injury and the subsequent use of the
reports are to a variable extent subject to rules regarding privacy and medical secrecy.
Confidentiality of personal data is needed. The complex of details in a patient history may be as
personal as a finger print and therefore a potential identifier. It is advisable for a
pharmacovigilance centre to establish data-management protocols, identifying legitimate data-
users and describing which data elements are available to whom and for which purpose and
which uses are excluded. Confidentiality primarily concerns the secrecy of the identity of all
individuals (patient, reporter, doctor) and institutions (hospital) involved. In many countries case
report summaries are not considered confidential.

Besides legal obligations, the basis of spontaneous monitoring is the commitment of healthcare
practitioners and patients together to make information available. If pharmacovigilance data
were used against the wish of reporters, the system as a whole might collapse.

9.      RELATIONS WITH OTHER PARTIES
9.1     The Drug Regulatory Authority
The Drug Regulatory Authority in the country needs to be informed about suspected adverse
reactions without delay, especially when unusual (e.g. reactions not included in the approved
Summary of Product Characteristics) or serious. In addition, a pharmacovigilance centre should
inform the regulatory authority about any cluster of case reports that is of possible interest, or
when an adverse reaction is reported in high or increasing frequency.

9.2     Pharmaceutical companies
Pharmaceutical companies need the same information as the regulatory authority. It will depend
on the local situation whether companies are to be informed directly or via the regulatory
authority.




12
9.3     Professional medical and pharmaceutical associations
A pharmacovigilance centre should seek the support of professional medical and pharmaceutical
associations. In the case of an emergency, these associations should be informed in good time.

9.4 World Health Organization and WHO Collaborating Centre for
International Drug Monitoring
A new pharmacovigilance centre should make contact with the World Health Organization in
Geneva and the WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring (the UMC) in
Uppsala, Sweden.

9.5     National pharmacovigilance centres
In addition it may be helpful to make contacts with national pharmacovigilance centres in
nearby countries. When more experienced, such centres may be helpful with staff training.

9.6     Academia
The need for pharmacovigilance and the nature of its procedures are a natural part of the
curriculum of pre-graduate training. In addition a pharmacovigilance centre may contribute to
and participate in postgraduate educational programs. Findings or hypotheses from the
pharmacovigilance system may be of potential interest for further study with regard to
mechanisms, reaction frequency, and so on, to academic pharmacological or epidemiological
institutions.

9.7     Media and consumer organisation
Support from national associations of consumers and patients may add to the general acceptance
of pharmacovigilance. Good relations with leading journalists may be helpful, e.g. for general
public relations and as part of the risk management strategy whenever an acute drug problem
arises. Special attention may be needed to explain to journalists the limitations of
pharmacovigilance data (see § 8.5)

10.     OTHER SOURCES OF INFORMATION
Spontaneous Reporting is especially useful in picking up signals of relatively rare, serious and
unexpected adverse reactions. For less rare adverse reactions several other methods may be used,
e.g. clinical trials or cohort studies. In addition to spontaneous reporting several other methods
have become available to provide data relevant to pharmacovigilance. Examples are: Prescription
Event Monitoring, Case-Control Surveillance and linkage of records from multipurpose
databases. In addition, drug utilisation data is of value in safety assessment.

11.     FUNDING
An estimation of the amount of money needed for pharmacovigilance can be calculated as a
function of the rate of reporting required and the size of the population (see § 5.3 and 6.1). The
collection of quantitatively and qualitatively good data and the careful assessment and
distribution of such information obviously have a price. A pharmacovigilance centre should have
some basic, regular source of funding in order to ensure continuity in its work. Such funding may
be obtained as part of the drug registration fee, or through a special mandatory
pharmacovigilance contribution. Both can be included in the budget of the drug regulatory
authority.




                                                                                               13
Apart from the basic resources, the centre may try to get additional funding from various parties
with an interest in pharmacovigilance. Institutions that may be approached include:

♦    health insurance companies and health insurance funds
♦    university departments
♦    professional associations
♦    governmental departments with an interest in drug safety.

In view of the great commercial and public health consequences of adverse reactions, the
continuity of the funding of pharmacovigilance should be guaranteed and not be susceptible to
possible pressure groups, political changes or economic factors.



REFERENCES
Stephens MDB. Detection of New Adverse Drug Reactions.
MacMillan Publishers, 1998, ISBN 0-333-693914.

Strom B (Ed). Pharmacoepidemiology (2nd ed).
Wiley, Chichester, 1994. ISBN 0 471 94058 5.

International Drug Monitoring: The Role of National Centres.
WHO Technical Report Series, No. 498, Geneva, 1972.

Rawlins MD. Spontaneous reporting of adverse drug reactions.
Br J Clin Pharmacol 1988;26:1-11.

Bégaud B, Chaslerie A, Fourrier A, Haramburu F, Miremont G (Eds). Methodological approaches
in pharmacoepidemiology. Applications to spontaneous reporting.
Elsevier Science Publishers, Amsterdam, 1993. ISBN 0-444-81-577-5.

Griffin JP, Weber JCP. Voluntary systems of adverse reaction reporting. In: Griffin JP, D’Arcy PF,
Harron DWG (Eds). Medicines: Regulation, Research and Risk.
Greystone Books, Antrim, 1989.

Bénichou C (Ed). Adverse drug reactions. A practical guide to diagnosis and management.
Wiley, Chichester, 1994. ISBN 0 471 94211.

Olsson S (Ed) National Pharmacovigilance Systems.
WHO Collaborating Centre for International Drug Monitoring, Uppsala, Sweden 2nd ed 1999,
ISBN 91-630-7678-0.



GLOSSARY
A drug or medicine is ‘a pharmaceutical product, used in or on the human body for the
prevention, diagnosis or treatment of disease, or for the modification of physiological function’.

An unexpected adverse reaction is ‘an adverse reaction, the nature or severity of which is not
consistent with domestic labelling or market authorisation, or expected from characteristics of the
drug’. Here the predominant element is that the phenomenon is unknown.




14
A side effect is ‘any unintended effect of a pharmaceutical product occurring at doses normally
used in man, which is related to the pharmacological proprieties of the drug’. Essential elements
in this definition are the pharmacological nature of the effect, that the phenomenon is unintended,
and that there is no overt overdose.

An adverse reaction is ‘a response to a medicine which is noxious and unintended, and which
occurs at doses normally used in man’. In this description it is of importance that it concerns the
response of a patient, in which individual factors may play an important role, and that the
phenomenon is noxious (an unexpected therapeutic response, for example, may be a side effect
but not an adverse reaction).

A signal refers to ‘reported information on a possible causal relationship between an adverse
event and a drug, the relationship being unknown or incompletely documented previously’.
Usually more than a single report is required to generate a signal, depending upon the
seriousness of the event and the quality of the information.

In these definitions drug or drug food interactions are also included. It should be added that
many patients have only suspected adverse reactions in which the causal role of the drug is
unproven and may be doubtful, and that pharmacovigilance data usually refer to only suspected
adverse reactions and side effects.

An adverse event or experience is defined as ‘any untoward medical occurrence that may present
during treatment with a medicine but which does not necessarily have a causal relationship with
this treatment’. The basic point here is the coincidence in time without any suspicion of a causal
relationship.

Serious adverse events can be defined as those that:

    a.   are life threatening or fatal
    b.   cause or prolong hospital admission
    c.   cause persistent incapacity or disability; or
    d.   concern misuse or dependence.

Type A effects (‘drug actions’) are those which are due to (exaggerated) pharmacological effects.
Type A effects tend to be fairly common, dose related (i.e. more frequent or severe with higher
doses) and may often be avoided by using doses which are appropriate to the individual patient.
Such effects can usually be reproduced and studied experimentally and are often already
identified before marketing.

Interactions between drugs, especially pharmacokinetic interactions, may often be classified as
Type A effects, although they are restricted to a defined sub-population of patients (i.e. the users
of the interacting drug).

Type B effects (‘patient reactions’) characteristically occur in only a minority of patients and
display little or no dose relationship. They are generally rare and unpredictable, and may be
serious and notoriously difficult to study. Type B effects are either immunological or non-
immunological and occur only in patients, with - often unknown - predisposing conditions.
Immunological reactions may range from rashes, anaphylaxis, vasculitis, inflammatory organ
injury, to highly specific autoimmune syndromes. Also non-immunological Type B effects occur
in a minority of predisposed, intolerant, patients, e.g. because of an inborn error of metabolism or
acquired deficiency in a certain enzyme, resulting in an abnormal metabolic pathway or




                                                                                                 15
accumulation of a toxic metabolite. Examples are chloramphenicol aplastic anaemia and isoniazid
hepatitis.

Type C effects refer to situations where the use of a drug, often for unknown reasons, increases
the frequency of a ‘spontaneous’ disease. Type C effects may be both serious and common (and
include malignant tumours) and may have pronounced effects on public health. Type C effects
may be coincidental and often concern long term effects; there is often no suggestive time
relationship and the connection may be very difficult to prove.

Confidentiality: Maintenance of the privacy of patients, healthcare providers and institutes,
including personal identities and all personal medical information.

Verification: The procedures carried out in pharmacovigilance to ensure that the data contained
in a final report matches the original observations. These procedures may apply to medical
records, data in case-report forms (in hard copy or electronic form), computer printouts, and
statistical analyses and tables.

Validation: The action of proving that any procedure, process, equipment (including the software
or hardware used), material, activity or system used in pharmacovigilance actually leads to the
expected results.



CAUSALITY CATEGORIES
The causality categories described by the Uppsala Monitoring Centre are as follows:
   1. Certain: a clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality, occurring in a plausible
       time relationship to drug administration, and which cannot be explained by concurrent
       disease or other drugs or chemicals. The response to withdrawal of the drug (dechallenge)
       should be clinically plausible. The event must be definitive pharmacologically or
       phenomenologically, using a satisfactory rechallenge procedure if necessary.
   2. Probable/Likely: a clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality, with a reasonable
       time sequence to administration of the drug, unlikely to be attributed to concurrent
       disease or other drugs or chemicals, and which follows a clinically reasonable response
       on withdrawal (dechallenge). Rechallenge information is not required to fulfil this
       definition.
   3. Possible: a clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality, with a reasonable time
       sequence to administrations of the drug, but which could also be explained by concurrent
       disease or other drugs or chemicals. Information on drug withdrawal may be lacking or
       unclear.
   4. Unlikely: a clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality, with a temporal
       relationship to drug administration which makes a causal relationship improbable, and
       in which other drugs, chemicals or underlying disease provide plausible explanations.
   5. Conditional/Unclassified: a clinical event, including laboratory test abnormality,
       reported as an adverse reaction, about which more data is essential for a proper
       assessment, or the additional data is under examination.
   6. Unassessable/Unclassifiable: a report suggesting an adverse reaction which cannot be
       judged because information is insufficient or contradictory, and which cannot be
       supplemented or verified.

As a step towards harmonisation in drug regulation in the countries of the European Union, the
EU pharmacovigilance working parties proposed the following three causality categories:




16
♦   Category A: ‘Reports including good reasons and sufficient documentation to assume a
    causal relationship, in the sense of plausible, conceivable, likely, but not necessarily highly
    probable’.
♦   Category B: ‘Reports containing sufficient information to accept the possibility of a causal
    relationship, in the sense of not impossible and not unlikely, although the connection is
    uncertain and may be even doubtful, e.g. because of missing data, insufficient evidence or the
    possibility of another explanation’.
♦   Category O: ‘Reports where causality is, for one or another reason, not assessable, e.g.
    because of missing or conflicting data’.



SOURCES
Edwards IR, Biriell C. Harmonisation in pharmacovigilance. Drug Safety 1994,10:93-102.

Bégaud B, Evreux JC, Jouglard J, Lagier G. Unexpected or toxic drug reaction assessment
(imputation). Actualisation of the method used in France. Thérapie 1985;40:111-8.

Meyboom RHB, Hekster YA, Egberts ACG, Gribnau FWJ, Edwards IR. Causal or casual? The role
of causality assessment in pharmacovigilance. Drug Safety 1997,16:374-389.

Meyboom RHB, Egberts ACG, Edwards IR, Hekster YA, De Koning FHP, Gribnau FWJ.
Principles of signal detection in pharmacovigilance. Drug Safety 1997;16:355-365.



WHO CONTACTS
Essential Drugs and Other Medicines                  WHO Collaborating Centre for Drug Policy,
World Health Organization                            Information and Safety Monitoring
20 Avenue Appia                                      (Joint Centre)
1211 Geneva 27                                       Department of Pharmacology, Medical
Switzerland                                          School,
Tel: +41 22 791 2111                                 University of Cape Town K45, Old Main
Fax: +41 22 791 4730                                 Building,
Website: www.who.int                                 Groot Shuur Hospital
                                                     Observatory - 7925,
                                                     South Africa
WHO Collaborating Centre for                         Tel: + 27 21 447 1618
International Drug Monitoring                        Fax: +27 21 448 6181
the Uppsala Monitoring Centre                        E-mail: pfolb@uctgshl.uct.ac.za
Stora Torget 3
S-753 20 Uppsala                                     WHO Regional Office for the Americas, Pan
Sweden                                               American Sanitary Bureau (AMRO/PASB)
Tel: +46 18 65 60 60                                 525, 23rd Street, N.W.
Fax: +46 18 65 60 80                                 Washington, D.C. 20037
E-mail: info@who-umc.org                             USA
Website: www.who-umc.org                             Tel: +1 202 974 3000
                                                     Fax: +1 202 974 3663
                                                     E-mail: feferenr@paho.org




                                                                                                17
WHO Regional Office for the Eastern       WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific
Mediterranean (EMRO)                      (WPRO)
P.O. Box No. 1517                         P.O. Box 2932
Alexandria – 21563                        Manila 2801
Egypt                                     Philippines
Tel: +203 487 0090/6/7/8                  Tel: +632 521 8421 (Ext. 3408)
Fax: +203 483 8916 or 482 4329            Fax: +632 521 1036 or 5360 279
E-mail: graaffp@who.sci.eg                E-mail: santosob@who.org

WHO Regional Office for Europe (EURO)     WHO Regional Office for Africa (AFRO)
8, Scherfigsvej                           Medical School, C Ward, Perirenyatwa
DK - 2100 Copenhagen                      Hospital
Denmark                                   Mazoe Street, P O Box BE 773, Belvedere,
Tel: +45 3917 1717                        Harare
Fax: +45 3917 1818                        Zimbabwe
E-mail: whoeuro@vm.uni-c.dk               Tel: + 263 4 703 580
                                          Fax: +1 407 733 9090
WHO Regional Office for South-East Asia   E-mail: regafro@whoafr.org
(SEARO)
Indraprastha Estate
Mahatma Gandhi Road
New Delhi – 110002
India
Tel: +91 11 331 78 04/7823
Fax: +91 11 331 8607/332 7972
E-mail: sheink@whosea.org




18
