                    Quality control methods
                     for herbal materials


Updated edition of Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials, 1998
WHO Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data

Quality control methods for herbal materials.

Updated edition of Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials, 1998

1. Plants, Medicinal. 2. Medicine, Herbal. 3. Medicine, Traditional. 4. Quality control. 5. Manuals. I. World Health
Organization.

ISBN 978 92 4 150073 9                          (NLM classiﬁcation: QV 766)



                                       © World Health Organization 2011

All rights reserved. Publications of the World Health Organization can be obtained from WHO Press, World
Health Organization, 20 Avenue Appia, 1211 Geneva 27, Switzerland (tel.: +41 22 791 3264; fax: +41 22 791 4857;
e-mail: bookorders@who.int). Requests for permission to reproduce or translate WHO publications – whether
for sale or for noncommercial distribution – should be addressed to WHO Press, at the above address
(fax: +41 22 791 4806; e-mail: permissions@who.int).

The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression
of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the World Health Organization concerning the legal status of any
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Dotted lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.

The mention of speciﬁc companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed
or recommended by the World Health Organization in preference to others of a similar nature that are not
mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital
letters.

All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained
in this publication. However, the published material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either
expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In no
event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.

Printed in Malta.
                                                                                                                     Contents




                                                                                                    Contents

Acknowledgment ............................................................................................................ v

Preface to the ﬁrst edition (1998).................................................................................vii

Preface to the updated edition ..................................................................................... ix

Note to the reader ........................................................................................................... xi

1.    General notices ......................................................................................................... 1

2.    Powder ﬁneness and sieve size.............................................................................. 5

3.    General advice on sampling................................................................................... 7

4.    Determination of foreign matter ........................................................................... 9

5.    Macroscopic and microscopic examination........................................................11

6.    Thin-layer chromatography.................................................................................. 23

7.    Determination of ash ............................................................................................. 29

8.    Determination of extractable matter................................................................... 31

9.    Determination of water and volatile matter...................................................... 33

10. Determination of volatile oils .............................................................................. 37

11. Determination of bitterness value ...................................................................... 41

12. Determination of haemolytic activity ................................................................ 43

13. Determination of tannins ..................................................................................... 45

14. Determination of swelling index ........................................................................ 47

15. Determination of foaming index......................................................................... 49

16. Determination of pesticide residues .................................................................. 51

17. Determination of arsenic and toxic metals ........................................................ 67

18. Determination of microorganisms ...................................................................... 75

19. Determination of aﬂatoxins.................................................................................. 85


                                                                                                                             iii
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          20. Radioactive contamination ................................................................................... 87

          21. Culture media and strains used for microbiological analysis ....................... 89

          22. Speciﬁcations for adsorbents for use in thin-layer chromatography ........... 93

          23. Reagents and solutions ......................................................................................... 99

          References ..................................................................................................................... 125

          Selected bibliography ................................................................................................. 127

          Glossary ........................................................................................................................ 129

          Annex           WHO good practices for pharmaceutical quality control
                          laboratories .................................................................................................. 135




iv
                                                                   Acknowledgements




                                           Acknowledgements


The World Health Organization wishes to express its appreciation for the generous
ﬁnancial support provided by the Government of Japan for the publication of this
document.

WHO acknowledges its indebtedness to approximately 260 reviewers, including
members of the organization’s Expert Advisory Panel on Traditional Medicine and
Expert Advisory Panel on the International Pharmacopoeia and Pharmaceutical
Preparations, WHO collaborating centres for traditional medicine, and national
regulatory authorities in over 114 countries who provided national information,
comments and advice on the draft texts. The preparation of this document
beneﬁted from technical support received from relevant professional bodies and
nongovernmental organizations.

WHO also wishes to thank the members of the WHO Expert Committee on
Speciﬁcations for Pharmaceutical Preparations, which met in 2004 and 2007 and
held consultation meetings in 2005 and 2006, for their review of, technical guidance
on, and endorsement of the updated contents of this publication.

The photograph on the front cover was kindly provided by Dr Yukihiro Goda,
Head of the Division of Pharmacognosy, Phytochemistry and Narcotics, at the
National Institute of Health Sciences, Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare,
Tokyo, Japan.




                                                                                  v
vi
                                                                         Preface to the ﬁrst edition (1998)




                      Preface to the ﬁrst edition (1998)


Plant materials are used throughout developed and developing countries as home
remedies, over-the-counter drug products and raw materials for the pharmaceutical
industry, and represent a substantial proportion of the global drug market. It is
therefore essential to establish internationally recognized guidelines for assessing
their quality. The World Health Assembly — in resolutions WHA31.33 (1978),
WHA40.33 (1987) and WHA42.43 (1989) — has emphasized the need to ensure
the quality of medicinal plant products by using modern control techniques and
applying suitable standards. This manual describes a series of tests for assessing
the quality of medicinal plant materials. The tests are designed primarily for
use in national drug quality control laboratories in developing countries, and
complement those described in The international pharmacopoeia,1 which provides
quality speciﬁcations only for the few plant materials that are included in the
WHO Model List of Essential Drugs.2 This manual does not constitute a herbal
pharmacopoeia, but a collection of test procedures to support the development of
national standards based on local market conditions, with due regard to existing
national legislation and national and regional norms. Publications containing
relevant speciﬁcations and standards, including those related to the food industry,
are listed in the References and Bibliography.

The test methods described here are the best methods currently available. The
manual will be revised as needed to incorporate improvements and additional
tests and to reﬂect developments in work being carried out at national and
regional levels, including projects aimed at ﬁnding replacements for toxic
reagents.

In addition to the test methods, some suggestions regarding general limits for
contaminants are included. They should be considered as a basis for establishing
national limits. WHO is not currently able to recommend limits for contaminants
since these are too diverse and there is a lack of consensus. For instance, the draft
proposal for limits for some pesticides published in Pharmeuropa, 1993, 5(1): 19, is
far more restrictive than that proposed here.

The test procedures cannot take account of all possible impurities. Common sense
and good pharmaceutical practice should be applied in deciding whether an
unusual substance not detectable by the prescribed tests can be tolerated.




1
  The international pharmacopoeia, 3rd ed. Geneva, World Health Organization. Vol. 1: General methods
  of analysis, 1979. Vol. 2: Quality speciﬁcations, 1981. Vol. 3; Quality speciﬁcations, 1988. Vol. 4: Tests,
  methods, and general requirements. Quality speciﬁcations for pharmaceutical substances, excipients, and
  dosage forms, 1994.
2
  The use of essential drugs. Eighth report of the WHO Expert Committee. Geneva, World Health
  Organization, 1998 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 882).



                                                                                                         vii
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          The analysis of medicinal plant materials is not restricted to those methods
          discussed or recommended here and many techniques similar to those used for the
          analysis of synthetic drugs are also frequently employed (e.g. volumetric analysis,
          gravimetric determinations, gas chromatography, column chromatography, high-
          performance liquid chromatography and spectrophotometric methods). Details of
          all these methods can be found in The international pharmacopoeia.




viii
                                                          Preface to the updated edition




                     Preface to the updated edition


WHO published Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials in 1998, in
order to support WHO Member States in establishing quality standards and
speciﬁcations for herbal materials, within the overall context of quality assurance
and control of herbal medicines. This publication came to be regarded as one of
the key technical documents in ensuring and controlling the quality of herbal
medicines.

At the end of 2007, the document WHO guidelines on assessing quality of herbal
medicines with reference to contaminants and residues was published. These two
publications were the result of joint activities between, among others, the teams of
Quality and Safety: Medicines (QSM) and Traditional Medicine (TRM) within the
WHO Cluster for Health Systems and Services.

The majority of adverse events reported in relation to the use of herbal products
and herbal medicines are attributable to poor quality of the product. In order to
promote the safety of herbal medicines, WHO has committed itself to develop
the necessary new guidelines and to update existing ones relating to the quality
assurance and control of herbal medicines.

The preparation of the guidelines relating to contaminants and residues gave WHO an
opportunity to gather detailed technical information on various analytical methods
for determining possible contaminants and residues in herbal medicines — including
those described in 10 national and/or regional pharmacopoeias. Subsequently, WHO
was able to compare each analytical method for speciﬁc contaminants and residues
and could recommend methods for each of the possible contaminants and residues of
herbal medicines. This material was identiﬁed to serve in updating the information
and methods corresponding to sections 16–22 of Quality control methods for medicinal
plant materials (1998).

As the Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials was widely distributed,
WHO considered reprinting the publication. However, in view of the above-
mentioned opportunity given by the development of the guidelines, it was
proposed to update the relevant sections and publish an updated edition instead
of reprinting the existing publication. In 2004, the WHO Expert Committee on
Speciﬁcation of Pharmaceutical Preparations agreed with this proposal.

Subsequently, draft chapters for the update were consolidated and were presented
to the WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations for Pharmaceutical Preparations
at its consultation meetings and sessions in 2005 and 2006. At its 2007 session, the
Expert Committee endorsed the publication of the updated edition.

The purpose of this updated edition remains unchanged from that of the ﬁrst
edition. It is to support the development of national standards based on local
market conditions, with due regard to existing national legislation and national



                                                                                     ix
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          and regional norms. It describes a series of tests for assessing the quality of herbal
          materials, including the determination of pesticide residues, arsenic and toxic
          heavy metals, microorganisms and aﬂatoxins. This new edition will also serve
          as key technical training material in capacity-building training workshops in
          herbal medicines. Compilation of the updated edition of Quality control methods for
          medicinal plant materials — now with the updated title of Quality control methods for
          herbal materials — has been undertaken thanks to continued collaboration between
          QSM and TRM. This publication is an example of the immediate response of WHO
          in the implementation of the Global strategy and plan of action on public health,
          innovation and intellectual property that was adopted by the Sixty-ﬁrst World
          Health Assembly.

          As this publication was being prepared, the WHO Expert Committee on
          Speciﬁcations for Pharmaceutical Preparations adopted WHO good practices for
          pharmaceutical quality control laboratories, which were published in 2010 as Annex 1
          of the 44th report of the Committee. The scope of the good practice guidance in
          this annex includes pharmaceutical quality control laboratories handling herbal
          medicines. In order to promote these good practices and to provide general
          technical guidance in conducting the test methods described in this publication,
          Annex 1 of the Forty-fourth report of the WHO Expert Committee on speciﬁcations for
          pharmaceutical preparations is annexed to this publication for easy reference.




x
                                                                                      Note to the reader




                                                          Note to the reader


The test methods described in this publication are presented as examples of suitable
methods for herbal materials.

The analysis of herbal medicines is not restricted to those methods discussed or
recommended here. Other techniques are available.

When considering the choice of method, the level of detection and the herbal
material matrix used for the testing (e.g. seeds containing oils) must be taken
into account, and the method modiﬁed if required. The method of determination
should be validated for the relevant matrix.

Although selected methods are described in detail in this document, they may
not necessarily be the most modern or state-of-the-art methods. They offer some
options and guidance but the available technology and resources, including human
and ﬁnancial, may inﬂuence their use in particular countries.

In the event of limitations precluding the required analytical services for herbal
materials in a particular district(s) in a country, it is recommended that at least other
national or regional ofﬁcial laboratories should be available for such purposes.

The guidance of good practices for pharmaceutical control laboratories (see Annex 1),
including quality assurance measures, should be followed when methods are chosen
for all analyses. All methods chosen should be properly validated in accordance with
these good practices.

WHO is currently unable to recommend limits for contaminants and residues
because they are too diverse and there is a lack of international consensus. However,
some examples of national experience regarding general limits for contaminants
and residues are provided in other WHO guidelines.1




1
    WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues,
    World Health Organization, Geneva, 2007.



                                                                                                      xi
xii
                                                                             General notices




                                                    1. General notices

General considerations
      The metric system is used throughout the text. All temperatures are expressed in
      degrees Celsius (°C).

      Tests are normally carried out at room temperature (15–25 °C, or up to 30 °C in
      some climatic zones), unless otherwise indicated.

      Any glassware used in the tests should be of suitable quality. Graduated and
      volumetric vessels should be calibrated at room temperature.

      When a water-bath is referred to in the text, a bath containing boiling water (about
      100 °C) is to be used, unless a speciﬁc water temperature is given.

      Unless otherwise speciﬁed, all solutions indicated in the tests are prepared with
      distilled or demineralized water of adequate purity.


Reagents and solutions
      Reagents and solutions used must conform to the requirements speciﬁed in chapter
      23 on “Reagents and solutions”, and are designated as follows: reagent, R; test
      solution, TS; volumetric solution, VS.


Precision of measurement
      Quantities and volumes
      The quantities and volumes of the materials and reagents used in the tests must be
      measured with adequate precision, which is indicated as follows:

      — a value of 20.0 means not less than 19.5 and not more than 20.5;
      — a value of 2.0 means not less than 1.95 and not more than 2.05;
      — a value of 0.20 means not less than 0.195 and not more than 0.205.

      Temperature
      Temperature measurement is indicated in a manner similar to that given for
      quantities and volumes.

      Storage conditions given in general terms refer to the following equivalent
      temperatures:

      In a refrigerator 0–6 °C;
      Cold or cool      6–15 °C;
      Room temperature 15–25 °C, or up to 30 °C in some climatic zones.




                                                                                          1
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          pH values
          Precision in the measurement of pH values is indicated in a manner similar to that
          for quantities and volumes.


Calculation of results

          The results of tests and assays should be calculated to one decimal place more than
          indicated in the requirement and then rounded up or down, as follows:

          — if the last ﬁgure calculated is 5 to 9, the preceding ﬁgure is increased by 1;
          — if the last ﬁgure calculated is 4 or less, the preceding ﬁgure is left unchanged.

          Other calculations, such as in the standardization of volumetric solutions, should
          be carried out in a similar manner.

          If the material has to be dried before it can be reduced to a powder for use in a
          determination, a correction must be made to take into account the loss on drying,
          and the amount of active principle calculated with reference to the undried
          sample.


Establishment of limits

          Reasonable limits may be established using simple statistical methods (e.g.
          control chart techniques) (1,2). Analytical results from about 20 successive
          batches are pooled together, and the grand average and “three sigma limits” (±3
          standard deviations from the grand average) are calculated. Such calculations are
          applicable when more than one individual or independent sample per batch is
          analysed (3,4).


Solubility

          Unless otherwise speciﬁed in the test procedure for the plant material concerned,
          the approximate solubility of herbal materials should be determined at 20 °C.
          Solubility is expressed in terms of “parts”, representing the number of millilitres
          (ml) of the solvent, in which 1 g of the solid is soluble. Descriptive terms are
          sometimes used to indicate the solubility of a substance, with the following
          meanings:
                 very soluble                  less than 1 part
                 freely soluble                1–10 parts
                 soluble                       10–30 parts
                 sparingly soluble             30–100 parts
                 slightly soluble              100–1000 parts
                 very slightly soluble         1000–10 000 parts
                 practically insoluble         more than 10 000 parts.


Storage
          Herbal materials must be stored under speciﬁed conditions in order to avoid
          contamination and deterioration.


2
                                                                                General notices



       Containers
       The container and its closure must not interact physically or chemically with
       the material within in any way that would alter its quality. The following
       descriptive terms are used to indicate general requirements for the permeability
       of containers:

       O   Well-closed containers must protect the contents from extraneous matter or from
            loss of the material under normal conditions of handling, shipment or storage.

       O   Tightly closed containers must protect the contents from extraneous matter, from
            loss of the material, and from efﬂorescence, deliquescence, or evaporation
            under normal conditions of handling, shipment or storage. If the container is
            intended to be opened on several occasions, it must be designed to be airtight
            after reclosure.

       O   Hermetically closed containers must protect the contents from extraneous matter
            and from loss of the substance, and must be impervious to air or any other gas
            under normal conditions of handling, shipment or storage.

       In addition, a tamper-evident container is one that is ﬁtted with a device that reveals
       clearly whether it has ever been opened.

       Protection from light
       Herbal materials requiring protection from light should be kept in a light-resistant
       container that — either by reason of the inherent properties of the material from
       which it is made or because a special coating has been applied to it — shields the
       contents from the effects of light. Alternatively, the container may be placed inside
       a suitable light-resistant (opaque) covering and/or stored in a dark place.

       Temperature
       Materials that need to be stored at temperatures other than room temperature
       (15–25 °C or, depending on the climate conditions, up to 30 °C) should be labelled
       accordingly.

       Humidity
       Low humidity may be maintained, if necessary, by the use of a desiccant in the
       container provided that direct contact with the product is avoided. Care must be
       taken when the container is opened in damp or humid conditions.


Size of cut
       Herbal materials are used either whole, or in cut or powdered form.

       Cut herbal materials are prepared by cutting or crushing the plant into small pieces.
       The cut is graded according to the aperture size of the mesh of the sieve through
       which the material will pass, and is indicated as follows:

                             Aperture size (mm)
              coarse cut     4.00
              medium cut     2.80
              ﬁne cut        2.00


                                                                                             3
Quality control methods for herbal materials



Units of measurement
          The names and symbols for units of measurement used in this manual conform
          with those used in The international pharmacopoeia (5) and those of the International
          System of units (SI), developed by the General Conference of Weights and Measures
          (CGPM) in collaboration with other international organizations (6,7).




4
                                                                        Powder ﬁneness and sieve size




                         2. Powder ﬁneness and sieve size

Powders
         The coarseness or ﬁneness of a powder is classed according to the nominal aperture
         size expressed in micrometres of the mesh of the sieve through which the powder
         will pass, and is indicated as shown in Table 1.

Table 1. Classiﬁcations of coarseness or ﬁneness of powder
          Descriptive term                                    Particle size
 Coarse (2000/355)                   All the particles will pass through a No. 2000 sieve,
                                       and not more than 40% through a No. 355 sieve
 Moderately coarse (710/250)         All the particles will pass through a No. 710 sieve,
                                       and not more than 40% through a No. 250 sieve
 Moderately ﬁne (355/180)            All the particles will pass through a No. 355 sieve,
                                       and not more than 40% through a No. 180 sieve
 Fine (180)                          All the particles will pass through a No. 180 sieve
 Very ﬁne (125)                      All the particles will pass through a No. 125 sieve


Sieves
         The wire sieves used to sift powdered herbal materials are classiﬁed by numbers that
         indicate their nominal aperture size expressed in μm. The sieves are made of wire of
         uniform circular cross-section, and have the speciﬁcations indicated in Table 2.

Table 2. Sieve numbers and speciﬁcations
    Number of sieve      Nominal size of aperture    Nominal diameter         Approximate screening
        (μm)                     (mm)                  of wire (mm)                 area (%)
          2000                     2.00                     0.90                       48
          710                      0.710                    0.450                      37
          500                      0.500                    0.315                      38
          355                      0.355                    0.224                      38
          250                      0.250                    0.160                      37
          212                      0.212                    0.140                      36
          180                      0.180                    0.125                      35
          150                      0.150                    0.100                      36
          125                      0.125                    0.090                      34
          90                       0.090                    0.063                      35
          75                       0.075                    0.050                      36
          45                       0.045                    0.032                      34


         The sieves recommended here have been selected from among those conforming
         to ISO standard 565 (1990).


                                                                                                      5
6
                                                                 General advice on sampling




                          3. General advice on sampling

     The reliability of any conclusions drawn from the analysis of a sample will depend
     upon how well the sample represents the whole batch. General recommendations
     for the sampling of pharmaceutical materials in connection with quality control
     are provided in the 39th report of the WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations
     for Pharmaceutical Preparations (3).

     Because of the speciﬁc characteristics of herbal materials, in particular their lack
     of homogeneity, special handling procedures are required in relation to sampling.
     The following procedures should be observed when selecting and preparing an
     average sample from a batch of material.


Recommended procedures
     Sampling of material in bulk
     Inspect each container or packaging unit for conformity with pharmacopoeia
     monographs or other requirements regarding packaging and labelling. Check
     the condition of the package and note any defects that may inﬂuence the quality
     or stability of the contents (physical damage, moisture, etc.). Sample damaged
     containers individually.

     If initial inspection indicates that the batch is uniform, take samples as follows.
     When a batch consists of ﬁve containers or packaging units, take a sample from
     each one. From a batch of 6–50 units, take a sample from ﬁve. In the case of batches
     of over 50 units, sample 10%, rounding up the number of units to the nearest
     multiple of 10. For example, a batch of 51 units would be sampled as for 60 — i.e.
     take samples from six packages.

     After opening, inspect the contents of the units selected for sampling for:

     — organoleptic characteristics (colour, texture and odour);
     — presentation of the material (raw, cut, crushed, compressed);
     — the presence of admixtures, foreign matter (sand, glass particles, dirt), mould
       or signs of decay;
     — the presence of insects;
     — the presence of packaging material originating from poor or degraded
       containers.

     From each container or package selected, take three original samples, taking care
     to avoid fragmentation. Samples should be taken from the top, middle and bottom
     of the container. In the case of sacks and packages, the three samples should be
     taken by hand, the ﬁrst from a depth of not less than 10 cm from the top and the
     second and third from the middle and bottom after cutting into the side of the
     package. Samples of seeds should be withdrawn with a grain probe. Material in
     boxes should ﬁrst be sampled from the upper layer; then approximately half of
     the contents should be removed and a second sample taken. Finally after further


                                                                                         7
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          removal of material, another sample should be taken from the bottom. Samples
          should be as uniform as possible in mass. The three original samples should then
          be combined into a pooled sample which should be mixed carefully.

          The average sample is obtained by quartering. Form the pooled sample, adequately
          mixed, into an even and square-shaped heap, and divide it diagonally into four
          equal parts. Take two diagonally opposite parts and mix carefully. Repeat the
          process as necessary until the required quantity, to within ± 10%, is obtained (100–
          200 g for ﬂowers and up to 10 kg for certain roots). Any remaining material should
          be returned to the batch.

          Using the same quartering procedure, divide the average sample into four ﬁnal
          samples, taking care that each portion is representative of the bulk material. The
          ﬁnal samples are tested for the following characteristics:

          — degree of fragmentation (sieve test);
          — identity and level of impurities;
          — moisture and ash content;
          — level of active ingredients, where possible.

          A portion of each ﬁnal sample should be retained to serve as reference material,
          which may also be used for re-test purposes, if necessary.

          Sampling of material in retail packages
          From each wholesale container (boxes, cartons, etc.) selected for sampling, take at
          random two consumer packages. From small batches (1–5 boxes), take 10 consumer
          packages. Prepare the pooled sample by mixing the contents of the selected consumer
          packages and proceed as described above to obtain the ﬁnal sample.




8
                                                               Determination of foreign matter




                  4. Determination of foreign matter

      Herbal materials should be entirely free from visible signs of contamination by
      moulds or insects, and other animal contamination, including animal excreta.
      No abnormal odour, discoloration, slime or signs of deterioration should be
      detected. It is seldom possible to obtain marketed plant materials that are entirely
      free from some form of innocuous foreign matter. However, no poisonous,
      dangerous or otherwise harmful foreign matter or residue should be allowed.

      During storage, products should be kept in a clean and hygienic place, so that no
      contamination occurs. Special care should be taken to avoid formation of moulds,
      since they may produce aﬂatoxins.

      Macroscopic examination can conveniently be employed for determining the
      presence of foreign matter in whole or cut plant materials. However, microscopy is
      indispensable for powdered materials.

      Any soil, stones, sand, dust and other foreign inorganic matter must be removed
      before herbal materials are cut or ground for testing.


Deﬁnition
      Foreign matter is material consisting of any or all of the following:

      — parts of the herbal material or materials other than those named with the limits
        speciﬁed for the herbal material concerned;
      — any organism, part or product of an organism, other than that named in the
        speciﬁcation and description of the herbal material concerned;
      — mineral admixtures not adhering to the herbal materials, such as soil, stones,
        sand and dust.


Sample size
      It is difﬁcult to prepare a pooled sample of foreign matter since most of it adheres
      to the herbal materials which are intrinsically non-uniform. Special procedures
      requiring considerable practice are therefore necessary. The problem is especially
      difﬁcult when the samples of unbroken crude herbal materials selected are small;
      they should be sufﬁciently large to be representative.

      The following quantities constitute a sample, unless otherwise speciﬁed in the test
      procedure for the herbal material concerned.




                                                                                            9
Quality control methods for herbal materials




          Herbal material                                                       Sample size
          roots, rhizomes and bark                                              500 g
          leaves, ﬂowers, seeds and fruit                                       250 g
          cut herbal materials                                                  50 g
          (average weight of each fragment less than 0.5 g)


Recommended procedures
          Foreign matter in whole or cut herbal materials
          Weigh a sample of herbal material, taking the quantity indicated above unless
          otherwise speciﬁed in the test procedures for the herbal material concerned.
          Spread it in a thin layer and sort the foreign matter into groups either by visual
          inspection, using a magnifying lens (6× or 10×), or with the help of a suitable sieve,
          according to the requirements for the speciﬁc herbal material. Sift the remainder of
          the sample through a No. 250 sieve; dust is regarded as mineral admixture. Weigh
          the portions of this sorted foreign matter to within 0.05 g. Calculate the content of
          each group in grams per 100 g of air-dried sample.

          For some herbal materials where the foreign matter may closely resemble the
          material itself, it may be necessary to take a pooled sample of the herbal material
          and apply a critical test — either chemical, physical or by microscopy. The
          proportion of foreign matter is calculated from the sum of the portions that fail to
          respond to the test.




10
                                                      Macroscopic and microscopic examination




                       5. Macroscopic and microscopic
                                         examination

      Herbal materials are categorized according to sensory, macroscopic and microscopic
      characteristics. An examination to determine these characteristics is the ﬁrst step
      towards establishing the identity and the degree of purity of such materials, and
      should be carried out before any further tests are undertaken. Wherever possible,
      authentic specimens of the material in question and samples of pharmacopoeial
      quality should be available to serve as a reference.

      Visual inspection provides the simplest and quickest means by which to establish
      identity, purity and — possibly — quality. If a sample is found to be signiﬁcantly
      different from the speciﬁcations in terms of colour, consistency, odour or taste,
      it is considered as not fulﬁlling the requirements. However, judgement must be
      exercised when considering odour and taste, owing to variability in assessment
      from person to person or by the same person at different times.

      Macroscopic identity of herbal materials is based on shape, size, colour,
      surface characteristics, texture, fracture characteristics and appearance of the
      cut surface. However, since these characteristics are judged subjectively and
      substitutes or adulterants may closely resemble the genuine material, it is often
      necessary to substantiate the ﬁndings by microscopy and/or physicochemical
      analysis.

      Microscopic inspection of herbal materials is indispensable for the identiﬁcation of
      broken or powdered materials; the specimen may have to be treated with chemical
      reagents. An examination by microscopy alone cannot always provide complete
      identiﬁcation, though when used in association with other analytical methods it
      can frequently supply invaluable supporting evidence.

      Comparison with a reference material will often reveal characteristics not described
      in the requirements which might otherwise have been attributed to foreign matter,
      rather than normal constituents.

      Any additional useful information for preparation or analysis should also be
      included in the test procedures for individual plant materials — for example the
      determination of vein-islets and the palisade ratio.


Visual examination and odour
      Wrinkled and contracted leaves, herbs or ﬂowers should be softened and stretched
      ﬂat (see “Preliminary treatment” below). Certain fruits and seeds may also require
      softening before dissection and observation of internal characteristics. No other
      preliminary treatment is required.




                                                                                          11
Quality control methods for herbal materials



Recommended procedures
          Size
          A graduated ruler in millimetres is adequate for the measurement of the length,
          width and thickness of crude materials. Small seeds and fruits may be measured
          by aligning 10 of them on a sheet of calibrated paper, with 1 mm spacing between
          lines, and dividing the result by 10.

          Colour
          Examine the untreated sample under diffuse daylight. If necessary, an artiﬁcial
          light source with wavelengths similar to those of daylight may be used. The colour
          of the sample should be compared with that of a reference sample.

          Surface characteristics, texture and fracture characteristics
          Examine the untreated sample. If necessary, a magnifying lens (6x to 10x) may be
          used. Wetting with water or reagents, as required, may be necessary to observe the
          characteristics of a cut surface. Touch the material to determine if it is soft or hard;
          bend and rupture it to obtain information on brittleness and the appearance of the
          fracture plane — whether it is ﬁbrous, smooth, rough, granular, etc.

          Odour
          If the material is expected to be innocuous, place a small portion of the sample
          in the palm of the hand or in a beaker of suitable size, and slowly and repeatedly
          inhale the air over the material. If no distinct odour is perceptible, crush the sample
          between the thumb and index ﬁnger or between the palms of the hands using
          gentle pressure. If the material is known to be dangerous, crush by mechanical
          means and then pour a small quantity of boiling water onto the crushed sample in
          a beaker. First, determine the strength of the odour (none, weak, distinct, strong)
          and then the odour sensation (aromatic, fruity, musty, mouldy, rancid, etc.). A direct
          comparison of the odour with a deﬁned substance is advisable (e.g. peppermint
          should have an odour similar to menthol, cloves should have an odour similar to
          eugenol).

          Taste
          N.B. This test should be applied only if speciﬁcally required for a given herbal
          material.


Inspection by microscopy
          Once the material has been examined and classiﬁed according to external
          characteristics, inspection by microscopy can be carried out as the next step.


Equipment
          The following are required:

          — a microscope equipped with lenses providing a wide range of magniﬁcation
            and a substage condenser, a graduated mechanical stage, objectives with a
            magniﬁcation of 4×, 10× and 40×, and colour ﬁlters of ground glass, blue-green;
            high eyepoint eyepieces are preferred for wearers of spectacles;
          — a lamp, either separate or incorporated into the microscope;


12
                                                      Macroscopic and microscopic examination



      — a set of polarizing ﬁlters;
      — a stage micrometer and an ocular micrometer to be inserted into a 6x eyepiece
        and placed on the diaphragm or, preferably, a micrometer eyepiece;
      — a set of drawing attachments for the microscope;
      — a microburner (Bunsen type);
      — slides and cover-glasses of standard size;
      — a set of botanical dissecting instruments.


Preliminary treatment
      Select a representative sample of the material. Dried parts of a plant may require
      softening before preparation for microscopy, preferably by being placed in a moist
      atmosphere or by soaking in water. For small quantities of material, place a wad of
      cotton-wool moistened with water into the bottom of a test-tube and cover with a
      piece of ﬁlter-paper. Place the material being examined on the paper, stopper the
      tube and allow it to stand overnight or until the material is soft and suitable for
      cutting. Use a desiccator for larger quantities of material, placing water into the
      lower part instead of the drying agent.

      Bark, wood and other dense and hard materials usually need to be soaked in water
      or in equal parts of water, ethanol and glycerol for a few hours or overnight until
      they are soft enough to be cut. Boiling in water for a few minutes may sometimes
      be necessary.

      Any water-soluble contents can be removed from the cells by soaking in water.
      Starch grains can be gelatinized by heating in water. In certain cases, material
      can be moistened with water for a few minutes to soften the surfaces and allow
      sections to be cut.


Preparation of specimens
      Powdered materials
      Place 1 or 2 drops of water, glycerol/ethanol TS or chloral hydrate TS on a glass
      slide. Moisten the tip of a needle with water and dip into the powder. Transfer a
      small quantity of the material that adheres to the needle tip into the drop of ﬂuid
      on the slide. Stir thoroughly, but carefully, and apply a cover-glass. Press lightly
      on the cover-glass with the handle of the needle, and remove excess ﬂuid from the
      margin of the cover-glass with a strip of ﬁlter-paper. Other ﬂuids may be used, if
      necessary, in the same manner.

      If the specimen is to be freed from air bubbles, boil carefully over a small ﬂame of
      a microburner until the air is completely removed. Care should be taken to replace
      the ﬂuid that evaporates so that the space beneath the cover-glass is completely
      ﬁlled with ﬂuid at the conclusion of the operation.

      Surface tissues of leaves and ﬂowers
      To render pieces of thin leaves transparent, boil them directly on a slide. Cut a
      piece of leaf into two portions, turn one piece upper side down and add chloral
      hydrate TS. Boil the specimen carefully over a small ﬂame of a microburner and, as
      soon as bubbles escape, remove the slide from the ﬂame. When the bubbles have
      ceased to appear, boil again until the fragments are transparent.


                                                                                          13
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          For slightly thicker but still papery leaves, cut square pieces, about 6 mm from the
          edge of the leaf, if not otherwise speciﬁed. The pieces should be taken one-third to
          one-half of the way from the leaf-base and should include a midrib or large vein.
          In addition, cut 1 or 2 pieces from the edge including 1 or 2 indentations, where
          appropriate. For broken or cut leaves take suitable fragments as described above.
          Place the fragments in a test-tube containing chloral hydrate TS and boil for a few
          minutes until they become transparent. Transfer a fragment to a slide and cut it
          into two equal portions. Turn one piece upper side down and align the two pieces
          so that both upper and lower surfaces can be observed under the microscope. Add
          1–2 drops of chloral hydrate TS and apply a cover-glass.

          For thicker leaves, that do not become transparent enough when prepared by the
          method described above, clarify fragments by boiling with chloral hydrate TS in a
          test-tube. Transfer a fragment onto a slide, cut it into two equal portions and turn
          one portion upper side down. Scrape the surface of the two portions using a scalpel
          until only a single layer of epidermis remains. Wash the epidermis with drops of
          chloral hydrate TS or glycerol/ethanol TS to remove any residues. If possible, turn
          both parts of the epidermis upper side down, and add one of the above ﬂuids.

          For very thick or ﬂeshy leaves, pull off the upper and lower parts of epidermis
          by winding the softened leaf around the index ﬁnger, pressing with the thumb
          and the middle ﬁnger against the index ﬁnger and carefully incising, catching the
          incised part with forceps, and carefully bending the epidermis backwards.

          Petals and sepals of ﬂowers may be treated in a similar manner.

          Sections
          Select representative pieces of the material being examined and cut into suitable
          lengths, one end of which is softened and smoothed. Prepare cross or transverse
          sections by cutting with a razor blade or microtome at a right angle to the
          longitudinal axis of the material. Prepare longitudinal sections by cutting in
          parallel with the longitudinal axis, either in a radial direction (radial section) or in
          a tangential direction (tangential section).

          Thick materials, such as wood, woody stems, rhizomes and roots can be cut by
          holding the softened material between the thumb and index ﬁnger, supported by
          the middle ﬁnger or by holding it in the central hole of a hand microtome. Thin
          materials such as leaves, petals and slender stems should be bound between two
          halves of a piece of elder-pith or other suitable support. If necessary, moisten the
          surface to be cut and the blade with ethanol (~375 g/l) TS. Cut the sections as
          thinly and evenly as possible. Transfer the sections with a brush moistened with
          ethanol (~150 g/l) TS to a dish containing ethanol (~150 g/l) TS. Select satisfactory
          sections for the preparation of the slides. For certain materials a sliding microtome
          may be used.

          Seeds and fruits that are very ﬂat, or that are small and spherical, and cannot be
          held in the manner described above may be inserted into a notch cut into a small
          rubber stopper or embedded in hard parafﬁn (parafﬁn wax) as follows. Prepare a
          hard parafﬁn block, rectangular in shape, measuring about 7×7×15 mm, and melt
          a small hole in the centre of one end using a heated needle or thin glass rod. Press
          the material, which should be dry or softened by exposure to moisture, into this
          hole. Then prepare sections with a microtome.


14
                                                          Macroscopic and microscopic examination



       For the examination of mucilage, aleurone grains or spherical aggregations of
       inulin, cut the material without using water.


Clariﬁcation of microscopic particles
       The presence of certain cell contents, such as starch grains, aleurone grains,
       plastids, fats and oils, may render sections non-translucent and obscure certain
       characteristics. Reagents that dissolve some of these contents can be used in order
       to make the remaining parts stand out clearly or produce a penetrating effect. This
       renders the section more transparent and reveals details of the structures.

       If the refractive index of the clarifying agent is close to that of the cell structure,
       the material being tested becomes almost invisible; if it differs appreciably, the
       material becomes markedly evident.

       The most frequently used clarifying agents are described below (for the methods
       of preparation, see chapter 23, “Reagents and solutions”).

       Chloral hydrate TS
       On gentle heating chloral hydrate TS dissolves starch grains, aleurone grains,
       plastids, and volatile oils, and expands collapsed and delicate tissue without causing
       any undue swelling of cell walls or distortion of the tissues. It has a refractive index
       (nD20) of 1.44–1.48. It is the best reagent for rendering calcium oxalate clearly evident
       and is particularly useful for small crystals. However, when allowed to stand, it
       slowly dissolves calcium oxalate, owing to an increase in acidity.

       Lactochloral TS
       Lactochloral TS has a similar use to chloral hydrate TS, but is usually applied to
       sections that are difﬁcult to clarify. It may be used cold. Before use, any air present
       in the specimen should be removed by placing in a desiccator and applying a
       vacuum.

       Lactophenol TS
       Lactophenol TS may be used cold or with heating. It has a refractive index (nD20) of
       1.44 and is useful for the preparation of fungi, pollen grains, most non-oily powders,
       and parasites such as mites and nematode worms. Sizes of starch grains can be
       measured accurately, but the concentric rings are usually invisible when prepared
       in this reagent. Crystals of calcium oxalate are clearly visible in lactophenol and
       shine brightly when illuminated with polarized light. This reagent dissolves
       calcium carbonate deposits with a slow effervescence, owing to the presence of
       lactic acid.

       Sodium hypochlorite TS
       Sodium hypochlorite TS is used for bleaching deeply coloured sections. Immerse
       the sections in the solution for a few minutes until sufﬁciently bleached, wash with
       water and prepare the mount with glycerol/ethanol TS. The bleached sections give
       a negative reaction to lignin.

       Solvents for fats and oils
       Xylene R and light petroleum R can be used to remove fats and oils from oily
       powders or sections. When necessary, immerse the material in the solvent for a
       short time, decant the liquid and wash the material with fresh solvent.


                                                                                              15
Quality control methods for herbal materials



Histochemical detection of cell walls and contents
          Reagents can be applied to a powdered sample or a section on a slide by the
          following methods:

          O   Add drops of the reagent to the sample and apply a cover-glass, then irrigate
               using a strip of ﬁlter-paper as described below.
          O   Place drops of the reagent on one edge of the cover-glass of a prepared specimen.
               Place a strip of ﬁlter-paper at the opposite edge of the cover-glass to remove the
               ﬂuid under the cover-glass by suction, causing the reagent to ﬂow over the
               specimen.

          Using the second method, the progress of the reaction may be observed under a
          microscope. Care should be taken to avoid using reagents or vapours that could
          attack the lenses or stages of the microscope.

          Cellulose cell walls
          Add 1–2 drops of iodinated zinc chloride TS and allow to stand for a few minutes;
          alternatively, add 1 drop of iodine (0.1 mol/l) VS, allow to stand for 1 minute,
          remove excess reagent with a strip of ﬁlter-paper and add 1 drop of sulfuric acid
          (~1160 g/l) TS; cellulose cell walls are stained blue to blue-violet. On the addition of
          1–2 drops of cuoxam TS, the cellulose cell walls will swell and gradually dissolve.

          Ligniﬁed cell walls
          Moisten the powder or section on a slide with a small volume of phloroglucinol
          TS and allow to stand for about 2 minutes or until almost dry. Add 1 drop of
          hydrochloric acid (~420 g/l) TS and apply a cover-glass; ligniﬁed cell walls are
          stained pink to cherry red.

          Suberized or cuticular cell walls
          Add 1–2 drops of sudan red TS and allow to stand for a few minutes or warm
          gently; suberized or cuticular cell walls are stained orange-red or red.

          Aleurone grains
          Add a few drops of iodine/ethanol TS; the aleurone grains will turn yellowish
          brown to brown. Then add a few drops of ethanolic trinitrophenol TS; the grains
          will turn yellow. Add about 1 ml of mercuric nitrate TS and allow to dissolve; the
          colour of the solution turns brick red. If the specimen is oily, render it fat-free by
          immersing and washing it in an appropriate solvent before carrying out the test.

          Calcium carbonate
          Crystals or deposits of calcium carbonate dissolve slowly with effervescence when
          acetic acid (~60 g/l) TS or hydrochloric acid (~70 g/l) TS is added.

          Calcium oxalate
          Crystals of calcium oxalate are insoluble in acetic acid (~ 60g/l) TS but dissolve in
          hydrochloric acid (~70 g/l) TS without effervescence (if applied by irrigation the
          acid should be more concentrated); they also dissolve in sulfuric acid (~350 g/l)
          TS, but needle-shaped crystals of calcium sulfate separate on standing after
          about 10 minutes. In polarized light, calcium oxalate crystals are birefringent.
          Calcium oxalate is best viewed after the sample has been clariﬁed (e.g. with
          chloral hydrate TS).


16
                                                         Macroscopic and microscopic examination



       Fats, fatty oils, volatile oils and resins
       Add 1–2 drops of sudan red TS and allow to stand for a few minutes or heat gently, if
       necessary. The fatty substances are stained orange-red to red. Irrigate the preparation
       with ethanol (~750 g/l) TS and heat gently; the volatile oils and resins dissolve in
       the solvent, while fats and fatty oils (except castor oil and croton oil) remain intact.

       Hydroxyanthraquinones
       Add 1 drop of potassium hydroxide (~55 g/l) TS; cells containing 1,8-di-
       hydroxyanthraquinones are stained red.

       Inulin
       Add 1 drop each of 1-naphthol TS and sulfuric acid (~1760 g/l) TS; spherical
       aggregations of crystals of inulin turn brownish red and dissolve.

       Mucilage
       Add 1 drop of Chinese ink TS to the dry sample; the mucilage shows up as
       transparent, spherically dilated fragments on a black background. Alternatively,
       add 1 drop of thionine TS to the dry sample, allow to stand for about 15 minutes,
       then wash with ethanol (~188 g/l) TS; the mucilage turns violet-red (cellulose and
       ligniﬁed cell walls are stained blue and bluish violet respectively).

       Starch
       Add a small volume of iodine (0.02 mol/l) VS; a blue or reddish blue colour is
       produced. Alternatively, add a small volume of glycerol/ethanol TS and examine
       under a microscope with polarized light; birefringence is observed giving a Maltese
       cross effect with the arms of the cross intersecting at the hilum.

       Tannin
       Add 1 drop of ferric chloride (50 g/l) TS; it turns bluish black or greenish black.


Disintegration of tissues
       Cut the material into small pieces about 2 mm thick and 5 mm long, or into slices
       about 1 mm thick (tangential longitudinal sections are preferred for woods or
       xylem from stems).

       Use one of the following methods depending on the nature of the cell walls. For
       tissues with ligniﬁed cell walls use either method 1 or method 2. For tissues where
       ligniﬁed cells are few or occur in small groups, use method 3.

       Method 1. Nitric acid and potassium chlorate
       Place the material in a test-tube containing about 5 ml of nitric acid (~500 g/l) TS
       and heat to boiling. Add a small quantity of powdered potassium chlorate R and
       allow to react, warming gently if necessary to maintain a slight effervescence; add
       fresh quantities of powdered potassium chlorate R as needed. When the tissue
       appears to be almost completely bleached and shows a tendency to disintegrate,
       apply pressure with a glass rod to the material. If the material breaks, interrupt the
       reaction by pouring the contents of the test-tube into water. Allow the material to
       settle, decant it and wash it with fresh water until the acidity is removed. Transfer
       the material onto a slide and tease it out with a needle. Add 1 drop of glycerol/
       ethanol TS and apply a cover-glass. The disintegrated material gives a negative
       reaction for lignin.


                                                                                             17
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Method 2. Nitric acid and chromic acid
          Place the material in a small dish and heat with nitro-chromic acid TS until the
          material breaks easily when pressure is applied with a glass rod. Wash the material
          repeatedly with water and transfer onto a slide. Tease out the material, add 1 drop
          of glycerol/ethanol TS and apply a cover-glass. The disintegrated material gives a
          negative reaction for lignin.

          This treatment can also be carried out on a slide. Place a moderately thick section of
          the material on a slide, add the reagent and allow it to stand for about 20 minutes.
          Separate the cells by applying gentle pressure, or with a sliding movement of the
          cover-glass. This process is especially useful when the disintegration of the tissues
          of a section under the microscope needs to be observed to ascertain where isolated
          cells come from.

          Method 3. Caustic alkali method
          Place the material in a test-tube containing about 5 ml of potassium hydroxide
          (~110 g/l) TS or sodium hydroxide (~80 g/l) TS, and heat on a water-bath for
          15–30 minutes until a portion breaks easily when pressure is applied with a glass
          rod. Decant the liquid and wash the softened material several times with fresh
          quantities of water. This method is particularly useful for the disintegration of
          bark, seeds, leaves and ﬂowers, facilitating the elimination of ﬁbres, scleroids,
          lactiferous tissues and epidermis. The disintegrated material gives a negative
          reaction for lignin.


Measurement of specimens

          Equipment
          Use a microscope with an ocular micrometer to measure the size of small objects.
          The scales should be calibrated using a stage micrometer, consisting of a glass slide
          of usual size, upon which a scale is engraved or photographed, usually 1 or 2 mm
          long, in 0.1 and 0.01 mm divisions. The ocular micrometer consists of a small disc
          of glass, across the diameter of which a 100-line scale is engraved or photographed.
          The disc is placed into the eyepiece.

          Calibration of the ocular micrometer
          Place the ocular micrometer scale in the eyepiece of the microscope. Put the
          stage micrometer on the microscope stage and focus on the scale divisions. Both
          scales should be sharply deﬁned in the ﬁeld of view. Turn the eyepiece to place
          the scales in a parallel position and, if necessary, move the stage micrometer
          until the starting lines of both scales coincide (Figure 1). Now ﬁnd another point,
          as far along the scale as possible, where two other division lines are exactly
          superimposed. Count the number of divisions on the ocular micrometer and
          the corresponding length on the stage micrometer scale, in order to determine
          the length that is equivalent to one division on the ocular micrometer scale. For
          example, if 100 divisions on the ocular micrometer scale are equal to 30 divisions
          on the stage micrometer scale, since the divisions on the stage micrometer scale
          are 0.01 mm apart, 100 ocular micrometer divisions are equivalent to 0.30 mm
          and therefore each division on the ocular micrometer scale represents 3.0 μm.
          Since the calibrations apply only for a particular lens combination, it is advisable
          to determine and record the ocular micrometer values for the most frequently
          used combinations.


18
                                                        Macroscopic and microscopic examination



Figure 1. Alignment of the stage micrometer and the ocular micrometer




Method
        Place the specimen on the microscope stage and focus on the object to be measured.
        Superimpose the ocular micrometer scale and read off the dimensions of the
        object. Multiply the number of scale divisions by the micrometer value to give the
        actual dimension in micrometres. By this method, using a 40× objective and a 6×
        eyepiece, measurements are correct to the nearest 2 μm, i.e. a dimension of 20 μm
        is liable to an error of 2 μm, or 10%, or ±5%; a dimension of 100 μm is liable to an
        error of 2% or ±1%.

        For curved and elongated objects, the measurement of lengths may be made
        using a microscope equipped with a drawing apparatus or a camera lucida. The
        instrument should be set up so that the image of the object, the drawing paper
        and the pencil are in focus simultaneously. With the stage micrometer in place,
        trace the lines of the stage micrometer scale upon the paper fastened on a drawing
        board. Tilt the drawing board, if necessary, until the divisions drawn upon the
        paper are equally spaced. The magniﬁcation is determined by measuring the
        distance between selected lines on the drawing paper and dividing by the distance
        between the corresponding lines on the stage micrometer. Place the specimen on
        the microscope stage and trace the image of the object on the paper. Superimpose
        a coloured thread along the length of the object drawn on the paper and, after
        straightening it, measure the length of the thread by means of a ruler graduated
        in millimetres; divide the measured length by the magniﬁcation to give the actual
        length of the object.




                                                                                            19
Quality control methods for herbal materials



Leaf stomata
          Types of stoma
          In the mature leaf, four signiﬁcantly different types of stoma are distinguished by
          their form and the arrangement of the surrounding cells, especially the subsidiary
          cells, as follows (Figure 2):

          O   The anomocytic or ranunculaceous (irregular-celled) type: the stoma is surrounded
               by a varying number of cells, generally not different from those of the epidermis.

          O   The anisocytic or cruciferous (unequal-celled) type: the stoma is usually surrounded
               by three or four subsidiary cells, one of which is markedly smaller than the others.

          O   The diacytic or caryophyllaceous (cross-celled) type: the stoma is accompanied by
               two subsidiary cells, the common wall of which is at right angles to the stoma.

          O   The paracytic or rubiaceous (parallel-celled) type: the stoma has two subsidiary
               cells, of which the long axes are parallel to the axis of the stoma.

          In describing an epidermis where certain stomata differ from the predominant
          type, the term applying to the majority of stomata is used.

Figure 2. Types of leaf stoma




20
                                                       Macroscopic and microscopic examination



      Determination of the stomatal index

      Place fragments of leaves, about 5×5 mm in size, in a test-tube containing about 5 ml
      of chloral hydrate TS and heat on a water-bath for about 15 minutes or until the
      fragments are transparent. Transfer a fragment to a slide and prepare it as described
      earlier, the lower epidermis uppermost, in chloral hydrate TS; place a small drop of
      glycerol/ethanol TS at one side of the cover-glass to prevent the material from drying.
      Examine under a microscope with a 40× objective and a 6× eyepiece, equipped with
      a drawing apparatus. Mark on the drawing paper a cross (x) for each epidermal cell
      and a circle (o) for each stoma. Calculate the stomatal index as follows:

                                                       S x 100
                                   stomatal index =
                                                        E+S

      where S = the number of stomata in a given area of leaf;
            E = the number of epidermal cells (including trichomes) in the same area
                of leaf.

      For each leaf sample, no fewer than 10 determinations should be carried out and
      the average index calculated.


Microsublimation
      Mount a small, square metal plate, about 4×4 cm in size, on a square of a suitable
      board from which a central hole, about 1 cm in diameter, has been cut. Place a metal
      ring, about 1 cm in diameter and 8 mm in height, at the centre of the metal plate
      aligned with the hole of the asbestos board. Place about 0.1–0.2 g of powdered
      material inside the ring to form an even layer, about 2 mm thick. Cover the ring
      with a clean slide. Heat gently and gradually over a small ﬂame of a microburner.
      Change the slide if a large amount of moisture or sublimate is observed. Remove
      the slide from the ring, set it aside until the sublimate has dried and then examine
      under a microscope without adding any ﬂuid and without a cover-glass. Prepare
      4–5 slides in this manner.

      A heating stage allows the temperature of sublimation to be recorded.




                                                                                           21
22
                                                                     Thin-layer chromatography




                              6. Thin-layer chromatography

      Thin-layer chromatography is particularly valuable for the qualitative determination
      of small amounts of impurities. The principles of thin-layer chromatography
      and application of the technique in pharmaceutical analysis are described in
      The international pharmacopoeia (5). As it is effective and easy to perform, and the
      equipment required is inexpensive, the technique is frequently used for evaluating
      herbal materials and their preparations.

      The following parameters should be determined on the basis of published
      pharmacopoeial monographs or established experimentally for the analysis of
      each individual herbal material:

      — type of adsorbent and method of activation (if no information on the latter can
        be obtained, heat at 110 °C for 30 minutes);
      — method of preparation and concentration of the test and reference solutions;
      — volume of the solutions to be applied on the plate;
      — mobile phase and the distance of migration;
      — drying conditions (including temperature) and method of detection;
      — for the spots obtained: number and approximate position (or the Rf values if
        necessary), and ﬂuorescence and colour.

      Two thin-layer chromatography methods are described below: the classical method
      and also the micromethod which uses different sizes of plates and hence different
      quantities of solvents.

Classical method
      Recommended procedure
      The method outlined below assumes that chromatographic plates prepared in the
      laboratory are used; however, precoated plates, activated if necessary, may be used
      provided that they have proved suitable for the application concerned.

      A powdered specimen of pharmacopoeial quality may be used as the reference
      material. If a test for the presence of a known active principle of a herbal material is
      to be carried out, a chemical reference substance identical to that principle should be
      used. The test and reference solutions should be prepared simultaneously in exactly
      the same way. The reference solutions should be of known concentration. If the relative
      concentrations of the chemical substances in the reference solution are selected in
      accordance with the composition of a typical material, comparison of the spot size
      offers valuable additional information. The solvent system should be speciﬁed in the
      test procedure for the individual material being examined. A three-colour mixture (e.g.
      0.01% solutions in toluene of indophenol blue, sudan red G and dimethyl yellow), run
      together, permits a rapid check on the prevailing chromatographic conditions.

      If it is suspected that the materials being examined are unstable, the chamber
      in which chromatography takes place should be protected from light. In


                                                                                           23
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          any case, the chromatographic chamber should always be kept out of direct
          sunlight. Otherwise, the rays of the sun may be refracted to different degrees
          owing to imperfections in the glass walls of the chamber, giving rise to areas
          of elevated temperature on the chromatographic plate and erratic flow of the
          mobile phase.

          Preparation of samples
          Prior to testing, prepare an extract of the herbal material to be examined, using a
          rapid extraction process, as follows. To 0.1–1.0 g of the powdered herbal material
          add 1–10 ml of solvent and extract either by stirring, shaking the mixture for
          3–30 minutes, or heating to boiling and allowing to cool. Remove the insoluble
          matter by centrifugation, or ﬁlter through a small funnel with ﬁlter-paper or a
          cotton plug. If necessary, evaporate the ﬁltrate on a water-bath for just as long as
          is required to remove the solvent, then re-dissolve the residue in a small volume
          of solvent (e.g. 0.1–0.2 ml). If necessary, purify the test solution by repeating the
          extraction with solvent at a different pH, or by sublimation, distillation, or other
          appropriate method.

          Equipment
          The equipment consists of:

          — glass plates of uniform thickness throughout their entire area, 15–20 cm long,
            and wide enough to accommodate the required number of test and reference
            solutions;
          — a device for spreading a uniform layer of coating material of desired thickness
            onto the glass plates;
          — a rack to hold the prepared plates (normally 10 plates with set spacings) during
            the drying period or for transportation and storage; the rack should be small
            enough to ﬁt in a drying oven and desiccator;
          — a chromatographic chamber of transparent material, usually glass, with a tightly
            ﬁtting lid, of suitable size to accommodate the test plates;
          — a suitable spraying implement with a ﬁne spray nozzle, made of a material
            resistant to the reagents to be used;
          — an ultraviolet light source emitting short (254 nm) and long (365 nm) wavelengths.

          Before use, clean the plates scrupulously by immersing in a suitable cleaning
          liquid and rinsing thoroughly until the water runs off the plates without leaving
          any visible water marks or oily spots, and then dry. The plates must be completely
          free of lint or dust when the coating material is applied.

          Method
          Preparation of the adsorbent
          Unless otherwise speciﬁed in the test procedure for the herbal material concerned,
          prepare a slurry of the coating material and water or an aqueous solution (see
          chapter 22, “Speciﬁcations for adsorbents”) and, using the spreading device,
          coat the cleaned plates with a layer about 0.25 mm thick. Dry the coated plates
          in air, heat to activate at 110 °C for 30 minutes, and then allow to cool. Inspect the
          uniformity of the coating in transmitted light and the texture in reﬂected light. If
          the plates are not to be used immediately, store them in a desiccator containing
          silica gel, desiccant, R. To form an edge, remove a narrow strip (2-5 mm wide) of
          the coating material from the sides of the plate.


24
                                                              Thin-layer chromatography



If acid, alkaline or buffered layers are required, use diluted acid, base or salt
mixtures instead of water for the preparation of the slurry, as speciﬁed in the test
procedure. An aqueous solution of 5–7 g of sodium carboxymethylcellulose R
could replace the water if the adsorbent does not already contain a binder.

Saturation of the chromatographic chamber
Unless otherwise speciﬁed in the test procedure, the chromatography is carried out
in a saturated chamber. To achieve saturation, line at least half of the total area of
the inside walls of the chamber with ﬁlter-paper, pour into the chamber a sufﬁcient
quantity of the mobile phase to saturate the ﬁlter-paper and form a layer about 5 mm
deep. Close the chamber and allow to stand for at least 1 hour at room temperature.

All operations during which the plate is exposed to the air should preferably be
carried out at a relative humidity of 50–60%, and the plates should be handled
with care.

Application of the test and reference solutions
Using a micropipette or a syringe graduated in μl, place spots of the test and
reference solutions onto the starting line, which should be parallel to and about
15 mm above the lower edge. The spots should be at least 15 mm from the sides of
the plate, and at least 15 mm apart. They should be as small as possible, preferably
not more than 4 mm in diameter; if necessary, apply the solution in portions, drying
between applications. Mark the distance the mobile phase is intended to ascend as
speciﬁed in the test procedure, usually 10–15 cm from the starting line.

The results of separation can often be improved by applying the solutions to form
a horizontal band 10-15 mm long and not more than 5 mm wide.

Development of chromatograms
Allow the spots to dry, place the plate — as nearly vertical as possible — into
the chamber, ensuring that the points of application are above the surface of the
mobile phase. Close the chamber. Develop the chromatogram at room temperature,
unless otherwise speciﬁed in the test procedure, allowing the solvent to ascend the
speciﬁed distance. Remove the plate, mark the position of the solvent front and
allow the solvent to evaporate at room temperature or as speciﬁed.

Observation and interpretation of the chromatograms
Observe the spots produced in daylight, then under short-wave and long-wave
ultraviolet light. Mark the centre of each spot with a needle. Measure and record
the distance from the centre of each spot to the point of application, and indicate
for each spot the wavelength under which it was observed. If indicated in the test
procedure, spray the spots with the speciﬁed reagent, and observe and compare
the spots with those of a reference material.

If required, calculate the ratio of the distance travelled on the adsorbent by a given
compound to that travelled by the leading edge of the solvent (the Rf value) or the
ratio of the distances moved by a compound and a stated reference substance (the
Rr value) as follows:

                          a                              a
                   Rf =                           Rr =
                          b                              c


                                                                                    25
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          where a = the distance between the point of application and the centre of the spot
                    of the material being examined;
                b = the distance between the point of application and the solvent front;
                c = the distance between the point of application and the centre of the spot
                    of reference material.

          Rf values may vary with each experiment depending on the saturation conditions
          in the chromatographic chamber, the activity of the adsorbent layer, and the
          composition of the mobile phase.


Micromethod
          The chromatograms can be developed either vertically or horizontally. Unless
          otherwise speciﬁed in the test procedure for the herbal material concerned, thin-
          layer chromatography is performed on small plates using the ascending technique.


          Ascending technique
          Equipment
          The equipment consists of:

          — precoated or specially prepared plates, not more than 100 mm long, and 100 mm
            wide, that permit development over at least 60 mm;
          — 1-μl or 2-μl micropipettes accurate to ±10% of the stated volume;
          — a chromatographic chamber with a tightly ﬁtting lid and a ﬂat base; the chamber
            must be of such a size to accommodate the plates and the appropriate volume
            of the mobile phase.

          Method
          Place a sufﬁcient quantity of a previously mixed and homogeneous mobile phase
          into the chromatographic chamber to form a layer 5 mm deep (Mobile phase
          mixtures should be discarded after the development of a plate). Close the chamber
          and allow to stand at constant room temperature, protected from draughts and
          direct sunlight, for 15 minutes.

          Using a micropipette, apply spots of the solutions being examined onto the
          starting line, which should be parallel to and about 10 mm above the lower edge
          of the plate. The spots should be at least 10 mm from the sides of the plate, and
          5–10 mm apart. They should be as small as possible, preferably no more than 2 mm
          in diameter. Mark the distance the mobile phase is intended to ascend as speciﬁed
          in the test procedure for the herbal material concerned, usually 60 mm from the
          starting line.

          Allow the spots to dry, then place the plate — as nearly vertical as possible —
          into the chamber, ensuring that the points of application are above the surface
          of the mobile phase. The sides of the plate must not come into contact with the
          wall of the chamber. Close the chamber. Develop the chromatogram at room
          temperature, unless otherwise speciﬁed in the test procedure, allowing the
          solvent to ascend the speciﬁed distance. Remove the plate, mark the position of
          the solvent front and allow the solvent to evaporate at room temperature or as
          speciﬁed.


26
                                                                     Thin-layer chromatography



       Horizontal technique
       Equipment
       The equipment consists of:

       — specially made plates 50 mm long, 50 mm wide;
       — 0.5-μl or 1-μl micropipettes, accurate to ±10% of the stated volume;
       — a chromatographic chamber for horizontal development (Figure 3); commercially
         available chambers consist of a solvent-proof body with a trough for the mobile
         phase and a tightly ﬁtting glass lid; the mobile phase is transferred from the
         trough to the adsorbent layer via an exchangeable sintered-glass plate.


Figure 3. Chromatographic chamber for horizontal development
(horizontal cross-section)




       Method
       Protect the chromatographic chamber from draughts and direct sunlight, and keep
       it at constant room temperature. Place a clean, dry sintered-glass plate into the
       chamber (After each use, the sintered-glass plate should be cleaned with acetone
       R and dried).

       If saturation is required, line the ﬂoor of the chamber with ﬁlter paper and pour the
       required quantity of saturation liquid onto it. Should more intensive saturation of
       the chamber be required, use, in addition, a ready-made silica gel plate, cut to size,
       and saturated with the liquid. As an alternative a sandwich-type plate can be used
       with a dry silica gel plate.

       Using a micropipette, apply the volumes of the solutions to be examined onto the
       starting line of the chromatographic plate, which should be parallel to the lower
       edge of the plate. The spots produced should be at least 7 mm from the sides of


                                                                                           27
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          the plate and not less than 5 mm apart. The spots should be as small as possible,
          preferably no more than 1 mm in diameter. Mark the distance the mobile phase
          is intended to travel as speciﬁed in the test procedure, for the herbal material
          concerned, usually 40 mm from the starting line.

          Allow the spots to dry, place the plate into the chamber with the coating downwards
          so as to be in contact with the sintered-glass plate across the whole width. The
          points of application should be about 3 mm from the edge of the sintered-glass
          plate. Close the chamber with the lid, leaving the trough for the mobile phase open.
          Using a pipette, place the required volume of previously mixed homogeneous
          mobile phase, usually 1–2 ml, into the trough and immediately close the chamber.
          Develop the chromatogram at room temperature, unless otherwise indicated in
          the test procedure, allowing the solvent to travel the speciﬁed distance. Remove
          the plate, mark the position of the solvent front and allow the solvent to evaporate
          at room temperature or as speciﬁed.




28
                                                                        Determination of ash




                                         7. Determination of ash

     The ash remaining following ignition of herbal materials is determined by three
     different methods which measure total ash, acid-insoluble ash and water-soluble ash.

     The total ash method is designed to measure the total amount of material remaining
     after ignition. This includes both “physiological ash”, which is derived from
     the plant tissue itself, and “non-physiological” ash, which is the residue of the
     extraneous matter (e.g. sand and soil) adhering to the plant surface.

     Acid-insoluble ash is the residue obtained after boiling the total ash with dilute
     hydrochloric acid, and igniting the remaining insoluble matter. This measures the
     amount of silica present, especially as sand and siliceous earth.

     Water-soluble ash is the difference in weight between the total ash and the residue
     after treatment of the total ash with water.


Recommended procedure
     Total ash
     Place about 2–4 g of the ground air-dried material, accurately weighed, in a
     previously ignited and tared crucible (usually of platinum or silica). Spread the
     material in an even layer and ignite it by gradually increasing the heat to 500–600 °C
     until it is white, indicating the absence of carbon. Cool in a desiccator and weigh.
     If carbon-free ash cannot be obtained in this manner, cool the crucible and moisten
     the residue with about 2 ml of water or a saturated solution of ammonium nitrate
     R. Dry on a water-bath, then on a hot-plate and ignite to constant weight. Allow
     the residue to cool in a suitable desiccator for 30 minutes, then weigh without
     delay. Calculate the content of total ash in mg per g of air-dried material.

     Acid-insoluble ash
     To the crucible containing the total ash, add 25 ml of hydrochloric acid (~70 g/l) TS,
     cover with a watch-glass and boil gently for 5 minutes. Rinse the watch-glass with
     5 ml of hot water and add this liquid to the crucible. Collect the insoluble matter
     on an ashless ﬁlter-paper and wash with hot water until the ﬁltrate is neutral.
     Transfer the ﬁlter-paper containing the insoluble matter to the original crucible,
     dry on a hotplate and ignite to constant weight. Allow the residue to cool in a
     suitable desiccator for 30 minutes, then weigh without delay. Calculate the content
     of acid-insoluble ash in mg per g of air-dried material.

     Water-soluble ash
     To the crucible containing the total ash, add 25 ml of water and boil for 5 minutes.
     Collect the insoluble matter in a sintered-glass crucible or on an ashless ﬁlter-
     paper. Wash with hot water and ignite in a crucible for 15 minutes at a temperature
     not exceeding 450 °C. Subtract the weight of this residue in mg from the weight
     of total ash. Calculate the content of water-soluble ash in mg per g of air-dried
     material.


                                                                                         29
30
                                                             Determination of extractable matter




         8. Determination of extractable matter

     This method determines the amount of active constituents extracted with solvents
     from a given amount of herbal material. It is employed for materials for which as
     yet no suitable chemical or biological assay exists.


Recommended procedure
     Method 1. Hot extraction
     Place about 4.0 g of coarsely powdered air-dried material, accurately weighed,
     in a glass-stoppered conical ﬂask. Add 100 ml of water and weigh to obtain the
     total weight including the ﬂask. Shake well and allow to stand for 1 hour. Attach a
     reﬂux condenser to the ﬂask and boil gently for 1 hour; cool and weigh. Readjust
     to the original total weight with the solvent speciﬁed in the test procedure for
     the plant material concerned. Shake well and ﬁlter rapidly through a dry ﬁlter.
     Transfer 25 ml of the ﬁltrate to a tared ﬂat-bottomed dish and evaporate to dryness
     on a water-bath. Dry at 105 °C for 6 hours, cool in a desiccator for 30 minutes, then
     weigh without delay. Calculate the content of extractable matter in mg per g of
     air-dried material.

     Method 2. Cold maceration
     Place about 4.0 g of coarsely powdered air-dried material, accurately weighed, in
     a glass-stoppered conical ﬂask. Macerate with 100 ml of the solvent speciﬁed for
     the plant material concerned for 6 hours, shaking frequently, then allow to stand
     for 18 hours. Filter rapidly, taking care not to lose any solvent, transfer 25 ml of the
     ﬁltrate to a tared ﬂat-bottomed dish and evaporate to dryness on a water-bath. Dry
     at 105 °C for 6 hours, cool in a desiccator for 30 minutes and weigh without delay.
     Calculate the content of extractable matter in mg per g of air-dried material.

     For ethanol-soluble extractable matter, use the concentration of solvent speciﬁed in
     the test procedure for the herbal material concerned; for water-soluble extractable
     matter, use water as the solvent. Use other solvents as speciﬁed in the test procedure.




                                                                                             31
32
                                                     Determination of water and volatile matter




                                    9. Determination of water
                                           and volatile matter

     An excess of water in herbal materials will encourage microbial growth, the presence
     of fungi or insects, and deterioration following hydrolysis. Limits for water content
     should therefore be set for every given herbal material. This is especially important
     for materials that absorb moisture easily or deteriorate quickly in the presence of
     water.

     The azeotropic method gives a direct measurement of the water present in the material
     being examined. When the sample is distilled together with an immiscible solvent,
     such as toluene R or xylene R, the water present in the sample is absorbed by
     the solvent. The water and the solvent are distilled together and separated in the
     receiving tube on cooling. If the solvent is anhydrous, water may remain absorbed
     in it leading to false results. It is therefore advisable to saturate the solvent with
     water before use.

     The test for loss on drying determines both water and volatile matter. Drying can
     be carried out either by heating to 100–105 °C or in a desiccator over phosphorus
     pentoxide R under atmospheric or reduced pressure at room temperature for a
     speciﬁed period of time. The desiccation method is especially useful for materials
     that melt to a sticky mass at elevated temperatures.


Recommended procedure

     Preparation of material
     Prepare a suitable quantity of the sample by cutting, granulating or shredding
     the unground or unpowdered material, so that the thickness of the parts does not
     exceed 3 mm. Seeds or fruits smaller than 3 mm should be cracked. Avoid the use
     of high-speed mills in preparing the sample, and take care that no appreciable
     amount of moisture is lost during preparation. It is important that the portion is
     large enough to be a representative sample.

     Azeotropic method (toluene distillation)
     The apparatus (Figure 4) consists of a glass ﬂask (A) connected by a tube (D)
     to a cylindrical tube (B) ﬁtted with a graduated receiving tube (E) and a reﬂux
     condenser (C). The receiving tube (E) is graduated in 0.1-ml divisions so that the
     error of readings does not exceed 0.05 ml. The preferred source of heat is an electric
     heater with a rheostat control, or an oil-bath. The upper portion of the ﬂask and the
     connecting tube may be insulated.

     Thoroughly clean the receiving tube and the condenser of the apparatus, rinse
     with water and dry. Introduce 200 ml of toluene R and about 2 ml of water into a
     dry ﬂask. Heat the ﬂask to distil the liquid over a period of 2 hours, allow to cool
     for about 30 minutes and read off the volume of water to an accuracy of 0.05 ml
     (ﬁrst distillation).


                                                                                            33
Quality control methods for herbal materials



Figure 4. Apparatus used to determine water content by the azeotropic method
(dimensions in mm)




34
                                                Determination of water and volatile matter



Weigh accurately a quantity of the material expected to give about 2–3 ml of water
and transfer to the ﬂask (For weighing material with a paste-like character, use a
boat of metal foil). Add a few pieces of porous porcelain and heat the ﬂask gently
for 15 minutes. When boiling begins, distil at a rate of 2 drops per second until
most of the water has distilled over, then increase the rate of distillation to about
4 drops per second. As soon as the water has been completely distilled, rinse the
inside of the condenser tube with toluene R. Continue the distillation for 5 more
minutes, remove the heat, allow the receiving tube to cool to room temperature
and dislodge any droplets of water adhering to the walls of the receiving tube
by tapping the tube. Allow the water and toluene layers to separate and read
off the volume of water (second distillation). Calculate the content of water as a
percentage using the formula:

                               100 (n1 — n)
                                    w
where w = the weight in g of the material being examined;
      n = the number of ml of water obtained in the ﬁrst distillation;
      n1 = the total number of ml of water obtained in both distillations.

Loss on drying (gravimetric determination)
Place about 2–5 g of the prepared air-dried material, or the quantity speciﬁed
in the test procedure for the herbal material concerned, accurately weighed, in
a previously dried and tared ﬂat weighing bottle. Dry the sample by one of the
following techniques:

— in an oven at 100-105 °C;
— in a desiccator over phosphorus pentoxide R under atmospheric pressure or
  reduced pressure and at room temperature.

Dry until two consecutive weighings do not differ by more than 5 mg, unless
otherwise speciﬁed in the test procedure. Calculate the loss of weight in mg per g
of air-dried material.




                                                                                       35
36
                                                                 Determination of volatile oils




                     10. Determination of volatile oils

     Volatile oils are characterized by their odour, oil-like appearance and ability to
     volatilize at room temperature. Chemically, they are usually composed of mixtures
     of, for example, monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes and their oxygenated derivatives.
     Aromatic compounds predominate in certain volatile oils.

     Because they are considered to be the “essence” of the herbal material, and are
     often biologically active, they are also known as “essential oils”. The term “volatile
     oil” is preferred because it is more speciﬁc and describes the physical properties.

     In order to determine the volume of oil, the plant material is distilled with water
     and the distillate is collected in a graduated tube. The aqueous portion separates
     automatically and is returned to the distillation ﬂask. If the volatile oils possess a
     mass density higher than or near to that of water, or are difﬁcult to separate from
     the aqueous phase owing to the formation of emulsions, a solvent with a low mass
     density and a suitable boiling-point may be added to the measuring tube. The
     dissolved volatile oils will then ﬂoat on top of the aqueous phase.


Recommended procedure
     Carry out the determination by steam distillation. Collect the distillate in a
     graduated tube, using xylene R or the solvent speciﬁed for the herbal material
     concerned, and allow the aqueous phase to recirculate into the distillation ﬂask.
     For all determinations read the rate of distillation from the marks engraved on the
     apparatus.

     Equipment
     A suitable apparatus is made from resistant glass with a low expansion coefﬁcient,
     and has the following parts:

     — a round-bottomed, short-necked ﬂask, capacity 500 or 1000 ml, the internal
       diameter of the ground-glass neck being 29 mm at the widest end;
     — a burner allowing ﬁne control and ﬁtted with a ﬂue, or an electric heating device;
     — a vertical support with a horizontal ring covered with insulating material;
     — the following sections fused into one piece (Figure 5):
       O a vertical tube (AC), 210–260 mm long, with an external diameter of 13–15 mm;
       O a bent tube (CDE), CD and DE each being 145–155 mm long, and having an
          external diameter of 10 mm;
       O a bulb-condenser (FG), 145–155 mm long;
       O a tube (GH) 30–40 mm long, with a side-arm tube (HK), at an angle of 30–40°;
       O a vented ground-glass stopper (K’) and a tube (K) with an internal diameter
          of 10 mm, the wide end being of ground glass;
       O a pear-shaped bulb (J) with a volume of 3 ml;
       O a tube with a volume of 1 ml (JL), graduated over 100–110 mm in divisions
          of 0.01 ml;
       O a bulb-like swelling (L), with a volume of about 2 ml;


                                                                                            37
Quality control methods for herbal materials



               O   a three-way tap (M);
               O   a connecting tube (BM), with an external diameter of 7–8 mm, which is ﬁtted
                    in the middle with a security tube (N); the junction (B) should be 20–25 mm
                    higher than the uppermost graduation.

          Before use, clean the apparatus thoroughly by successive washings, for example
          with acetone R or a suitable detergent, then rinse with water, drain and assemble
          in a suitable place.

Figure 5. Apparatus used to determine volatile oils (dimensions in mm)1




          1
              For reasons of clarity, the 0.01-ml graduations are not shown on the tube JL.



38
                                                                    Determination of volatile oils



        Preparation of the sample
        The preparation of the sample depends on the texture of the material and the
        location of the volatile oils. Hard and compact herbal material (e.g. bark, roots
        or rhizomes), or material containing volatile oils in the cells or small cavities
        of the tissue, should be coarsely powdered; thick leaves should be finely cut
        or lightly bruised; materials such as citrus peel are preferably crushed under
        water, as the volatile oils in large schizolysigenous cavities are easily lost
        during the process of comminution. Material consisting of thin floral parts
        or thin laminae or containing volatile oils in the epidermal glands should be
        distilled whole.

        Method
        Place the volume of distillation liquid speciﬁed in the test procedure for the herbal
        material concerned in the ﬂask, add a few pieces of porous porcelain and join the
        condenser to the apparatus. Introduce water by tube N until it reaches level B.
        Remove stopper (K’) and introduce the appropriate volume of xylene R or the
        solvent speciﬁed for the given herbal material, using a graduated pipette and
        placing its tip at the bottom of tube K. Replace stopper, heat the liquid in the ﬂask
        until it begins to boil and adjust the distillation rate to 2–3 ml per minute, unless
        otherwise speciﬁed in the test procedure.

        To determine the distillation rate, lower the level of water while distilling by
        means of the three-way tap until the meniscus is at the level of the lower mark (see
        Figure 6). Close the tap and simultaneously start a stopwatch. As soon as the level
        in the bulb reaches the upper mark, stop the watch and note the time taken. Open
        the tap and continue the distillation. Stop the heating after 30 minutes, turn off
        the heater, wait at least 10 minutes and then record the volume of solvent (xylene)
        collected in the graduated tube.




Figure 6. Determination of distillation rate




                                                                                               39
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Introduce the speciﬁed quantity of the herbal material being examined into the ﬂask
          and continue the distillation as described above for the time and at the rate given
          in the test procedure. After a further 10 minutes record the volume of oil collected
          in the graduated tube and subtract the volume of solvent (xylene) previously
          noted. The difference represents the volume of volatile oils in the sample of herbal
          material taken. Calculate the oil content in ml per 100 g of herbal material.




40
                                                              Determination of bitterness value




             11. Determination of bitterness value

     Herbal materials that have a strong bitter taste (“bitters”) are employed
     therapeutically, mostly as appetizing agents. Their bitterness stimulates secretions
     in the gastrointestinal tract, especially of gastric juice.

     Bitter substances can be determined chemically. However, since they are mostly
     composed of two or more constituents with various degrees of bitterness, it is ﬁrst
     necessary to measure total bitterness by taste.

     The bitter properties of herbal material are determined by comparing the threshold
     bitter concentration of an extract of the materials with that of a dilute solution of
     quinine hydrochloride R. The bitterness value is expressed in units equivalent to
     the bitterness of a solution containing 1 g of quinine hydrochloride R in 2000 ml.

     Safe drinking-water should be used as a vehicle for the extraction of herbal materials
     and for the mouthwash after each tasting. Taste buds dull quickly if distilled water
     is used. The hardness of water rarely has any signiﬁcant inﬂuence on bitterness.

     Sensitivity to bitterness varies from person to person, and even for the same person
     it may be different at different times (because of fatigue, smoking, or after eating
     strongly ﬂavoured food). Therefore, the same person should taste both the material
     to be tested and the quinine hydrochloride solution within a short space of time.
     The bitter sensation is not felt by the whole surface of the tongue, but is limited to
     the middle section of the upper surface of the tongue. A certain amount of training
     is required to perform this test. A person who does not appreciate a bitter sensation
     when tasting a solution of 0.058 mg of quinine hydrochloride R in 10 ml of water
     is not suitable to undertake this determination.

     The preparation of the stock solution of each individual herbal material (ST) should
     be speciﬁed in the test procedure. In each test series, unless otherwise indicated,
     the determination should start with the lowest concentration in order to retain
     sufﬁcient sensitivity of the taste buds.


Recommended procedure

     Caution: This test should not be carried out until the identity of the herbal
     material has been conﬁrmed.

     Preparation of solutions

     Stock and diluted quinine hydrochloride solutions
     Dissolve 0.100 g of quinine hydrochloride R in sufﬁcient safe drinking-water to
     produce 100 ml. Further dilute 5 ml of this solution to 500 ml with safe drinking-
     water. This stock solution of quinine hydrochloride (Sq) contains 0.01 mg/ml.
     Use nine test-tubes for the serial dilution for the initial test as indicated in
     Table 3.


                                                                                            41
Quality control methods for herbal materials



Table 3. Determination of bitterness value: serial dilution for the initial test
                                          Tube no.
                                             1       2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9
Sq (ml)                                      4.2     4.4     4.6     4.8     5.0     5.2     5.4     5.6     5.8
Safe drinking-water (ml)                     5.8     5.6     5.4     5.2     5.0     4.8     4.6     4.4     4.2
Quinine hydrochloride                        0.042   0.044   0.046   0.048   0.050   0.052   0.054   0.056   0.058
in 10 ml of solution (= c) (mg)
Sq = stock solution of quinine hydrochloride.


           Stock and diluted solutions of the plant material
           Prepare the solution as speciﬁed in the test procedure for the given plant material
           (ST). Use 10 test-tubes for the serial dilution for the test as indicated in Table 4.

Table 4. Determination of bitterness value: serial dilution for the second test
                                  Tube no.
                                   1         2       3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10
ST (ml)                            1.00      2.00    3.00    4.00    5.00    6.00    7.00    8.00    9.00    10.0
Safe drinking-water (ml)           9.00      8.00    7.00    6.00    5.00    4.00    3.00    2.00    1.00    —

ST = stock solution of the herbal material being examined.


           Method
           After rinsing the mouth with safe drinking-water, taste 10 ml of the most dilute
           solution swirling it in the mouth mainly near the base of the tongue for 30 seconds.
           If the bitter sensation is no longer felt in the mouth after 30 seconds, spit out
           the solution and wait for 1 minute to ascertain whether this is due to delayed
           sensitivity. Then rinse with safe drinking-water. The next highest concentration
           should not be tasted until at least 10 minutes have passed. The threshold bitter
           concentration is the lowest concentration at which a material continues to provoke
           a bitter sensation after 30 seconds. After the ﬁrst series of tests, rinse the mouth
           thoroughly with safe drinking-water until no bitter sensation remains. Wait for at
           least 10 minutes before carrying out the second test.

           In order to save time in the second test, it is advisable to ascertain ﬁrst whether
           the solution in tube no. 5 (containing 5 ml of ST in 10 ml) gives a bitter sensation. If
           so, ﬁnd the threshold bitter concentration of the material by tasting the dilutions
           in tubes 1−4. If the solution in tube no. 5 does not give a bitter sensation, ﬁnd the
           threshold bitter concentration by tasting the dilutions in tubes 6−10.

           All solutions and the safe drinking-water for mouthwashing should be at 20−25 °C.

           Calculate the bitterness value in units per g using the following formula:

                                                     2000 × c
                                                      a×b

           where a = the concentration of the stock solution (ST) (mg/ml);
                 b = the volume of ST (in ml) in the tube with the threshold bitter concentration;
                c = the quantity of quinine hydrochloride R (in mg) in the tube with the
                     threshold bitter concentration.




42
                                                         Determination of haemolytic activity




      12. Determination of haemolytic activity

     Many herbal materials, especially those derived from the families Caryophyllaceae,
     Araliaceae, Sapindaceae, Primulaceae, and Dioscoreaceae contain saponins. The
     most characteristic property of saponins is their ability to cause haemolysis:
     when added to a suspension of blood, saponins produce changes in erythrocyte
     membranes, causing haemoglobin to diffuse into the surrounding medium.

     The haemolytic activity of herbal materials, or a preparation containing saponins,
     is determined by comparison with that of a reference material, saponin R, which
     has a haemolytic activity of 1000 units per g. A suspension of erythrocytes is
     mixed with equal volumes of a serial dilution of the herbal material extract. The
     lowest concentration to effect complete haemolysis is determined after allowing
     the mixtures to stand for a given period of time. A similar test is carried out
     simultaneously with saponin R.

     Procedures proposed for the determination of the haemolytic activity of
     saponaceous herbal material are all based on the same principle although the
     details may vary (e.g. the source of erythrocytes, methods for the preparation of
     the erythrocyte suspension and the herbal material extract, the deﬁned haemolytic
     activity of the reference material of saponin, and the experimental method). In
     order to obtain reliable results, it is essential to standardize the experimental
     conditions, and especially to determine the haemolytic activity by comparison
     with that of saponin R.


Recommended procedure
     To prepare the erythrocyte suspension ﬁll a glass-stoppered ﬂask to one tenth of
     its volume with sodium citrate (36.5 g/l) TS, swirling to ensure that the inside of
     the ﬂask is thoroughly moistened. Introduce a sufﬁcient volume of blood freshly
     collected from a healthy ox and shake immediately. Citrated blood prepared in
     this way can be stored for about 8 days at 2−4 °C. Place 1 ml of citrated blood in
     a 50-ml volumetric ﬂask with phosphate buffer pH 7.4 TS and carefully dilute
     to volume. This diluted blood suspension (2% solution) can be used as long as
     the supernatant ﬂuid remains clear and colourless. It must be stored at a cool
     temperature.

     To prepare the reference solution, transfer about 10 mg of saponin R, accurately
     weighed, to a volumetric ﬂask and add sufﬁcient phosphate buffer pH 7.4 TS to
     make 100 ml. This solution should be freshly prepared.

     The extract of herbal material and dilutions should be prepared as speciﬁed in the
     test procedure for the herbal material concerned, using phosphate buffer pH 7.4 TS.

     Preliminary test
     Prepare a serial dilution of the herbal material extract with phosphate buffer
     pH 7.4 TS and blood suspension (2%) using four test-tubes as shown in Table 5.


                                                                                          43
Quality control methods for herbal materials



Table 5. Determination of haemolytic activity: serial dilution for the preliminary test
                                                   Tube no.
                                                          1               2                  3               4
Herbal material extract (ml)                              0.10            0.20               0.50            1.00
Phosphate buffer pH 7.4 TS (ml)                           0.90            0.80               0.50            —
Blood suspension (2%) (ml)                                1.00            1.00               1.00            1.00

           As soon as the tubes have been prepared, gently invert them to mix, avoiding
           the formation of foam. Shake again after a 30-minute interval and allow to stand
           for six hours at room temperature. Examine the tubes and record the dilution at
           which total haemolysis has occurred, indicated by a clear, red solution without any
           deposit of erythrocytes. Proceed as follows:
           O   If total haemolysis is observed only in tube no. 4, use the original herbal material
                extract directly for the main test.
           O   If total haemolysis is observed in tubes 3 and 4, prepare a two-fold dilution of
                the original herbal material extract with phosphate buffer pH 7.4 TS.
           O   If total haemolysis is observed in tubes 2, 3 and 4, prepare a ﬁve-fold dilution of
                the original herbal material extract with phosphate buffer pH 7.4 TS.
           O   If, after six hours, all four tubes contain a clear, red solution, prepare a ten-fold
                dilution of the original herbal material extract with phosphate buffer pH 7.4 TS
                and carry out the preliminary test again as described above.
           O   If total haemolysis is not observed in any of the tubes, repeat the preliminary
                test using a more concentrated herbal material extract.

           Main test
           Prepare a serial dilution of the herbal material extract, undiluted or diluted as
           determined by the preliminary test, with phosphate buffer pH 7.4 TS and blood
           suspension (2%) using 13 test-tubes as shown in Table 6.

           Carry out the dilutions and evaluations as in the preliminary test but observe
           the results after 24 hours. Calculate the amount of herbal material in g, or of the
           preparation in g or ml, that produces total haemolysis.

           To eliminate the effect of individual variations in resistance of the erythrocyte
           suspension to saponin solutions, prepare a series of dilutions of saponin R in
           the same manner as described above for the plant material extract. Calculate the
           quantity of saponin R in g that produces total haemolysis.

Table 6. Determination of haemolytic activity: serial dilution for the main test
                              Tube no.
                              1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9      10     11     12       13
Herbal material extract       0.40   0.45   0.50   0.55   0.60   0.65   0.70   0.75   0.80   0.85   0.90   0.95     1.00
(diluted if necessary) (ml)
Phosphate buffer              0.60   0.55   0.50   0.45   0.40   0.35   0.30   0.25   0.20   0.15   0.10   0.05      —
pH 7.4 TS (ml)
Blood suspension (2%) (ml)    1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00   1.00     1.00

           Calculate the haemolytic activity of the herbal material using the following formula:
                                                                 a
                                                   1000 ×
                                                                 b
           where 1000 = the deﬁned haemolytic activity of saponin R in relation to ox blood;
                    a = quantity of saponin R that produces total haemolysis (g);
                    b = quantity of herbal material that produces total haemolysis (g).



44
                                                                     Determination of tannins




                             13. Determination of tannins

     Tannins (or tanning substances) are substances capable of turning animal hides into
     leather by binding proteins to form water-insoluble substances that are resistant
     to proteolytic enzymes. This process, when applied to living tissue, is known as
     an “astringent” action and is the reason for the therapeutic application of tannins.

     Chemically, tannins are complex substances; they usually occur as mixtures of
     polyphenols that are difﬁcult to separate and crystallize. They are easily oxidized
     and polymerized in solution; if this happens they lose much of their astringent
     effect and are therefore of little therapeutic value.


Recommended procedure
     To prepare the herbal material extract, introduce the quantity speciﬁed in the test
     procedure for the herbal material concerned, previously powdered to a known
     ﬁneness and weighed accurately, into a conical ﬂask. Add 150 ml of water and
     heat over a boiling water-bath for 30 minutes. Cool, transfer the mixture to a 250-
     ml volumetric ﬂask and dilute to volume with water. Allow the solid material to
     settle and ﬁlter the liquid through a ﬁlter-paper, diameter 12 cm, discarding the
     ﬁrst 50 ml of the ﬁltrate.

     To determine the total amount of material that is extractable into water, evaporate
     50.0 ml of the plant material extract to dryness, dry the residue in an oven at 105 °C
     for 4 hours and weigh (T1).

     To determine the amount of herbal material not bound to hide powder that is
     extractable into water, take 80.0 ml of the herbal material extract, add 6.0 g of hide
     powder R and shake well for 60 minutes. Filter and evaporate 50.0 ml of the clear
     ﬁltrate to dryness. Dry the residue in an oven at 105 °C and weigh (T2).

     To determine the solubility of hide powder, take 6.0 g of hide powder R, add
     80.0 ml of water and shake well for 60 minutes. Filter and evaporate 50.0 ml of the
     clear ﬁltrate to dryness. Dry the residue in an oven at 105 °C and weigh (T0).

     Calculate the quantity of tannins as a percentage using the following formula:

                                [T1–(T2 – T0)] × 500
                                         w
     where w = the weight of the herbal material in grams.




                                                                                          45
46
                                                             Determination of swelling index




              14. Determination of swelling index

     Many herbal materials are of speciﬁc therapeutic or pharmaceutical utility because
     of their swelling properties − especially gums and those containing an appreciable
     amount of mucilage, pectin or hemicellulose.

     The swelling index is the volume in ml taken up by the swelling of 1 g of herbal
     material under speciﬁed conditions. Its determination is based on the addition
     of water or a swelling agent as speciﬁed in the test procedure for each individual
     herbal material (either whole, cut or pulverized). Using a glass-stoppered
     measuring cylinder, the material is shaken repeatedly for 1 hour and then allowed
     to stand for a required period of time. The volume of the mixture (in ml) is then
     read.

     The mixing of whole herbal material with the swelling agent is easy to achieve,
     but cut or pulverized material requires vigorous shaking at speciﬁed intervals to
     ensure even distribution of the material in the swelling agent.


Recommended procedure
     Carry out simultaneously no fewer than three determinations for any given
     material. Introduce the speciﬁed quantity of the herbal material concerned,
     previously reduced to the required ﬁneness and accurately weighed, into a 25-ml
     glass-stoppered measuring cylinder. The internal diameter of the cylinder should be
     about 16 mm, the length of the graduated portion about 125 mm, marked in 0.2- ml
     divisions from 0 to 25 ml in an upwards direction. Unless otherwise indicated in
     the test procedure, add 25 ml of water and shake the mixture thoroughly every
     10 minutes for 1 hour. Allow to stand for 3 hours at room temperature, or as
     speciﬁed. Measure the volume in ml occupied by the herbal material, including
     any sticky mucilage. Calculate the mean value of the individual determinations,
     related to 1 g of herbal material.




                                                                                         47
48
                                                                 Determination of foaming index




                 15. Determination of foaming index

     Many herbal materials contain saponins that can cause a persistent foam when
     an aqueous decoction is shaken. The foaming ability of an aqueous decoction of
     herbal materials and their extracts is measured in terms of a foaming index.


Recommended procedure
     Reduce about 1 g of the herbal material to a coarse powder (sieve size no. 1250),
     weigh accurately and transfer to a 500-ml conical ﬂask containing 100 ml of boiling
     water. Maintain at moderate boiling for 30 minutes. Cool and ﬁlter into a 100-ml
     volumetric ﬂask and add sufﬁcient water through the ﬁlter to dilute to volume.

     Pour the decoction into 10 stoppered test-tubes (height 16 cm, diameter 16 mm)
     in successive portions of 1 ml, 2 ml, 3 ml, etc. up to 10 ml, and adjust the volume
     of the liquid in each tube with water to 10 ml. Stopper the tubes and shake them
     in a lengthwise motion for 15 seconds, two shakes per second. Allow to stand for
     15 minutes and measure the height of the foam. The results are assessed as follows:

     O   If the height of the foam in every tube is less than 1 cm, the foaming index is
          less than 100.
     O   If a height of foam of 1 cm is measured in any tube, the volume of the herbal
          material decoction in this tube (a) is used to determine the index. If this tube is
          the ﬁrst or second tube in a series, prepare an intermediate dilution in a similar
          manner to obtain a more precise result.
     O   If the height of the foam is more than 1 cm in every tube, the foaming index is
          over 1000. In this case repeat the determination using a new series of dilutions
          of the decoction in order to obtain a result.

     Calculate the foaming index using the following formula:

                                          1000
                                            a
     where a = the volume in ml of the decoction used for preparing the dilution in the
               tube where foaming to a height of 1 cm is observed.




                                                                                            49
                                                             Determination of pesticide residues




          16. Determination of pesticide residues

General
      Methods for the determination of pesticide residues
      Chromatography (mostly column and gas) is recommended as the principal
      method for the determination of pesticide residues. These methods may be
      coupled with mass spectrometry (MS). Samples are extracted by a standard
      procedure, impurities are removed by partition and/or adsorption, and the
      presence of a moderately broad spectrum of pesticides is measured in a single
      determination. However, these techniques are not universally applicable.
      Some pesticides are satisfactorily carried through the extraction and clean-up
      procedures, others are recovered with a poor yield, and some are lost entirely.
      Following chromatography, the separations may not always be complete,
      pesticides may decompose or metabolize, and many of the metabolic products are
      still unknown. Consequently, as a result of limitations in the analytical technique
      and incomplete knowledge of pesticide interactions with the environment, it is
      not yet possible to apply an integrated set of methods that will be satisfactory
      in all situations.

      Generally, the methodology should be adapted to the type of herbal material being
      tested, and modiﬁcations may be necessary for different samples — including
      seeds, leaves, oils, extracts and ﬁnished products — and for samples containing
      different quantities of moisture. Also, the spectrum of pesticides to be tested for is
      dependent on the speciﬁc pesticides used on the herbal material and the history of
      use of persistent pesticides in the region.

      It is therefore desirable to test herbal materials of unknown history for broad
      groups of compounds rather than for individual pesticides. Various methods
      are suitable for this purpose. Pesticides containing chlorine in the molecule,
      for example, can be detected by the measurement of total organic chlorine;
      insecticides containing phosphate can be measured by analysis for total
      organic phosphorus, whereas pesticides containing arsenic and lead can be
      detected by measurement of total arsenic or total lead, respectively. Similarly,
      the measurement of total bound carbon disulﬁde in a sample will provide
      information on whether residues of the dithiocarbamate family of fungicides
      are present.

      Importantly, where such general methods are employed, care must be taken to
      ensure that results are not adversely affected by contributions from certain plant
      constituents containing the targeted elements.

      If the pesticide to which the herbal material has been exposed is known or can be
      identiﬁed by suitable means, an established method for the determination of that
      particular pesticide residue should be employed.




                                                                                             51
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          General aspects of analytical methodology
          The samples should be tested as quickly as possible after collection, before any
          physical or chemical changes occur. If prolonged storage is envisaged, the samples
          should preferably be stored in airtight containers under refrigeration.

          The water content of samples can also be problematic and, in some ofﬁcial
          pharmacopoeias, content is limited to 15% and below for the determination of
          organochlorine and pyrethroid insecticides.

          Light can cause degradation of many pesticides, and it is therefore advisable to
          protect the samples and any extracts or solutions from undue exposure to light.

          The type of container or wrapping material used should not interfere with the
          sample or affect the analytical results.

          Solvents and reagents used in the analytical method should be free from substances
          that may interfere with the reaction, alter the results or provoke degradation of the
          pesticide residue in the sample. It is usually necessary to employ specially puriﬁed
          solvents or to distil them freshly in an all-glass apparatus. Blank determinations
          with the solvents should be carried out, concentrating and testing them as speciﬁed
          in the test procedure for the herbal material concerned.

          The simplest and quickest procedure should be used to separate unwanted material
          from the sample (clean-up procedure) in order to save time when many samples
          have to be tested.

          The process of concentrating solutions should be undertaken with great care,
          especially during the evaporation of the last traces of solvent, to avoid losses of
          pesticide residues. For this reason, it is often not advisable to remove the last
          traces of solvent. Agents such as mineral oil or other oils of low volatility that may
          help to preserve the solution could be added to retard the loss of the relatively
          volatile pesticides, especially when the last traces of solvent are being evaporated.
          However, these agents, while satisfactory in colorimetric procedures, are usually
          not desirable in gas chromatographic methods. It may be necessary to evaporate
          heat-labile compounds using a rotary vacuum apparatus.

Determination of total chlorine and phosphorus
          Most pesticides contain organically bound chlorine or phosphorus.

          Recommended procedure
          Preparation of samples
          Reduce the herbal material to a ﬁne powder, and extract with a mixture of
          water and acetonitrile R. Most pesticides are soluble in this mixture, while most
          cellular constituents (e.g. cellulose, proteins, amino acids, starch, fats and related
          compounds) are sparingly soluble and are thus removed. A number of polar and
          moderately polar compounds may also be dissolved; it is therefore necessary to
          transfer the pesticides to light petroleum R. For pesticides containing chlorine,
          further puriﬁcation is seldom required, but for those containing phosphorus,
          further puriﬁcation by column chromatography may be necessary, eluting with
          mixtures of light petroleum R and ether R.


52
                                                         Determination of pesticide residues



Preparation of the column
Use Florisil R grade 60/100 PR (or equivalent), activated at 650 °C, as the support.
If this material is obtained in bulk, transfer it immediately after opening to a 500-ml
glass jar or bottle with a glass stopper or foil-lined, screw-top lid. Store in the dark.
Before use, heat at not less than 130 °C, cool in a desiccator to room temperature
and heat once again to 130 °C after 2 days.

Prepare a Florisil column (external diameter 22 mm) which contains, after settling,
10 cm of activated Florisil topped with about 1 cm of anhydrous sodium sulfate
R. Pre-wet the column with 40–50 ml of light petroleum R. Place a graduated ﬂask
under the column to receive the eluate.

Method
Grind the material to allow it to pass through a sieve no. 710 or 840 and mix
thoroughly. Place 20–50 g of the ground sample into a blender, add 350 ml
of acetonitrile R with a water content of 35% (to 350 ml of water add sufﬁcient
acetonitrile R to produce 1000 ml). Blend for 5 minutes at a high speed. Filter under
vacuum through an appropriate funnel, diameter 12 cm, ﬁtted with ﬁlter paper,
into a 500-ml suction ﬂask.

Transfer the ﬁltrate to a 250-ml measuring cylinder and record the volume. Transfer
the measured ﬁltrate to a 1-litre separating funnel and carefully add 100 ml of light
petroleum R. Shake vigorously for 1–2 minutes, add 10 ml of sodium chloride
(400 g/l) TS and 600 ml of water. Hold the separating funnel in a horizontal position
and mix vigorously for 30–45 seconds. Allow to separate, discard the aqueous layer
and gently wash the solvent layer with two 100-ml portions of water. Discard the
washings, transfer the solvent layer to a 100-ml glass-stoppered cylinder, and record
the volume. Add about 15 g of anhydrous sodium sulfate R and shake vigorously.
The extract must not remain in contact with this reagent for longer than 1 hour.
Transfer the extract directly to a Florisil column; if necessary, reduce the volume
ﬁrst to 5–10 ml. Allow it to pass through the column at a rate of not more than 5 ml
per minute. Carefully rinse the cylinder with two portions, each of 5 ml, of light
petroleum R, transfer them to the column, rinse with further small portions of light
petroleum R if necessary, and then elute at the same rate with 200 ml of ether/light
petroleum TS1. Change the receiver and elute with 200 ml of ether/light petroleum
TS2. Again change the receiver and elute with 200 ml of ether/light petroleum TS3.
Evaporate each eluate to a suitable volume, as required, for further testing.

O   The ﬁrst eluate contains chlorinated pesticides (aldrin, DDE, TDE (DDD), o,p’-
     and p,p’-DDT, HCH, heptachlor, heptachlor epoxide, lindane, methoxychlor),
     polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB), and phosphated pesticides (carbophenothion,
     ethion and fenchlorphos).
O   The second eluate contains chlorinated pesticides (dieldrin and endrin) and
     phosphated pesticides (methyl parathion and parathion).
O   The third eluate contains phosphated pesticide (malathion).

Combustion of the organic matter
Combustion of the organic matter in oxygen is the preparatory step for the
determination of chlorine and phosphorus. The pesticide is extracted from the
sample and puriﬁed if necessary. The extract is concentrated, evaporated to
dryness, transferred to a sample holder, and burned in a suitable conical ﬂask
ﬂushed with oxygen. The gases produced during combustion are then absorbed


                                                                                         53
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          in a suitable solution. The absorbed chlorine is determined as chloride and the
          absorbed phosphorus as orthophosphate, both using colorimetry.

          Equipment
          The combustion is carried out in a 1-litre conical ﬂask made of borosilicate glass,
          into the stopper of which is fused one end of a piece of platinum wire about 1 mm
          in diameter. To the free end of the wire is attached a piece of platinum gauze
          measuring about 1.5 × 2 cm to provide a means of holding the sample clear of the
          absorbing liquid during combustion.

          Sample holder for chlorine-containing residues
          For a small quantity of solid material, use a sample holder made from a piece
          of halide-free ﬁlter-paper about 5 cm long and 3 cm wide; for a small volume of
          liquid, it is preferable to use a sample holder in the form of a cone made from
          cellulose acetate ﬁlm. Prepare the cone as follows:

          Wearing cloth gloves and using a suitable cardboard template, cut from the ﬁlm a
          circle of radius 4 cm. Manually pin the two edges together to form a cone. Seal the
          joined edges using heat to form a seam about 5 mm wide. Immerse the seam in
          acetone R to about one half of its width for 10 seconds. Remove and dry it immediately
          in a stream of hot air. Using forceps, wash the cone by dipping in a 1-litre beaker
          containing warm sodium hydroxide (~240 g/l) TS for 10 seconds at a temperature of
          about 60 °C. Rinse the cone thoroughly with water and allow to drain dry on a piece
          of aluminium foil. Place each cone in a clean funnel (diameter 65 mm).

          Sample holder for phosphorus-containing residues
          Use a piece of halide-free ﬁlter-paper about 4 cm square as the sample holder.

          Combustion of chlorine-containing residues
          Transfer an aliquot of the extract as prepared above onto the sample holder, which
          is placed in a funnel using a solvent that will not dissolve the sample holder. Allow
          the solvent to evaporate. Wearing rubber gloves, remove the sample holder and
          its dry contents from the funnel, fold it over and up to form a small packet, about
          1 cm2 in area, and secure it in the centre of the platinum gauze. Insert a narrow
          strip of ﬁlter paper, about 1 × 3 cm, as a fuse into the top of the holder, between
          the folds of the packet. Add 30 ml of water to the combustion ﬂask. Moisten the
          neck of the ﬂask with water. Fill the ﬂask thoroughly with oxygen by means of a
          tube with its end just above the liquid. Ignite the free end of the paper strip and
          immediately insert the stopper. Hold the stopper ﬁrmly in place. When vigorous
          burning has begun, tilt the ﬂask to prevent incompletely burned material from
          falling into the liquid. Immediately after combustion is completed, shake the
          ﬂask vigorously for 10 minutes to dissolve the combustion products. Place a
          small quantity of water around the rim of the ﬂask, and carefully withdraw the
          stopper. Rinse the stopper, platinum wire, platinum gauze and sides of the ﬂask
          with water. Transfer the liquid and liquids used for rinsing to a 50-ml volumetric
          ﬂask and dilute to volume with water.

          Combustion of phosphorus-containing residues
          Dip the sample holder made from ﬁlter paper into methanolic sodium hydroxide
          TS, and then suspend it in a current of heated air. Immediately transfer about
          0.2 ml of an aliquot of the extract as prepared above to the sample holder with the
          aid of 0.2-ml portions of chloroform R using a micropipette. Allow the solvent to


54
                                                            Determination of pesticide residues



      evaporate from the paper, fold it to form a small packet about 1 cm2 in area and
      place it in the centre of the platinum gauze. Insert a strip of ﬁlter paper, about 1
      × 3 cm, as a fuse into the top of the holder, between the folds of the packet. Add
      10 ml of sulfuric acid (~37 g/l) TS to the combustion ﬂask and continue with the
      combustion as described above. Transfer the solution and the liquid used for
      rinsing to a 25-ml volumetric ﬂask and dilute to volume with water.

Determination of chlorides
      Recommended procedure
      Equipment
      The determination is made with a spectrophotometer capable of measuring
      absorbance at 460 nm using absorption cells with path-lengths of 2 cm and 10 cm.

      Method
      Place 15 ml of the solution obtained after combustion in a 50-ml conical ﬂask
      together with 1 ml of ferric ammonium sulfate (0.25 mol/l) VS and 3 ml of mercuric
      thiocyanate TS. Swirl the contents of the ﬂask and allow to stand for 10 minutes.
      Transfer a portion of the solution to a 2-cm cell and measure the absorbance at
      460 nm using water in the reference cell. The reading should be made promptly to
      minimize absorption of chloride from the air.

      Prepare a standard solution of sodium chloride R containing 5 μg of chloride per
      ml. Transfer aliquots of this solution (0 ml, 2 ml, 4 ml, 6 ml, 8 ml and 10 ml) into
      a series of 50-ml conical ﬂasks and dilute to 15 ml with water. Develop the colour
      and measure the absorbances as described above. Plot the absorbances against the
      chloride content of the dilutions in μg per ml and interpolate the chloride content
      of the solutions of the material tested.

Determination of phosphates
      Recommended procedure
      The phosphomolybdate method is based on the reaction of phosphate ions
      with ammonium molybdate to form a molybdophosphate complex, which is
      subsequently reduced to form a strongly blue-coloured molybdenum complex.
      The intensity of the blue colour is measured spectrophotometrically. This method
      is applicable for the determination of any phosphates that have undergone a prior
      separation procedure.

      Naturally occurring phosphates are present in most samples, and are often not
      removed during the clean-up procedure. In order to obtain background values,
      therefore, it is necessary to proceed with the determination for all samples, even
      those with no phosphate-containing pesticides. These background values should
      be subtracted from the results obtained on testing pesticide residues. Extracts of
      most uncontaminated materials contain about 0.05–0.1 mg/kg of phosphorus.
      Therefore, no contamination with organophosphate pesticides can be assumed for
      results in this range.

      Equipment
      The determination is made with a spectrophotometer capable of measuring
      absorbance at 820 nm using an absorption cell with a path-length of 1 cm.


                                                                                            55
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Method
          Place 7 ml of the solution obtained after combustion in a calibrated 10-ml test-tube.
          Add 2.2 ml of sulfuric acid (300 g/l) TS and mix the solution well. Add 0.4 ml
          of ammonium molybdate (40 g/l) TS and swirl the mixture. Then add 0.4 ml of
          aminonaphtholsulfonic acid TS and swirl again. Heat the solution to 100 °C for
          12 minutes (± 2 minutes), cool, and transfer a portion to a 1-cm cell. Measure the
          absorbance at 820 nm using water in the reference cell.

          Prepare standard dilutions with a known content of phosphate and measure the
          absorbance as described above. Plot the absorbances against the phosphate content
          of the dilutions in μg per ml and interpolate the phosphate content of the solutions
          of the material tested.


Qualitative and quantitative determination of organochlorine pesticides

          Recommended procedure
          Preparation of sample
          Place 20 g of powdered herbal material (sieve no. 180), accurately weighed, in
          a 500-ml beaker (tall form), mix with 98 ml of water and allow to macerate for
          at least 30 minutes. Add 200 ml of acetone R; the resulting volume of extraction
          solvent will be 295 ml. Extract for 5 minutes, while cooling, using a high-speed
          mixer. Filter the homogenized mixture through a porcelain ﬁlter (Büchner funnel,
          diameter 70 mm) ﬁtted with a ﬁlter paper, using a slight vacuum, into a 250-ml
          graduated cylinder, allowing the process to last no longer than 1 minute, and then
          measure the volume (V) of the ﬁltrate in ml.

          Method
          Transfer the ﬁltrate prepared as above to a 500-ml separating funnel. Add a quantity
          of sodium chloride R equivalent in grams to one tenth of the volume of the ﬁltrate,
          then add 100 ml of dichloromethane R. Shake vigorously for 5 minutes, allow
          the phases to separate and discard the lower (aqueous) layer. Dry the acetone-
          dichloromethane phase, transfer it to a 500-ml conical ﬂask, add 25 g of anhydrous
          sodium sulfate R and swirl occasionally. Next, ﬁlter the solution into a 500-ml ﬂask
          with a ground-glass stopper using a glass funnel (diameter 100 mm) containing
          puriﬁed glass-wool and anhydrous sodium sulfate R. Rinse the separating funnel,
          the conical ﬂask and the glass funnel twice with 10 ml of ethyl acetate R. Add 5 ml
          of 2,2,4-trimethylpentane R, and concentrate the crude extract to about 2 ml in a
          rotary vacuum evaporator in a water-bath at 30–40 °C. Expel the remaining solvent
          in a gentle stream of air.

          To purify by gel chromatography, macerate 50 g of suitable beads (e.g. S-X3 bio-
          beads) in an elution mixture of cyclohexane R and ethyl acetate R (1:1) and pour
          them into a chromatographic column (length 600 mm, diameter 25 mm) adapted
          for use with a vacuum pump. Rinse the gel bed with the elution mixture under air-
          free conditions. Dissolve the extract in the ﬂask with 5 ml of ethyl acetate R. Add 2 g
          of anhydrous sodium sulfate R, swirl gently and add 5 ml of cyclohexane R. Filter
          the completely dissolved crude extract through a rapid ﬁlter into a 10-ml test-tube
          with a ground-glass stopper and close the tube immediately. Then transfer 5 ml of
          the ﬁltrate on to the gel column. Elute with the elution mixture at an average rate
          of 5 ml/minute. Herbal material components leave the gel column ﬁrst, followed


56
                                                        Determination of pesticide residues



by the active ingredients of pesticides. Fractionation must be determined for each
column, using appropriate reference substances.

Discard the ﬁrst fraction (about 100 ml) containing the impurities. Collect the
organochlorine pesticides appearing in the next eluate (about 70 ml) in a ﬂask with
a ground-glass stopper. Add l0 ml of 2,2,4-trimethylpentane R and concentrate
the solution to about 5 ml in a rotary vacuum evaporator and a water-bath at 30–
40 °C. Pipette another 5 ml of 2,2,4-trimethylpentane R into the ﬂask and carefully
evaporate the solution to about 1 ml (do not allow to become completely dry).

Calculate the amount of plant material, in grams, in the puriﬁed extract using the
following formula:
                          V
                         590 × sample weight in g
where V = volume of ﬁltrate.

To purify further, transfer 1 g of previously deactivated silica gel for column
chromatography (70-230 mesh) containing 1.5% water, to a chromatographic column
(length 25 cm, internal diameter 7 mm). Put 10 mm of anhydrous sodium sulfate R
on top of the content of the column and cover with puriﬁed glass wool. Before use,
rinse the column with 5 ml of hexane R. Allow the solvent to reach the surface of
the column ﬁlling, then transfer quantitatively, by means of a pipette, the puriﬁed
extract obtained by gel chromatography from the ﬂask to the prepared silica gel
column and rinse with 1 ml of hexane R. Set the ﬂask aside for subsequent elutions.

Using a 10-ml volumetric ﬂask as the receiver, elute any residues of polychlorinated
biphenyls from the column with 10 ml of hexane R (eluate 0). Add 2 ml of an
elution mixture composed of toluene R/hexane R (35:65) to the ﬂask and swirl.
Quantitatively transfer the solution to the column. Using another 10-ml volumetric
ﬂask as the receiver, elute the majority of the organochlorine pesticides from the
silica gel column using 6 ml of the same elution mixture. Dilute the contents of the
ﬂasks to volume with the elution mixture (eluate 1).

Rinse the ﬂask with 2 ml of toluene R and transfer it quantitatively to the column.
Collect the eluate in a third 10-ml volumetric ﬂask. Add 8 ml of toluene R to the
ﬂask, swirl and transfer the solution to the silica gel column; elute the remaining
organochlorine pesticides using the same receiver. Dilute the contents of the ﬂask
to volume with toluene R (eluate 2).

Evaluate the test solutions by capillary gas chromatography using an electron capture
detector (ECD). Conﬁrm the ﬁndings obtained for the main column (ﬁrst separation
system) with a second capillary column of different polarity (second separation system).

Determination by gas chromatography
A capillary gas chromatograph with an ECD is used for the measurement. Helium
R is used as the carrier gas and a mixture of argon R and methane R (95:5) as an
auxiliary gas for the detection.

First separation system
Use a vitreous silica column, 30 m long with an internal diameter of 0.25 mm,
packed with a chemically bound phase of 5% phenyl, 95% methyl-polysiloxane.
Use the following temperature programme:


                                                                                        57
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          — heat at 60 °C for 0.5 minutes;
          — increase the temperature at a rate of 30 °C per minute to 160 °C and maintain
            this temperature for 2 minutes;
          — increase the temperature at a rate of 2 °C per minute to 250 °C and maintain this
            temperature for 5 minutes.

          Use a “split/split-free” injector to inject the sample solution and maintain
          the injection port at a temperature of 240 °C. Inject a volume of 1 μl at a rate of
          30 seconds (“split-free”). The detector temperature should be 300 °C.

          Second separation system
          Use a vitreous silica column, 15 m long with an internal diameter of 0.25 mm,
          packed with a chemically bound phase of 7% cyanopropyl, 7% phenyl, 86%
          methyl-polysiloxane. Use the following temperature programme:

          — heat at 60 °C for 12 seconds;
          — increase the temperature at a rate of 30 °C per minute to 180 °C and maintain
            this temperature for 1 minute;
          — increase the temperature at a rate of 2 °C per minute to 250 °C and maintain this
            temperature for 5 minutes.

          Use an on-column injector to inject a volume of 1 μl of the sample solution. The
          detector temperature should be 300 °C.

          Use the “external standard” method for the qualitative and quantitative evaluation
          of the organochlorine pesticides in the test solutions with reference solutions
          of the following pesticides: α-, β-, γ- and δ-hexachlorocyclohexane (HCH);
          hexachlorobenzene; quintozene; aldrin; dieldrin; endrin; α- and β-endosulfan;
          endosulfan sulfate; heptachlor, heptachlorepoxide; camphechlor; TDE, DDE and
          DDT (both o,p’- and p,p’-isomers); methoxychlor.

          Measure the peak height of the pesticides obtained in the chromatograms and
          calculate the concentration of the residues in mg/kg using the following formula:

                                               ht × 10       wr
                                                         ×
                                                  w          hr

          where ht = peak height obtained for the test solution in mm;
                w = quantity of sample in the puriﬁed extract (g);
                wr= quantity of pesticide in ng in the reference solution injected;
                hr = peak height obtained for the reference solution in mm.


Analysis of esters of organophosphorus compounds

          Although most organophosphorus compounds undergo rapid decomposition,
          Member States may elect to test for them because of their harmful nature if present
          in signiﬁcant concentrations. Testing may be more relevant in the case of herbal
          medicines used at high concentrations and frequency.

          The extraction and the clean-up procedures can be performed as described above,
          but the detection requires a phosphorus ﬂame ionization detector (P-FID).


58
                                                                        Determination of pesticide residues



Determination of speciﬁc pesticide residues in herbal material
       General recommendations
       For the total determination, mix thoroughly 1 kg of herbal material.

       In order to obtain reliable chromatographic results, do one or more of the following:

       — repeat the separation using another column;
       — use a different separation system;
       — use a different detector system;
       — apply a coupling technique;
       — prepare a derivative;
       — perform chromatography with a mixture of the sample and a reference substance;
       — change the sample preparation;
       — use a fractionated elution during the column-chromatography clean-up
         procedure of the herbal extract and test every fraction by chromatography;
       — compare the distribution coefﬁcient of the material with that of a reference
         substance.

       Prior to the quantitative determination of the material to be tested, check whether
       there is a linear relationship between the values obtained for the reference substance
       and its concentration over the range 0.1–2 times the standard concentration.
       Otherwise, prepare another concentration range or evaluate the results using
       a reference curve. Use any suitable mechanical or manual technique for the
       chromatographic determination.

       Store the reference solutions protected from light to prevent decomposition. Use
       glass vessels closed with glass stoppers and keep them in a container saturated with
       the solvent employed to avoid any increase in concentration due to evaporation.
       Check the loss by evaporation by interim weighing of the vessels.


       Rate of recovery
       The rate of recovery (R) is the percentage of the reference material originally added
       to the herbal material that is determined using the method described below.


Determination of desmetryn, prometryn and simazine residues
       Recommended procedure

       Preparation of the herbal material extract
       Place 10 g of powdered herbal material in a 500-ml conical ﬂask and add 125 ml of
       chloroform R.1 Shake the mixture for 60 minutes and ﬁlter under reduced pressure
       through a ﬁlter paper (medium grade) into a round-bottomed ﬂask. Wash the
       residue with 3 successive volumes each of 25 ml of chloroform R.



       1
           In future development of this method, replacement of chloroform by other appropriate solvents is
           recommended.



                                                                                                        59
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Method
          Concentrate the combined ﬁltrates to a volume of 3–5 ml using a rotary vacuum
          evaporator and a water-bath at 40 °C. Transfer the extract to a chromatographic column
          as prepared below, rinsing the round-bottomed ﬂask twice with 5 ml of chloroform R.

          Preparation of chromatographic column
          Use a glass tube (internal diameter 20–22 mm) with a restricted oriﬁce and protected
          with a sintered-glass plate (e.g. P10 or P16, glass ﬁlter G4; or P40, glass ﬁlter G3).
          Fill the column with chloroform R, and then pour puriﬁed aluminium oxide R into
          it to form a 100-mm thick layer. The support material should remain covered with
          chloroform R. After transferring the extract and the rinsing liquids to the column,
          elute with 150 ml of chloroform R at a rate of 1–2 drops per second, collecting the
          eluate in a round-bottomed ﬂask. The ﬁrst purifying process is completed when no
          further eluate drips from the column.

          Evaporate the eluate to dryness using a rotary vacuum evaporator and a water-
          bath at 40 °C. To the residue add 10 ml of light petroleum R and transfer the
          mixture to a chromatographic column containing a layer of puriﬁed aluminium
          oxide R, 50 mm thick, in light petroleum R. Elute the mixture with 90 ml of light
          petroleum R, using this to rinse the round-bottomed ﬂask, at a rate of 1–2 drops
          per second. Discard the eluate. Dissolve any remaining residue, which has not
          dissolved in light petroleum R in 10 ml of a mixture composed of 60 volumes of
          chloroform R, and 40 volumes of light petroleum R and transfer the solution to
          the column. Rinse the round-bottomed ﬂask twice more with 10 ml of the solvent
          mixture. Transfer the liquid used for rinsing to the column. Elute with 120 ml of
          the same solvent mixture, at a rate of 1–2 drops per second and collect the eluate
          in a round-bottomed ﬂask. The second purifying process is completed when no
          further eluate drips from the column.

          Evaporate the eluate to dryness using a rotary vacuum evaporator and a water-bath
          at 40 °C. To prepare a puriﬁed extract for the determination by gas chromatography,
          dissolve the residue in sufﬁcient acetone R to produce a volume of 10 ml. If an
          especially puriﬁed extract is required, proceed as described below.

          To the residue add 10 ml of light petroleum R and 10 ml of dimethyl sulfoxide
          R. Shake the mixture and transfer it to a separating funnel. Extract the dimethyl
          sulfoxide layer twice with 10 ml of light petroleum R. Discard the petroleum ether
          extract. Then add 100 ml of water to the dimethyl sulfoxide layer and extract 3
          times, each with 20 ml of chloroform R. Extract the combined chloroform extracts
          twice with 20 ml of water and evaporate them to dryness using a rotary vacuum
          evaporator and a water-bath at 40 °C. Transfer the residue together with a mixture
          of 10 ml of light petroleum R and 10 ml of hydrochloric acid (1 mol/l) VS to a
          separating funnel and extract the mixture ﬁrst with 10 ml and then with 5 ml of
          hydrochloric acid (1 mol/l) VS. Discard the petroleum ether layer and adjust the
          pH of the combined aqueous solutions to a value between 7 and 8 using sodium
          hydroxide (1 mol/l) VS. Extract the solution 3 times, each with 20 ml of chloroform
          R. Dry the combined chloroform extracts with anhydrous sodium sulfate R
          and ﬁlter into a round-bottomed ﬂask, rinsing the funnel 3 times with 10.0-ml
          portions of chloroform R. Evaporate the ﬁltrate to dryness using a rotary vacuum
          evaporator and a water-bath at 40 °C. Dissolve the residue in sufﬁcient acetone R
          to produce 10 ml of especially puriﬁed extract to be used for the determination by
          gas chromatography.


60
                                                                    Determination of pesticide residues



         Use the extracts as indicated in Table 7 for the following herbal materials.

Table 7. Extract to be used for speciﬁc herbal materials
   No.    Material                                 No.   Material

    1     Flores Calendulae                        10    Fructus Foeniculi
    2     Flores Chamomillae                       11    Herba Millefolii
    3     Folia Melissae                           12    Herba Plantaginis lanceolatae
    4     Folia Menthae piperitae                  13    Radix Althaeae
    5     Folia Salviae                            14    Radix Angelicae
   6      Folia Thymi                              15    Radix Levistici
   7      Fructus Carvi                            16    Radix Petroselini
   8      Fructus Coriandri                        17    Radix Valerianae
   9      Fructus Cynobasti


         For materials no. 1 and 2, use an especially puriﬁed extract (see above); for materials
         no. 3–17, use a puriﬁed extract (see above).

         Determination of the rate of recovery
         Prepare ﬁve individual samples using each of the following procedures:

            1. To prepare solution S2, ﬁrst dissolve separately 0.04 g of each of the reference
               substances, desmetryn R, prometryn R and simazine R, in sufﬁcient acetone
               R to produce 100 ml. Then place 5 ml of each solution in a 100-ml volumetric
               ﬂask and dilute the mixture to volume with acetone R (S2). Place 10 g of
               powdered plant material in a 500-ml conical ﬂask and add 1 ml of solution
               S2. Shake this mixture mechanically for 60 minutes; if necessary, repeat the
               operation manually and then proceed as described under “Preparation of
               the herbal material extract” (see p. 59). Use either the puriﬁed or especially
               puriﬁed extract for the determination by gas chromatography, as speciﬁed in
               the test procedure for the herbal material concerned.
            2. Treat 10 g of powdered herbal material as described under “Preparation of
               the herbal material extract” (see p. 59). Use either the puriﬁed extract or the
               especially puriﬁed extract for the determination by gas chromatography, as
               speciﬁed in the test procedure for each individual herbal material.

         Calculate the rate of recovery (R) as a percentage using the following formula:

                                             2(a-b)
                                               c

         where a = average quantity in mg/kg of the 5 residues obtained using procedure 1;
               b = average quantity in mg/kg of the 5 residues obtained using procedure 2;
               c = quantity of reference substances in mg contained in solution S2 during
                   procedure 1.

         The rate should be within the range 70–120%. It is speciﬁc for each material.

         Determination by gas chromatography
         Perform the determination as described in The international pharmacopoeia (5).


                                                                                                    61
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Equipment
          The equipment consists of:

          — a glass column 1.2 m long, internal diameter 2 mm;
          — a suitable stationary liquid phase;
          — a suitable diatomaceous support.

          Use nitrogen R as the carrier gas with a ﬂow rate of 30 ml/min. The sample injection
          block should be maintained at 230 °C, the column at 190 °C and the detector, which
          should be nitrogen-selective, at 300 °C. In addition:

          — volume of sample solution to be injected: 2.0 μl;
          — separation characteristics: h ≤ 1.2 × 10-3 for desmetryn R; RS ≥1.2 for prometryn
            R and simazine R;
          — relative standard deviation (precision of chromatographic system): sr. 0.05 for
            desmetryn R, prometryn R and simazine R.

          Method
          Chromatogram T. To determine the separation characteristics, inject solution S2 (for
          the preparation of solution S2 see “Determination of the rate of recovery” above).
          Chromatograms A1–A5. To determine the relative standard deviation inject solution
          S2 and repeat the determination 5 times.

          Chromatogram S2. Inject 1 ml of solution S2 for the determination of the rate of
          recovery. Dilute 1 ml of solution S2 to 10 ml with acetone R and inject it for the
          chromatographic determination. The peaks on the chromatogram occur in the
          following sequence: prometryn, simazine, desmetryn.

          Chromatogram P2. Inject the puriﬁed extract or the especially puriﬁed extract.
          Determine using an external standard: a = 0.0005. To convert the values obtained
          to percentage by weight, multiply the concentration in mg/kg by 104.

          The total maximum permissible amount of residues due to desmetryn, prometryn
          and simazine is 2 mg/kg of herbal material.


Determination of speciﬁc organochlorine, organophosphorus
and pyrethroid insecticide residues

          Recommended procedure

          Depending on the substance being examined, it may be necessary to modify,
          sometimes extensively, the procedure described below. In any case, it may
          be necessary to use, in addition, another column with a different polarity or
          another detection method (e.g. mass spectrometry) or a different method (e.g.
          immunochemical method) to conﬁrm the results obtained.

          This procedure is valid only for the analysis of samples of herbal materials
          containing less than 15% water. Samples with a higher content of water may
          be dried, provided it has been shown that the drying procedure does not
          signiﬁcantly affect the pesticide content.


62
                                                        Determination of pesticide residues



Preparation of sample
Extraction
To 10 g of the substance being examined, coarsely powdered, add 100 ml of acetone
R and allow to stand for 20 min. Add 1 ml of a solution containing 1.8 μg/ml
of carbophenothion R in toluene R. Homogenize using a high-speed blender for
3 min. Filter and wash the ﬁlter cake with two quantities, each of 25 ml, of acetone
R. Combine the ﬁltrate and the washings and heat using a rotary evaporator
at a temperature not exceeding 40 °C until the solvent has almost completely
evaporated. To the residue add a few millilitres of toluene R and heat again until
the acetone is completely removed. Dissolve the residue in 8 ml of toluene R. Filter
through a membrane ﬁlter (45 μm), rinse the ﬂask and the ﬁlter with toluene R and
dilute to 10.0 ml with the same solvent (solution A).

Puriﬁcation
Organochlorine, organophosphorus and pyrethroid insecticides

Examine by size-exclusion chromatography. The chromatographic procedure may
be carried out using:
— a stainless steel column 0.30 m long and 7.8 mm in internal diameter packed
  with styrene-divinylbenzene copolymer R (5 μm);
— as mobile phase toluene R at a ﬂow rate of 1 ml/min.

Performance of the column. Inject 100 μl of a solution containing 0.5 g/l of methyl red
R and 0.5 g/l of oracet blue 2R in toluene R and proceed with the chromatography.
The column is not suitable unless the colour of the eluate changes from orange to
blue at an elution volume of about 10.3 ml. If necessary calibrate the column using
a solution containing, in toluene R, at a suitable concentration, the insecticide to be
analysed with the lowest molecular mass (for example, dichlorvos) and that with
the highest molecular mass (for example, deltamethrin). Determine which fraction
of the eluate contains both insecticides.

Puriﬁcation of the test solution. Inject a suitable volume of solution A (100 μl to
500 μl) and proceed with the chromatography. Collect the fraction as determined
above (solution B). Organophosphorus insecticides are usually eluted between
8.8 ml and 10.9 ml. Organochlorine and pyrethroid insecticides are usually eluted
between 8.5 ml and 10.3 ml.

Organochlorine and pyrethroid insecticides
In a chromatography column, 0.10 m long and 5 mm in internal diameter, introduce
a piece of defatted cotton and 0.5 g of silica gel treated as follows: heat silica gel
for chromatography R in an oven at 150 °C for at least 4 h. Allow to cool and add
dropwise a quantity of water R corresponding to 1.5% of the mass of silica gel used;
shake vigorously until agglomerates have disappeared and continue shaking for
2 h using a mechanical shaker. Condition the column using 1.5 ml of hexane R.
Prepacked columns containing about 0.5 g of a suitable silica gel may also be used
provided they have been validated beforehand.

Concentrate solution B in a current of helium for chromatography R or oxygen-
free nitrogen R almost to dryness and dilute to a suitable volume with toluene
R (200 μl to 1 ml according to the volume injected in the preparation of solution
B). Transfer quantitatively on to the column and proceed with the chromatography
using 1.8 ml of toluene R as the mobile phase. Collect the eluate (solution C).


                                                                                        63
Quality control methods for herbal materials



            Quantitative analysis
            Organophosphorus insecticides
            Examine by gas chromatography, using carbophenothion R as internal standard. It
            may be necessary to use a second internal standard to identify possible interference
            with the peak corresponding to carbophenothion.

            Test solution. Concentrate solution B in a current of helium for chromatography R
            almost to dryness and dilute to 100 μl with toluene R.

            Reference solution. Prepare at least 3 solutions in toluene R containing the insecticides
            to be determined and carbophenothion at concentrations suitable for plotting a
            calibration curve.

            The chromatographic procedure may be carried out using:

            — a fused-silica column 30 m long and 0.32 mm in internal diameter, the internal
              wall of which is covered with a layer 0.25 μm thick of poly(dimethyl)siloxane R;
            — hydrogen for chromatography R as the carrier gas (other gases such as helium
              for chromatography R or nitrogen for chromatography R may also be used
              provided the chromatography is suitably validated);
            — a phosphorus-nitrogen ﬂame-ionization detector or an atomic emission
              spectrometry detector,

            maintaining the temperature of the column at 80 °C for 1 minute, then raising
            it at a rate of 30 °C/minute to 150 °C, maintaining it at 150 °C for 3 min, then
            raising the temperature at a rate of 4 °C/minute to 280 °C and maintaining at this
            temperature for 1 minute, and maintaining the temperature of the injector port at
            250 °C and that of the detector at 275 °C. Inject the chosen volume of each solution.
            When the chromatograms are recorded in the prescribed conditions, the relative
            retention times are approximately those listed in Table 8. Calculate the content of
            each insecticide from the peak areas and the concentrations of the solutions.

Table 8. Relative retention times of organophosphorus insecticides
 Substances                   Relative retention times   Substances           Relative retention times
 dichlorvos                            0.20              parathion                     0.69
 fonofos                               0.50              chlorpyrifos                  0.70
 diazinon                              0.52              methidathion                  0.78
 parathion-methyl                      0.59              ethion                        0.96
 chlorpyrifos-methyl                   0.60              carbophenothion               1.00
 pirimiphos-methyl                     0.66              azinphos-methyl               1.17
 malathion                             0.67              phosalon                      1.18


            Note: The relative retention times are very close. If it is necessary to distinguish
            between two relative retention times that are very close, further development of a
            suitable method will be required.

            Organochlorine and pyrethroid insecticides
            Examine by gas chromatography, using carbophenothion as the internal standard. It
            may be necessary to use a second internal standard to identify possible interference
            with the peak corresponding to carbophenothion.


64
                                                                                Determination of pesticide residues



               Test solution. Concentrate solution C in a current of helium for chromatography R
               or oxygen-free nitrogen R almost to dryness and dilute to 500 μl with toluene R.

               Reference solution. Prepare at least three solutions in toluene R containing the
               insecticides to be determined and carbophenothion at concentrations suitable for
               plotting a calibration curve.

               The chromatographic procedure may be carried out using:

               — a fused silica column 30 m long and 0.32 mm in internal diameter the internal
                 wall of which is covered with a 0.25 μm thick layer of poly (dimethyl) (diphenyl)
                 siloxane R;
               — hydrogen for chromatography R as the carrier gas (other gases such as helium
                 for chromatography R or nitrogen for chromatography R may also be used,
                 provided the chromatography is suitably validated);
               — an electron-capture detector;
               — a device allowing direct cold on-column injection,

               maintaining the temperature of the column at 80 °C for 1 minute, then raising it
               at a rate of 30 °C/minute to 150 °C, maintaining it at 150 °C for 3 minutes, then
               raising the temperature at a rate of 4 °C/minute to 280 °C and maintaining at
               this temperature for 1 minute, and maintaining the temperature of the injector
               port at 250 °C and that of the detector at 275 °C. Inject the chosen volume of each
               solution. When the chromatograms are recorded in the prescribed conditions,
               the relative retention times are approximately those listed in Table 9. Calculate
               the content of each insecticide from the peak areas and the concentrations of the
               solutions.

Table 9. Relative retention times of organochlorine and pyrethroid insecticides
    Substances                    Relative retention times   Substances                   Relative retention times
    α- hexachlorocyclohexane               0.44              p,p’-DDE                              0.87
    hexachlorobenzene                      0.45              o,p’-DDD                              0.89
    β- hexachlorocyclohexane               0.49              endrin                                0.91
    lindane                                0 49              β-endosulfan                          0.92
    δ- hexachlorocyclohexane               0.54              o,p’-DDT                              0.95
    ε- hexachlorocyclohexane               0.56              carbophenothion                       1.00
    heptachlor                             0.61              p,p’- DDT                             1.02
    aldrin                                 0.68              cis-permethrin                        1.29
    cis-heptachlor-epoxide                 0.76              trans-permethrin                      1.31
    o,p’-DDE                               0.81                             a                      1.40
                                                             cypermethrin
    α-endosulfan                           0.82              fenvaleratea                      1.47 and 1.49
    dieldrin                               0.87              deltamethrin                          1.54
a
    The substance shows several peaks.




                                                                                                                 65
66
                                                                        Determination of arsenic and toxic metals




                                         17. Determination of arsenic
                                                    and toxic metals

Limit tests
        Limit test for arsenic
        Arsenic is abundant in nature and its presence in herbal materials should be no
        different to its wide occurrence in foods. A popular test method relies on the
        digestion of the herbal material matrix followed by subjection of the digestate to a
        comparative colorimetric test in a special apparatus.

        The test method described below uses colorimetry and does not use toxic mercuric
        bromide paper. The method uses N-N-diethylmethyldithiocarbamate in pyridine
        and it reacts with hydrogen arsenide to afford a red–purple complex. The limit is
        expressed in terms of arsenic (III) trioxide (As2O3).

        Equipment
        Use the apparatus illustrated in Figure 7.

Figure 7. Apparatus for arsenic limit test




        A, generator bottle (capacity up to the shoulder: approximately 70 ml); B, exit tube; C, glass tube (inside
        diameter: 5.6 mm, the tip of the part to be inserted in the absorber tube D is drawn out to 1 mm in diameter);
        D, absorber tube (inside diameter: 10 mm); E, small perforation; F, glass wool (about 0.2 g); G, mark at 5 ml;
        H and J, rubber stopper.



                                                                                                                  67
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Place glass wool F in the exit tube B up to about 30 mm in height, moisten the glass
          wool uniformly with a mixture of an equal volume of lead (II) acetate TS and water,
          and apply gentle suction to the lower end to remove the excess mixture. Insert the
          tube vertically into the centre of the rubber stopper H, and attach the tube to the
          generator bottle A so that the small perforation E in the lower end of B extends
          slightly below the stopper. At the upper end of B, attach the rubber stopper J to
          hold the tube C vertically. Make the lower end of the exit tube of C level with that
          of the rubber stopper J.

          Preparation of the test solution
          Unless otherwise speciﬁed, proceed as follows.

          Examples for ginseng, powdered ginseng and red ginseng
          Prepare the test solution with 1.0 g of pulverized ginseng (or red ginseng) according
          to the method described below, and perform the test using the apparatus described
          above.

          Method
          Weigh the amount of the sample as directed in the monograph, and place it in a
          crucible of platinum, quartz or porcelain. Add 10 ml of a solution of magnesium
          nitrate hexahydrate in ethanol (95) (1 in 10), burn the ethanol, heat gradually,
          and ignite to incinerate. If carbonized material still remains after this procedure,
          moisten with a small quantity of nitric acid and ignite again to incinerate in the
          same manner. After cooling, add 3 ml of hydrochloric acid, heat in a water bath to
          dissolve the residue, and designate it as the test solution.

          Standard solutions
          Absorbing solution for hydrogen arsenide. Dissolve 0.50 g of silver N,N-diethyl-
          dithiocarbamate in pyridine to make 100 ml. Preserve this solution in a glass-
          stoppered bottle protected from light, in a cold place.

          Standard arsenic stock solution. Weigh accurately 0.100 g of ﬁnely powdered arsenic
          (III) trioxide standard reagent dried at 105 °C for 4 hours, and add 5 ml of sodium
          hydroxide solution (1 in 5) to dissolve. Add dilute sulfuric acid to neutralize, add
          a further 10 ml of dilute sulfuric acid, and add freshly boiled and cooled water to
          make exactly 1000 ml.

          Standard arsenic solution. Pipette 10 ml of standard arsenic stock solution, add 10 ml
          of dilute sulfuric acid, and add freshly boiled and cooled water to make exactly
          1000 ml. Each ml of the solution contains 1 μg of arsenic (III) trioxide (As2O3).
          Prepare standard arsenic solution just before use and preserve in a glass-stoppered
          bottle.

          Procedure
          Unless otherwise speciﬁed, proceed using the above-mentioned apparatus. Carry
          out the preparation of the standard colour at the same time.

          Place the test solution in the generator bottle A and, if necessary, wash down the
          solution in the bottle with a small quantity of water. Add 1 drop of methyl orange
          TS, and after neutralizing with ammonia TS, ammonia solution (NH4OH), or
          diluted hydrochloric acid, add 5 ml of diluted hydrochloric acid (1 in 2) add 5 ml
          of potassium iodide TS, and allow to stand for 2–3 minutes. Add 5 ml of acidic


68
                                                     Determination of arsenic and toxic metals



tin (II) chloride TS, and allow to stand for 10 minutes. Then add water to make
40 ml, add 2 g of zinc for arsenic analysis, and immediately connect the rubber
stopper H ﬁtted with B and C with the generator bottle A. Transfer 5 ml of the
absorbing solution for hydrogen arsenide to the absorber tube D, insert the tip
of C to the bottom of the absorber tube D, then immerse the generator bottle A
up to the shoulder in water maintained at 25 °C, and allow to stand for 1 hour.
Disconnect the absorber tube, add pyridine to make 5 ml, if necessary, and observe
the colour of the absorbing solution: the colour produced is not more intense than
the standard colour.

Preparation of standard colour. Measure accurately 2 ml of Standard Arsenic Solution
into the generator bottle A. Add 5 ml of diluted hydrochloric acid (1 in 2) and 5 ml
of potassium iodide TS, and allow to stand for 2–3 minutes. Add 5 ml of acidic
tin (II) chloride TS, allow to stand at room temperature for 10 minutes, and then
proceed as directed above. The colour produced corresponds to 2 μg of arsenic (III)
trioxide (As2O3) and is used as the standard.

Notes: Apparatus, reagents and test solutions used in the test should contain little
or no arsenic. If necessary, perform a blank determination.

Details of the reagents and solutions are given in chapter 23.


Limit test for cadmium and lead
Equipment
The equipment comprises a digestion vessel, consisting of a vitreous silica crucible
(DIN 12904), “tall form”, height 62 mm, diameter 50 mm, capacity 75 ml, with a
vitreous silica cover.

The materials used are:

— digestion mixture: 2 parts by weight of nitric acid (~1000 g/l) TS and 1 part by
  weight of perchloric acid (~1170 g/l) TS;
— reference materials: olive leaves (Olea europaea)1 and hay powder.2

Clean scrupulously with nitric acid (~1000 g/l) TS the digestion vessel and all
other equipment to be used for the determination. Rinse thoroughly several times
with water and dry at 120 °C.

Preparation of the sample
For the wet digestion method in an open system, place 200–250 mg of air-dried
herbal material, accurately weighed, ﬁnely cut and homogeneously mixed, into
a cleaned silica crucible. Add 1.0 ml of the digestion mixture, cover the crucible
without exerting pressure and place it in an oven with a controlled temperature
and time regulator (computer-controlled, if available).



1
  BCR reference material CRM No. 62 Community Bureau of Reference, obtainable from BCR,
  Directorate-General XII, Commission of the European Communities, 200 rue de la Loi, B-1049
  Brussels, Belgium.
2
  Obtainable from IAEA/V-10, International Atomic Energy Agency, Analytical Quality Control
  Services, Laboratory Geibersdorf, PO Box 100, A-Vienna, Austria.



                                                                                           69
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Heat slowly to 100 °C and maintain at this temperature for up to 3 hours; then heat
          to 120 °C and maintain at this temperature for 2 hours. Raise the temperature very
          slowly to 240 °C, avoiding losses due to possible violent reactions, especially in
          the temperature range of 160–200 °C, and maintain at this temperature for 4 hours.
          Dissolve the remaining dry inorganic residue in 2.5 ml of nitric acid (~1000 g/l) TS
          and use for the determination of heavy metals.

          Every sample should be tested in parallel with a blank.

          Method
          The contents of lead and cadmium may be determined by inverse voltammetry or
          by atomic absorption spectrophotometry.


          Limit test for total toxic metals as lead
          In this method, the heavy metals are the metallic inclusions that are darkened with
          sodium sulﬁde TS in acidic solution; their quantity is expressed in terms of the
          quantity of lead (Pb).

          Preparation of sample solution and blank solution
          Test solution. Place an amount of the sample, as directed in the monograph, in
          a quartz or porcelain crucible, cover loosely with a lid, and carbonize by gentle
          ignition. After cooling, add 2 ml of nitric acid and 5 drops of sulfuric acid, heat
          cautiously until white fumes are evolved, and incinerate by ignition between
          500 °C and 600 °C. Cool, add 2 ml of hydrochloric acid, evaporate to dryness in
          a water-bath, moisten the residue with 3 drops of hydrochloric acid, add 10 ml of
          hot water, and warm for 2 minutes. Then add 1 drop of phenolphthalein TS, add
          ammonia TS drop by drop until the solution develops a pale red colour, add 2 ml
          of dilute acetic acid, ﬁlter, if necessary, and wash with 10 ml of water. Transfer the
          ﬁltrate and washings to a Nessler tube, and add water to make 50 ml. Designate
          this as the test solution.

          Control solution. Evaporate a mixture of 2 ml of nitric acid, 5 drops of sulfuric
          acid, and 2 ml of hydrochloric acid on a water-bath, further evaporate to dryness
          on a sand-bath, and moisten the residue with 3 drops of hydrochloric acid.
          Hereinafter, proceed as directed above for the test solution, and then add the
          volume of standard lead solution as directed in the monograph and sufﬁcient
          water to make 50 ml.

          Procedure
          Add 1 drop of sodium sulﬁde TS both to the test solution and to the control solution,
          mix thoroughly, and allow to stand for 5 minutes. Then compare the colours of the
          two solutions by viewing the tubes downwards or transversely against a white
          background. The test solution has no more colour than the control solution.


          Limit test for total toxic metals as lead in extracts
          Test solution. Ignite 0.3 g of extracts to ash, warm with 3 ml of dilute hydrochloric
          acid, and ﬁlter. Wash the residue with two 5 ml portions of water. Neutralize the
          combined ﬁltrate and washings by adding ammonia TS, ﬁlter, if necessary, and
          add 2 ml of dilute acetic acid and water to make 50 ml. Perform the heavy metals
          limit test using this solution as the test solution.


70
                                                            Determination of arsenic and toxic metals



       Control solution. Proceed with 3 ml of dilute hydrochloric acid in the same manner
       as directed above for the preparation of the test solution, and add 3 ml of standard
       lead solution 1 ppm, and water to make 50 ml.

       Procedure
       Add 1 drop of sodium sulﬁde TS to both the test solution and to the control solution,
       mix thoroughly, and allow to stand for 5 minutes. Then compare the colours of the
       two solutions by viewing the tubes downwards or transversely against a white
       background. The test solution has no more colour than the control solution.


Determination of speciﬁc toxic metals
       Atomic absorption spectrometry (AA) is used for the determination of the amount
       or concentration of speciﬁc heavy metals. AA uses the phenomenon that atoms
       in the ground state absorb light of a speciﬁc wavelength, characteristic of the
       particular atom, when the light passes through an atomic vapour layer of the
       element to be determined.

       Caution must be exercised when using the recommended closed high-pressure
       digestion vessels and microwave laboratory equipment, and the operators
       should be fully familiar with the safety and operating instructions given by the
       manufacturer.


       Procedure
       Equipment
       Usually the apparatus consists of a light source, a sample atomizer, a spectroscope,
       a photometer and a recording system, together with the following:

       O    A digestion ﬂask: a polytetraﬂuoroethylene ﬂask with a volume of about 120 ml,
             ﬁtted with an airtight closure, a valve to adjust the pressure inside the container
             and a polytetraﬂuoroethylene tube to allow release of gas. A good example is
             the Digestion Vessel Assembly P/N ZZ 1000.
       O    A system for making ﬂasks airtight, using the same torsional force. One example is
             the CEM Capping station calibration.
       O    A microwave oven, with a magnetron frequency of 2450 MHz, with a selectable
             output from 0 to 630 ± 70 W in 1% increments, a programmable digital computer,
             a polytetraﬂuoroethylene-coated microwave cavity with a variable speed
             exhaust fan, a rotating turntable drive system and exhaust tubing to vent fumes.
       O    An atomic absorption spectrometer, equipped with an appropriate lamp for each
             element as source of radiation and a deuterium lamp as background corrector;
             the system is ﬁtted with a sample atomiser of which there are three types (the
             ﬂame type, the electrochemical type and the cold-vapour type).
       O    A graphite furnace (electrochemical type) is used as an atomization device
             for cadmium, copper, iron, lead, nickel and zinc. One example is the Vapour
             Generation Accessory.

       An automated continuous-ﬂow hydride vapour generation system is used for
       arsenic and mercury.1

       1
            The Vapour Generation Accessory is suitable.



                                                                                                  71
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Method
          Clean all the glassware and laboratory equipment with a 10 g/l solution of nitric
          acid R in water, carbon-dioxide free R before use.

          Test solution. In a digestion ﬂask, place the prescribed quantity of the substance
          to be examined (about 0.5 g of powdered drug or 0.5 g of fatty oil). Add 3 ml of
          nitric acid R, 1 ml hydrogen peroxide R and 1 ml of hydrochloric acid R. Seal the
          ﬂask so that it is airtight. Place the digestion ﬂasks in the microwave oven. Carry
          out the digestion in 3 steps according to the following procedure, for 7 ﬂasks
          each containing the test solution: 80% power for 15 minutes; 100% power for
          5 minutes; then 80% power for 20 minutes. At the end of the cycle allow the
          ﬂasks to cool in air and to each add 4 ml of sulfuric acid R. Repeat the digestion
          programme. After cooling in air, open each digestion ﬂask and introduce the
          clear, colourless solution obtained into a 50-ml volumetric ﬂask. Rinse each
          digestion ﬂask with 2 quantities, each of 15 ml, of water R and collect the rinsings
          in the volumetric ﬂask. Add 1 ml of 10 g/l solution of magnesium nitrate R and
          1 ml of 100 g/l solution of ammonium dihydrogen phosphate R and dilute to
          50 ml with water R.

          Blank solution. Mix 3 ml of nitric acid R, 1 ml hydrogen peroxide R (30%) and 1 ml
          of hydrochloric acid R in a digestion ﬂask. Carry out the digestion in the same
          manner as for the test solution.


          Detection of cadmium, copper, iron, lead, nickel and zinc
          Measure the content of cadmium (Cd), copper (Cu), iron (Fe), lead (Pb), nickel (Ni)
          and zinc (Zn) by the standard additions method using reference solutions of each
          heavy metal. Suitable instrumental parameters are listed in Table 10.

          The absorbance value of the compensation liquid (blank solution) is subtracted from
          the value obtained with the test solution.

Table 10. Instrumental parameters for heavy metals
                                                  Cd      Cu      Fe     Ni      Pb      Zn
 Wavelength                             nm       228.8   324.8   248.3   232    283.5   213.9
 Slit width                             nm        0.5     0.5     0.2    0.2     0.5     0.5
 Hollow-cathode lamp current            mA        6       7       5       10     5       7
 Ignition temperature                    °C      800     800     800     800    800     800
 Atomization temperature                 °C      1800    2300    2300    2500   2200    2000
 Background corrector                             on      on      on     on      on      on
 Nitrogen ﬂow                        Litre/min    3       3       3       3      3       3




72
                                                            Determination of arsenic and toxic metals



           Detection of arsenic and mercury
           Measure the content of arsenic (As) and mercury (Hg) in comparison with reference
           solutions containing these elements at a known concentration by direct calibration
           using an automated continuous-ﬂow hydride vapour generation system.

           The absorbance value of the compensation liquid (blank solution) is automatically
           subtracted from the value obtained with the test solution.

           Arsenic
           Sample solution. To 19 ml of the test solution or of the blank solution as described
           above, add 1 ml of a 200 g/l solution of potassium iodide R. Allow the test solution
           to stand at room temperature for about 50 min or at 70 °C for about 4 minutes.

           Acid reagent. Heavy metal-free hydrochloric acid R.

           Reducing reagent. A 6 g/l solution of sodium tetrahydroborate R in a 5 g/l solution
           of sodium hydroxide R.

           The instrumental parameters in Table 11 may be used.

           Mercury
           Sample solution. Test solution or blank solution, as described above.

           Acid reagent. A 515 g/l solution of heavy metal-free hydrochloric acid R.

           Reducing reagent. A 10 g/l solution of stannous chloride R or sodium tetrahydroborate
           in dilute hydrochloric acid R.

           The instrumental parameters in Table 11 may be used.

Table 11. Instrumental parameters for determination of arsenic and mercury
                                                                 As                     Hg
 Wavelength                                   nm                193.7                 253.7
 Slit width                                   nm                 0.2                   0.5
 Hollow-cathode lamp current                  mA                 10                     4
 Acid reagent ﬂow rate                    ml/minute              1.0                   1.0
 Reducing reagent ﬂow rate                ml/minute              1.0                   1.0
 Sample solution ﬂow rate                 ml/minute              7.0                   7.0
 Absorption cell                                           Quartz (heated)      Quartz (unheated)
 Background corrector                                            on                    on
 Nitrogen ﬂow rate                        litre/minute           0.1                   0.1
 Heating                                                       800 °C                100 °C




                                                                                                  73
74
                                                              Determination of microorganisms




             18. Determination of microorganisms

Total viable aerobic count
       The total viable aerobic count (TVC) of the herbal material being examined is
       determined, as speciﬁed in the test procedure below, using one of the following
       methods: membrane-ﬁltration, plate count or serial dilution. Aerobic bacteria and
       fungi (moulds and yeasts) are determined by the TVC.

       Usually a maximum permitted level is set for certain products, but when the TVC
       exceeds this level then it is unnecessary to proceed with determination of speciﬁc
       organisms; the material should be rejected without being subjected to further
       testing.


       Pretreatment of the test herbal material
       Depending on the nature of the crude herbal material, grind, dissolve, dilute,
       suspend or emulsify it using a suitable method and eliminate any antimicrobial
       properties by dilution, neutralization or ﬁltration. Either phosphate buffer pH 7.2;
       buffered sodium chloride-peptone solution, pH 7.0; or ﬂuid medium, used for the
       test, is used to suspend or dilute the test specimen.

       Some materials have special requirements, which have to be met for acceptable
       pretreatment to be performed. Some examples are as follows:

       Materials containing tannins, antimicrobial substances
       Some herbal preparations present difﬁculties in determining levels of microbes
       (e.g. those containing high contents of tannins or essential oils). When test
       specimens have antimicrobial activity or contain antimicrobial substances, any
       such antimicrobial properties are removed as mentioned above. For the test, use a
       mixture of several portions selected at random from the bulk or from the contents
       of a sufﬁcient number of containers. If the test specimens are diluted with ﬂuid
       medium, the test should be performed quickly.

       Water-soluble materials
       Dissolve or dilute 10 g or 10 ml of plant material, unless otherwise speciﬁed in
       the test procedure for the material concerned, in lactose broth or another suitable
       medium proven to have no antimicrobial activity under the conditions of the test.
       Adjust the volume to 100 ml with the same medium (Note that some materials may
       require the use of larger volumes). If necessary, adjust the pH of the suspension to
       about 7.

       Non-fatty materials insoluble in water
       Suspend 10 g or 10 ml of the herbal material, unless otherwise speciﬁed in the test
       procedure for the material concerned, in lactose broth or another suitable medium
       proven to have no antimicrobial activity under the conditions of the test; dilute to
       100 ml with the same medium (Note that some materials may require the use of a


                                                                                          75
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          larger volume). If necessary, divide the material and homogenize the suspension
          mechanically. A suitable surfactant, such as a solution of polysorbate 20 R or 80 R
          containing 1 mg per ml may be added to aid dissolution. If necessary, adjust the
          pH of the suspension to about 7.

          Fatty materials
          Homogenize 10 g or 10 ml of material, unless otherwise speciﬁed in the test
          procedure for the material concerned, with 5 g of polysorbate 20 R or 80 R. If
          necessary, heat to a temperature not exceeding 40 °C (Occasionally, it may be
          necessary to heat to a temperature of up to 45 °C, for the shortest possible time).
          Mix carefully while maintaining the temperature in a water-bath or oven. Add
          85 ml of lactose broth or another suitable medium proven to have no antimicrobial
          activity under the conditions of the test, if necessary heated to a temperature not
          exceeding 40 °C. Maintain this temperature for the shortest time necessary until an
          emulsion is formed and, in any case, for not more than 30 minutes. If necessary,
          adjust the pH of the emulsion to about 7.


          Test procedures
          Plate count
          For bacteria use Petri dishes 9–10 cm in diameter. To one dish add a mixture of
          1 ml of the pre-treated herbal material and about 15 ml of liqueﬁed casein-soybean
          digest agar at a temperature not exceeding 45 °C. Alternatively, spread the material
          on the surface of the solidiﬁed medium in a Petri dish. If necessary, dilute the
          material to obtain an expected colony count of not more than 300. Prepare at least
          two dishes using the same dilution, invert them and incubate them at 30–35 °C for
          48–72 hours, unless a more reliable count is obtained in a shorter period of time.
          Count the number of colonies formed and calculate the results using the plate with
          the largest number of colonies, up to a maximum of 300.

          For fungi use Petri dishes 9–10 cm in diameter. To one dish add a mixture of 1 ml
          of the pretreated material and about 15 ml of liqueﬁed Sabouraud glucose agar with
          antibiotics (also used is potato dextrose agar with antibiotics) at a temperature not
          exceeding 45 °C. Alternatively, spread the pretreated material on the surface of
          the solidiﬁed medium in a Petri dish. If necessary, dilute the material as described
          above to obtain an expected colony count of not more than 100. Prepare at least
          two dishes using the same dilution and incubate them upright at 20–25 °C for
          5 days, unless a more reliable count is obtained in a shorter period of time. Count
          the number of colonies formed and calculate the results using the dish with not
          more than 100 colonies.

          Membrane ﬁltration
          Use membrane ﬁlters with a nominal pore size of not greater than 0.45 μm, and
          with a proven effectiveness at retaining bacteria (e.g. cellulose nitrate ﬁlters are
          used for aqueous, oily and weakly alcoholic solutions, whereas cellulose acetate
          ﬁlters are better for strongly alcoholic solutions). The technique below uses
          ﬁlter discs of about 50 mm in diameter. Where ﬁlters of a different diameter are
          used, adjust the volumes of the dilutions and washings accordingly. Sterilize, by
          appropriate means, the ﬁltration apparatus and the membrane, as the solution is
          introduced, ﬁltered and examined under aseptic conditions, and the membrane is
          then transferred to the culture medium.


76
                                                                               Determination of microorganisms



            The detailed method
            Transfer 10 ml or a solution containing 1 g of the material to each of two membrane
            ﬁlter apparatuses and ﬁlter immediately. If necessary, dilute the pretreated material
            to obtain an expected colony count of 10–100. Wash each membrane, ﬁltering three or
            more successive quantities of approximately 100 ml of a suitable liquid such as buffered
            sodium chloride-peptone solution at pH 7.0. For fatty materials, a suitable surfactant
            may be added, such as Polysorbate 20 R or 80 R. Transfer one of the membrane ﬁlters,
            intended primarily for the enumeration of bacteria, to the surface of a plate with
            soybean-casein digest agar and the other, intended primarily for the enumeration of
            fungi, to the surface of a plate with Sabouraud glucose agar with antibiotics. Incubate the
            plates for 5 days, unless a more reliable count can be obtained otherwise, at 30–35 °C
            for the detection of bacteria and at 20–25 °C for the detection of fungi. Count the
            number of colonies formed. Calculate the number of microorganisms per gram or per
            ml of the material tested, if necessary counting bacteria and fungi separately.

            Serial dilution
            Prepare a series of 12 tubes each containing 9–10 ml of soybean-casein digest medium.
            To each of the:
            — ﬁrst group of three tubes, add 1 ml of the 1:10 dilution of dissolved, homogenized
              material (containing 0.1 g or 0.1 ml of specimen) prepared as described later
              in the section on “Test procedure for the Enterobacteriaceae and certain other
              Gram-negative bacteria”, below);
            — second group of three tubes, add 1 ml of a 1:100 dilution of the material;
            — third group of three tubes, add 1 ml of a 1:1000 dilution of the material;
            — last three tubes, add 1 ml of the diluent.

             Incubate the tubes at 30–35 °C for at least 5 days. No microbial growth should appear in
             the last three tubes. If the reading of the results is difﬁcult or uncertain, owing to the nature
             of the material being examined, prepare a subculture in a liquid or a solid medium, and
             evaluate the results after a further period of incubation. Determine the most probable
             number of microorganisms per gram or per ml of the material using Table 12.

             If, for the ﬁrst column, the number of tubes showing microbial growth is two or less,
             the most probable number of microorganisms per g or per ml is less than 100 (Table 12).

Table 12. Determination of total viable aerobic count
                  Number of tubes with microbial growtha
                                                                         Most probable number of microorganisms
         100 mg or                10 mg or                1 mg or                      per g or ml
      0.1 ml per tube         0.01 ml per tube       0.001 ml per tube
             3                       3                       3                           >1100
             3                       3                       2                            1100
             3                       3                       1                             500
             3                       3                       0                             200
             3                       2                       3                             290
             3                       2                       2                             210
             3                       2                       1                             150
             3                       2                       0                              90
             3                       1                       3                             160
             3                       1                       2                             120
             3                       1                       1                              70
             3                       1                       0                              40
             3                       0                       3                              95
             3                       0                       2                              60
             3                       0                       1                              40
             3                       0                       0                              23
a
    Amounts in mg or ml are quantities of original plant material.



                                                                                                             77
Quality control methods for herbal materials



        Effectiveness of the culture medium, conﬁrmation of antimicrobial
        substances and validity of the counting method
          The following strains are normally used (see also chapter 21):

          Staphylococcus aureus           NCIMB 8625 (ATCC 6538-P, CIP 53.156) or NCIMB 9518
                                          (ATCC 6538, CIP 4.83, IFO 13276)
          Bacillus subtilis               NCIMB 8054 (ATCC 6633, CIP 52.62, IFO 3134)
          Escherichia coli                NCIMB 8545 (ATCC 8739, CIP 53.126, IFO 3972)
          Candida albicans                ATCC 2091 (CIP 1180.79, IFO 1393) or ATCC 10 231
                                          (NCPF 3179, CIP 48.72, IFO 1594)
          Clostridia botulinum            ATCC 19297 (NCTC 7272)
          Clostridium perfringens         ATCC 13124 (NCTC 8239)
          Clostridium tetani              ATCC e19406 (NCTC 279)

          Allow the test strains to grow separately in tubes containing soybean-casein digest
          medium at 30–35 °C for 18–24 hours for aerobic bacteria and between 20–25 °C for
          Candida albicans, for 48 hours (Antibiotics are often added to the culture medium
          to attain a particular selectivity).

          Dilute portions of each of the cultures using buffered sodium chloride-peptone
          solution, pH 7.0 or phosphate buffer, pH 7.2 to prepare test suspensions containing
          50–200 viable colony forming units (cfu) (microorganisms) per ml. Growth-
          promoting qualities are tested by inoculating 1 ml of each microorganism into each
          medium. The test media are satisfactory if clear evidence of growth appears in
          all the inoculated media after incubation at the indicated temperature for 5 days.
          When a count of test organisms with a test specimen is less than one ﬁfth of that
          without the test specimen, any such effect must be eliminated by dilution, ﬁltration,
          neutralization or inactivation.

          To conﬁrm the sterility of the medium and of the diluent and the aseptic performance
          of the test, follow the TVC method using sterile buffered sodium chloride-peptone
          solution, pH 7.0, or phosphate buffer, pH 7.2, as a control. There should be no
          growth of microorganisms.

          To validate the method, a count for the test organism should be obtained differing
          by not more than a factor of 10 from the calculated value for the inoculum.


Tests for speciﬁc microorganisms

          Microbial tests should be applied to starting plant materials, intermediate and
          ﬁnished products where necessary. Enterobacteria and certain other Gram-negative
          bacteria Escherichia coli, Salmonella and Staphylococcus aureus are included as target
          strains of the test.

          The conditions of the tests for microbial contamination are designed to
          minimize accidental contamination of the materials being examined and the
          precautions taken must not adversely affect any microorganisms that could be
          revealed.


78
                                                                        Determination of microorganisms



         Pretreatment of the material being examined
         Refer to the sampling and preparation of the test solution in TVC (see ”Test
         procedures” above), including the elimination of any antimicrobial substances
         which may be present.


         Test procedure for the Enterobacteriaceae and certain other
         Gram-negative bacteria
         Detection of bacteria
         Homogenize the pretreated material appropriately and incubate at 30–37 °C for
         a length of time sufﬁcient for reviviﬁcation of the bacteria, but not sufﬁcient for
         multiplication of the organisms (usually 2–5 hours). Shake the container, transfer
         aliquots equivalent to 1 g or 1 ml of the homogenized material to 100 ml of
         Enterobacteriaceae enrichment broth Mossel and incubate at 35–37 °C for 18–48 hours.
         Prepare a subculture on a plate with violet-red bile agar with glucose and lactose.
         Incubate at 35–37 °C for 18–48 hours. The material passes the test if no growth of
         colonies of Gram-negative bacteria is detected on the plate.

         Quantitative evaluation
         Inoculate a suitable amount of Enterobacteriaceae enrichment broth Mossel with
         quantities of homogenized material prepared as described in the above section on
         “Detection of bacteria”, appropriately diluted as necessary, to contain 1 g, 0.1 g and
         10 μg, or 1 ml, 0.1 ml and 10 μl, of the material being examined. Incubate at 35–37 °C
         for 24–48 hours. Prepare a subculture of each of the cultures on a plate with violet-
         red bile agar with glucose and lactose in order to obtain selective isolation. Incubate at
         35–37 °C for 18–24 hours. The growth of well-developed colonies, generally red or
         reddish in colour, of Gram-negative bacteria constitutes a positive result. Note the
         smallest quantity of material that gives a positive result. Determine the probable
         number of bacteria using Table 13.


Table 13. Determination of Enterobacteriaceae and certain other Gram-negative bacteria
             Result for each quantity or volume               Probable number of bacteria
                                                              per g of material
  1.0 g or 1.0 ml      0.1 g or 0.1 ml    0.01 g or 0.01 ml
        +                    +                    +           More than 102
        +                    +                    –           Less than 102 but more than 10
        +                    –                    –           Less than 10 but more than 1
        –                    –                    –           Less than 1


         Escherichia coli
         Transfer a quantity of the homogenized material in lactose broth, prepared and
         incubated as described above, and containing 1 g or 1 ml of the material being
         examined, to 100 ml of MacConkey broth and incubate at 43–45 °C for 18–24 hours.

         Prepare a subculture on a plate with MacConkey agar and incubate at 43–45 °C for
         18–24 hours. Growth of red, generally non-mucoid colonies of Gram-negative rods,
         sometimes surrounded by a reddish zone of precipitation, indicates the possible
         presence of E. coli. This may be conﬁrmed by the formation of indole at 43.5–44.5 °C
         or by other biochemical reactions. The material passes the test if no such colonies
         are detected or if the conﬁrmatory biochemical reactions are negative.


                                                                                                    79
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Salmonella spp.
          Incubate the solution, suspension or emulsion of the pretreated material prepared
          as described above at 35–37 °C for 5–24 hours, as appropriate for enrichment.

          Primary test
          Transfer 10 ml of the enrichment culture to 100 ml of tetrathionate bile brilliant green
          broth and incubate at 42–43 °C for 18–24 hours. Prepare subcultures on at least two
          of the following three agar media: deoxycholate citrate agar; xylose, lysine, deoxycholate
          agar; and brilliant green agar. Incubate at 35–37 °C for 24–48 hours. Carry out the
          secondary test if any colonies are produced that conform to the description given
          in Table 14.

          Secondary test
          Prepare a subculture of any colonies showing the characteristics described in
          Table 14 on the surface of triple sugar iron agar using the deep inoculation technique.
          This is done by ﬁrst inoculating the inclined surface of the culture medium,
          followed by a stab culture with the same inoculating needle and then, incubating
          at 35–37 °C for 18–24 hours. The test is positive for the presence of Salmonella spp. if
          a change of colour from red to yellow is observed in the deep culture (but not in the
          surface culture), usually with the formation of gas with or without production of
          hydrogen sulﬁde in the agar. Conﬁrmation is obtained by appropriate biochemical
          and serological tests.

          The material being examined passes the test if cultures of the type described do
          not appear in the primary test, or if the conﬁrmatory biochemical and serological
          tests are negative.

Table 14. Description of Salmonella colonies appearing on different culture media
 Medium                                        Description of colony
 Deoxycholate citrate agar                     Well-developed, colourless
 Xylose, lysine, deoxycholate agar             Well-developed, red, with or without black centres
 Brilliant green agar                          Small, transparent and colourless, or opaque, pink or white
                                               (frequently surrounded by a pink to red zone)


          Pseudomonas aeruginosa
          Pretreat the material being examined as described under “Pretreatment of the test
          herbal material”, above, but using buffered sodium chloride-peptone solution, pH
          7.0, or another suitable medium shown not to have antimicrobial activity under
          the conditions of the test, in place of lactose broth. Inoculate 100 ml of soybean-
          casein digest medium with a quantity of the solution, suspension or emulsion thus
          obtained containing 1 g or 1 ml of the material being examined. Mix and incubate
          at 35–37 °C for 24–48 hours. Prepare a subculture on a plate of cetrimide agar and
          incubate at 35–37 °C for 24–48 hours. If no growth of microorganisms is detected,
          the material passes the test. If growth of colonies of Gram-negative rods occurs,
          usually with a greenish ﬂuorescence, apply an oxidase test and test the growth in
          soybean-casein digest medium at 42 °C. The following method may be used. Place
          2 or 3 drops of a freshly prepared 0.01 g/ml solution of N,N,N’,N’-tetramethyl-
          p-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride R on a ﬁlter paper and apply a smear of
          the suspected colony; the test is positive if a purple colour is produced within
          5–10 seconds. The material passes the test if cultures of the type described do not
          appear or if the conﬁrmatory biochemical test is negative.


80
                                                                            Determination of microorganisms



            Staphylococcus aureus
            Prepare an enrichment culture as described for Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Prepare a
            subculture on a suitable medium such as Baird-Parker agar. Incubate at 35–37 °C
            for 24–48 hours. The material passes the test if no growth of microorganisms is
            detected. Black colonies of Gram-positive cocci often surrounded by clear zones
            may indicate the presence of Staphylococcus aureus. For catalase-positive cocci,
            conﬁrmation may be obtained, for example, by coagulase and deoxyribonuclease
            tests. The material passes the test if cultures of the type described do not appear or
            if the conﬁrmatory biochemical test is negative.

            Clostridium spp.
            Add 10 g (10 ml) of the herbal materials, preparation or product to be examined
            to two suitable vessels, each containing 100 ml of cooked-meat medium, heated
            just prior to use, to 100 °C for a few minutes and cooled to 37 °C. To distinguish
            between sporing and non-sporing organisms, immediately seal one vessel with a
            layer of sterile parafﬁn or agar, heat the other vessel at 65 °C for 30 minutes, and
            then similarly seal.

            Incubate both vessels at 35–37 °C and examine every 24 hours for up to 4 days.
            Growth of sporing organisms occurs in the vessel which was heated after
            inoculation.

            If no growth occurs in either of the vessels, the sample passes the test for absence
            of Clostridia and other anaerobic bacteria.

            If sporing anaerobic organisms (Table 15) are found, inoculate the cultures, each in
            duplicate, on one half of the surface of plates containing 5% deﬁbrinated sheep blood
            agar medium. Incubate at 37 °C for 48 hours, one plate anaerobically and the other
            aerobically, to check that the organisms will not grow under aerobic conditions.

Table 15. Characteristics of Clostridium species on cooked-meat medium
 Clostridium botulinum                   Clostridium perfringens            Clostridium tetani
 No digestion of meat;                   No digestion of meat;              No digestion of meat;
 much gas, white sediment                meat turns pink colour             burnt organic smell


            After 24 and 48 hours examine the appearance of the colonies together with the type
            and extent of haemolysis, and also examine microscopically for spore formation
            using Gram stain or spore stain techniques. Match the result with the description
            in Table 16, for further identiﬁcation of speciﬁed clostridia.

Table 16. Characteristics of Clostridium species on 5% deﬁbrinated sheep blood agar
medium
                   Clostridium botulinum         Clostridium perfringens        Clostridium tetani
 Colonies          Irregular, translucent        Large, circular, convex,       Transparent with long
                   with a granular surface       semitranslucent, smooth        feathery spreading
                   and indeﬁnite ﬁmbriated       with an entire edge            projections
                   spreading edge
 Haemolysis        +                             Double zone                    +
 Spores            Oval, central, subterminal    Absent                         Spherical and terminal
                   distended bacilli                                            (drum stick)



                                                                                                         81
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Shigella
          The method described below is adapted from the WHO guidelines for the control
          of epidemics due to Shigella dysenteriae type 1.

          Direct inoculation of agar plates
          Use 2 or 3 loopfuls of the herbal materials, preparations or products to be tested.
          Incubate plates at 35–37 °C for 18–24 hours.

          Inoculate a general purpose plating medium of low selectivity and one of moderate
          or high selectivity. MacConkey agar is recommended as a medium of low selectivity.
          MacConkey agar with 1 mcg/ml of potassium tellurite has been reported to be
          particularly useful for S. dysenteriae type 1 (Sd1). Use a small inoculum. Incubate
          at 35–37 °C for 18–24 hours.

          Xylose-lysine-desoxycholate (XLD) agar is recommended as a medium of moderate or
          high selectivity for isolation of Shigella. Desoxycholate citrate agar (DCA) is a suitable
          alternative.

          Note: Do not use salmonella–shigella (SS) agar, as it often inhibits growth of Sd1.

          Each new batch of medium should be controlled for quality before routine use by
          inoculating it with known reference strains and observing their growth and colony
          characteristics.

          Identiﬁcation of colonies on plating media
          Colonies suspicious for Shigella will appear as follows:

          — MacConkey agar: convex, colourless, 2–3 mm;
          — XLD agar: red, smooth, 1–2 mm;
          — DCA agar: colourless, translucent, 2–3 mm.

          Identify well-separated colonies of typical appearance to be transferred from each
          of the plating media for further testing by making a mark on the bottom of the
          Petri dish.

          Whenever possible a person experienced in the identiﬁcation of Shigella should
          train laboratory workers who are unfamiliar with its identiﬁcation.

          Inoculation of Kligler iron agar
          Pick three characteristic colonies from the plating media and inoculate into Kligler
          iron agar (KIA) as follows: stab the butt and then streak the slant with a zigzag
          conﬁguration. Pay attention to proper labelling of the tubes. If screw-cap KIA tubes
          are used, make sure that the caps are loose. Incubate overnight. On the following
          morning, examine the reactions in the KIA tubes. Tubes suspicious for Shigella will
          have an acid (yellow) butt and an alkaline (red) slant. They will not produce gas
          (no bubbles or cracks in the agar) and will not produce hydrogen sulﬁde (no black
          along the stab line).

          Triple sugar iron agar (TSI) can also be used for the identiﬁcation of Shigella. It will
          give the same reactions as KIA.



82
                                                                           Determination of microorganisms



              Validation of the tests for speciﬁc microorganisms
              If necessary, grow separately the test strains listed in Table 17 on the culture media
              indicated, at 30–35 °C for 18–24 hours. Dilute portions of each of the cultures using
              buffered sodium chloride-peptone solution pH 7.0 so that the test suspensions
              contain about 103 microorganisms per ml. Mix equal volumes of each suspension
              and use 0.4 ml (approximately 102 microorganisms of each strain) as an inoculum in
              tests for Escherichia coli, Salmonella spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Staphylococcus
              aureus, in the presence of the material being examined, if necessary. The test method
              should give a positive result for the respective strain of microorganism.

Table 17. Validation of tests for detection of speciﬁc microorganisms in the herbal sample
    Microorganism             Strain numbera                                    Medium

    Escherichia coli          e.g. NCIMB 8545                                   lactose broth
                              (ATCC 8739, CIP 53.126, IFO 3972)
    Pseudomonas aeruginosa    e.g. NCIMB 8626                                   soybean-casein digest
                              (ATCC 9027, CIP 82.118)                           medium
    Salmonella typhimurium    No strain number is recommended. Species not      lactose broth
                              pathogenic for humans, such as Salmonella abony
                              (NCTC 6017, CIP 80.39), may be used
    Clostridium botulinum     e.g. ATCC 19297 (NCTC 7272)                       cooked-meat medium
    Clostridium perfringens   e.g. ATCC 13124 (NCTC 8239)                       cooked-meat medium
    Clostridium tetani        e.g. ATCC e19406 (NCTC 279)                       cooked-meat medium
    Staphylococcus aureus     e.g. NCIMB 8625                                   soybean-casein digest
                              (ATCC 6538 P, CIP 53.156) or NCIMB 9518           medium
                              (ATCC 6538, CIP 4.83, IFO 13276)
a
     See chapter 21.


              For other microorganisms see overview under ”Effectiveness of the culture
              medium, conﬁrmation of antimicrobial substances and validity of the counting
              method” (see p. 78).




                                                                                                        83
84
                                                                           Determination of aﬂatoxins




                              19. Determination of aﬂatoxins

       Whenever testing for aﬂatoxins is required, this should be done after using a
       suitable clean-up procedure during which great care should be taken not to
       expose any personnel or the working or general environment to these dangerous
       and toxic substances. Thus Member States should adapt their good practices for
       pharmaceutical control laboratories and good manufacturing practices (GMP)
       accordingly. Only products that have a history of aﬂatoxin contamination need
       to be tested.

Tests for aﬂatoxins
       These tests are designed to detect the possible presence of aﬂatoxins B1, B2, G1 and
       G2, which are highly toxic contaminants in any material of plant origin.

       Recommended procedure
       The method described below does not require the use of toxic solvents, such as
       chloroform and dichloromethane. It uses a multifunctional column, which contains
       lipophilic and charged active sites, and high-performance liquid chromatography
       (HPLC) using ﬂuorescence detection to determine aﬂatoxins B1, B2, G1 and G2. The
       advantages of employing a multifunctional column are:

       — high total recoveries of aﬂatoxins B1, B2, G1 and G2 (more than 85%);
       — the column can be kept (stocked) at room temperature and for a fairly long time
         prior to use.

       Standard solutions of aﬂatoxin B1, B2, G1 and G2 (2.5 ng/ml)
       Stock standard solution. Weigh exactly 1.0 mg each of crystalline material of aﬂatoxins
       B1, B2, G1 and G2 and dissolve in 50 ml of toluene-acetonitrile (9:1) solution by
       shaking vigorously in a glass ﬂask to obtain a standard stock solution (20 μg/ml).
       This standard solution should be kept in a tightly sealed container, covered with
       aluminium foil, and kept in a refrigerator at 4 °C in the dark.

       Working standard solution. 0.5 ml of stock standard solution is added to toluene-
       acetonitrile (9:1) solution to give 200 ml (working standard solution (50 ng/ml).

       Standard solution. Take 1.0 ml of working standard solution and add to toluene-
       acetonitrile (9:1) solution to give 20 ml (ﬁnal standard solution (2.5 ng/ml).

       Standard solution for liquid chromatography analysis. Transfer 0.25 ml of the ﬁnal
       standard solution (as described above) into a glass centrifuge tube and evaporate
       to dryness at 40 °C or by using a nitrogen air stream. To derivatize1 aﬂatoxins B1 and
       G1 (precolumn derivatization), add 0.1 ml of triﬂuoroacetic acid (TFA) solution to
       the residue in the tube, tightly seal the tube and shake vigorously. Allow the tube to
       1
           BCR reference material CRM No. 62 Community Bureau of Reference, obtainable from BCR,
           Directorate-General X11, Commission of the European Communities, 200 rue de la Loi, B-1049
           Brussels, Belgium.



                                                                                                  85
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          stand at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. Add 0.4 ml of acetonitrile:water
          (1:9) solution to the tube. A 20-μl portion of the sample solution in the tube is
          subjected to liquid chromatography analysis.

          Preparation of sample
          Grind the herbal material for testing to a uniform consistency using a coffee mill,
          and extract a 50-g test sample with 400 ml of acetonitrile-water (9:1) by shaking
          vigorously in a glass ﬂask ﬁtted with a stopper for 30 minutes or by using a
          mechanical blender for 5 minutes. Filter the solution through a ﬁlter paper
          or centrifuge. Transfer a 5-ml portion of the ﬁltrate, or the top clean layer, to a
          multifunctional column (such as a MultiSep #228 cartridge column (Romer Labs)
          or an Autoprep MF-A [Showa-denko]) and pass through at a ﬂow rate of 1 ml/
          minute. The aﬂatoxins present in a sample are passed through the column as the
          ﬁrst eluate. Obtain the ﬁrst 1-ml of the eluate as the test solution.

          Evaporate 0.5 ml of the test solution in a glass centrifuge tube to dryness at 40 °C
          or by using a nitrogen air stream to remove solvent.

          To derivatize aﬂatoxins B1 and G1 (precolumn derivatization), add 0.1 ml of
          triﬂuoroacetic acid (TFA) solution to the residue in the tube, tightly seal the tube
          and shake vigorously. Allow the tube to stand at room temperature for 15 minutes
          in the dark. Add 0.4 ml of acetonitrile-water (1:9) solution to the tube. Subject a
          20-μl portion of the sample solution in the tube to liquid chromatography analysis.

          Method
          Liquid chromatography conditions
          The mobile phase is acetonitrile-methanol-water (1:3:6).1 De-gas the mobile phase by
          sonication. Connect an octadecyl-silica gel (ODS) column (4.6 mm inner diameter (ID)
          × 250 mm, 3–5 μm), such as Inertsil ODS-3 (4.6 mm ID × 250 mm, 3 μm) as the liquid
          chromatography column. Maintain the column at 40 °C with a ﬂow rate of 1 ml/
          minute. The aﬂatoxin and its derivatives are detected at the excitation and emission
          wavelengths of 365 nm and 450 nm, respectively. The injection volume is 20 μl.

          If an impurity peak overlaps the peaks corresponding to aﬂatoxins, the alternative
          liquid chromatography conditions, described below, are recommended.

          Alternative liquid chromatography conditions
          The mobile phase is methanol-water (3:7). De-gas the mobile phase by sonication.
          Connect a ﬂuorocarbonated column, such as Wako-pack Fluoﬁx 120E (4.6 mm ID ×
          250 mm, 5 μm) as the liquid chromatography column. Maintain the column at 40 °C
          with a ﬂow rate of 1 ml/minute. The aﬂatoxin and its derivatives are detected at
          the excitation and emission wavelengths of 365 nm and 450 nm, respectively. The
          injection volume is 20 μl.

          Interpretation of the results
          Compare the retention time of peak area or peak heights of the aﬂatoxin under
          study in the chromatograms. If they are bigger or higher than those obtained in a
          standard solution of the aﬂatoxin under investigation, it should be regarded as a
          positive result for the presence of aﬂatoxin in the sample solution.
          1
              If the sample solution contains a lot of impurity, the column should be washed by acetonitrile for
              5–10 min and reconditioned with the mobile phase for 10 min before the next analysis.



86
                                                                     Radioactive contamination




                        20. Radioactive contamination

Following a severe nuclear accident, the environment may be contaminated with
airborne radioactive materials. These may deposit on the leaves of medicinal
plants. Their activity concentration and the type of radioactive contamination can
be measured by the radiation monitoring laboratories of most of the WHO Member
States. The activity concentration of radioisotopes in herbs should be assessed by
the competent national radiohygiene laboratories taking into account the relevant
recommendations of international organizations, such as Codex Alimentarius,
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and WHO.

Since radionuclides from accidental discharges vary with the type of facility
involved, a generalized method of measurement is not yet available. However,
should such contamination be a concern, suspect samples can be analysed by
a competent laboratory. Details of laboratory techniques are available from the
IAEA.1




1
    International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Analytical Quality Control Services, Laboratory
    Seibersdorf, PO Box 100, Vienna, Austria.



                                                                                           87
88
                                        Culture media and strains used for microbiological analysis




                  21. Culture media and strains used
                          for microbiological analysis

Culture media
      The following media are satisfactory, but other media may be used if they have
      similar nutritive and selective properties for the microorganisms to be tested. See
      chapter 23 for the list of reagents and solutions.

      Baird–Parker agar
      Procedure. Dissolve 10 g of pancreatic digest of casein R, 5 g of beef extract R, 1g
      of water-soluble yeast extract R, 5 g of lithium chloride R, 20 g of agar R, 12 g of
      glycine R and 10 g of sodium pyruvate R in sufﬁcient water to produce 950 ml.
      Heat to boiling for 1 minute, shaking frequently and adjust the pH to 6.6–7.0 using
      sodium hydroxide (0.5 mol/l) VS. Sterilize in an autoclave at 121 °C for 15 minutes,
      cool to 45–50 °C and add 10 ml of a sterile 0.01 g/ml solution of potassium tellurite
      R and 50 ml of egg-yolk emulsion.

      Brilliant green agar
      Procedure. Dissolve 10 g of dried peptone R (meat and casein), 3 g of water-
      soluble yeast extract R, 5 g of sodium chloride R, 10 g of lactose R, 10 g of sucrose
      R, 20 g of agar R, 0.08 g of phenol red R and 12.5 mg of brilliant green R in
      sufﬁcient water to produce 1000 ml. Heat to boiling for 1 minute. Using sodium
      hydroxide (0.05 mol/l) VS, adjust the pH to 6.7–7.1. Immediately before use,
      sterilize in an autoclave at 121 °C for 15 minutes, cool to 50 °C and pour into
      Petri dishes.

      Buffered sodium chloride–peptone solution pH 7.0
      Procedure. Dissolve 3.56 g of potassium dihydrogen phosphate R, 7.23 g of
      disodium hydrogen phosphate R, 4.30 g of sodium chloride R and 1 g of dried
      peptone R (meat and casein) in sufﬁcient water to produce 1000 ml. Polysorbate
      20 R or polysorbate 80 R may be added, 0.001–0.01 g/ml. Sterilize in an autoclave
      at 121 °C for 15 minutes.

      Casein–soybean digest agar
      Procedure. Dissolve 15 g of pancreatic digest of casein R, 3 g of papaic digest of
      soybean meal R, 5 g of sodium chloride R and 15 g of agar R in sufﬁcient water
      to produce 1000 ml. Using sodium hydroxide (0.05 mol/l) VS, adjust the pH to
      7.1–7.5. Sterilize in an autoclave at 121 °C for 15 minutes.

      Cetrimide agar
      Procedure. Dissolve 20 g of pancreatic digest of gelatin R, 1.4 g of magnesium
      chloride R, 10 g of potassium sulfate R, 0.3 g of cetrimide R, 13.6 g of agar R and
      10 ml of glycerol R in sufﬁcient water to produce 1000 ml. Heat to boiling for
      1 minute with shaking. Using sodium hydroxide (0.05 mol/l) VS, adjust the pH to
      7.0–7.4. Sterilize in an autoclave at 121 °C for 15 minutes.



                                                                                                89
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Cooked-meat medium
          Procedure
          Part I: Mix 454.0 g of ground beef heart (fat free) with 1000 ml of water (use
          puriﬁed water) and add 25 ml of 1 M sodium hydroxide. Heat to boiling and
          simmer for 20 minutes with frequent stirring. Cool and check the pH, which
          should be about 7.2; adjust it if necessary. Filter through several layers of gauze;
          squeeze out the excess liquid. Spread the meat particles to partially dry and place
          in suitable vessels.

          Part II: Filter the ﬂuid obtained from part I through three pieces of coarse ﬁlter
          paper to clarify. Then ﬁlter through one piece of ﬁner ﬁlter paper (Whatman No. 1
          or equivalent is suitable). Dissolve the following ingredients in the ﬁltrate: peptic
          digest of animal tissues (20.0 g), dextrose monohydrate (2.0 g), and sodium chloride
          (5.0 g). Adjust the volume to 1000 ml with water (use puriﬁed water). Add the ﬂuid
          to the vessels, using about four to ﬁve parts of the ﬂuid to one part of the meat. pH
          after sterilization: 7.2 +/- 0.1.

          Deﬁbrinated sheep blood agar medium (ﬁve per cent) (blood agar medium)
          Procedure. Heat casein-soybean digest agar medium and cool to 45–50 °C in a
          water-bath. Add sufﬁcient amount of deﬁbrinated sheep blood to make 5 per cent
          and mix.

          Deoxycholate citrate agar
          Procedure. Dissolve 10 g of beef extract R, 10 g of dried peptone R (meat), 10 g
          of lactose R, 20 g of sodium citrate R, 1 g of iron (III) citrate R, 5 g of sodium
          deoxycholate, 13.5 g of agar R and 20 mg of neutral red R in sufﬁcient water to
          produce 1000 ml. Heat gently to boiling for 1 minute, cool to 50 °C and adjust the
          pH to 7.1–7.5 using sodium hydroxide (0.05 mol/l) VS. Pour into Petri dishes. Do
          not heat in an autoclave.

          Enterobacteriaceae enrichment broth (Mossel)
          Procedure. Dissolve 10 g of pancreatic digest of gelatin R, 5 g of glucose hydrate
          R, 20 g of dehydrated ox bile R, 2 g of potassium dihydrogen phosphate R, 8 g of
          disodium hydrogen phosphate R and 15 mg of brilliant green R in sufﬁcient water
          to produce 1000 ml. Heat to boiling for 30 minutes and cool immediately. Using
          sodium hydroxide (0.05 mol/l) VS adjust the pH to 7.0–7.4.

          Kligler’s iron agar (KIA)
          Procedure. Dissolve the agar in the meat infusion broth, or alternatively in
          meat extract broth, by heating in a boiling water-bath or in steam at 100° C.
          Bring the molten nutrient agar to 80 °C in a water-bath. Add and dissolve the
          lactose, peptone, proteose peptone, NaCl, glucose, ferrous sulfate, and sodium
          thiosulfate and mix well. Adjust the pH to 7.4. Add 6 ml of 0.5% solution of
          phenol red and mix well. Distribute in screw-cap tubes (15 × 150 or 16 × 160 mm)
          in 5–6 ml amounts and sterilize by autoclaving at 121 °C for 15 minutes. Allow
          the medium to cool and set with a slant of 2.5 cm and a butt 2.5 cm deep. Record
          batch number and date on the label and then store at room temperature not
          exceeding 25 °C.

          An additional 10 g of peptone, 3 g of beef extract, 3 g of yeast extract, and one litre
          of distilled water may be used in place of meat infusion broth.


90
                                   Culture media and strains used for microbiological analysis



Lactose broth
Procedure. Dissolve 3 g of beef extract R, 5 g of pancreatic digest of gelatin R and
5 g of lactose R in sufﬁcient water to produce 1000 ml. Using sodium hydroxide
(0.0 5 mol/l) VS adjust the pH to 6.7–7.1. Sterilize in an autoclave at 121 °C for
15 minutes.

MacConkey agar
Procedure. Dissolve 17 g of pancreatic digest of gelatin R, 3 g of dried peptone R
(meat and casein), 10 g of lactose R, 5 g of sodium chloride R, 1.5 g of bile salts R,
13.5 g of agar R, 30 mg of neutral red R and 1 mg of crystal violet R in sufﬁcient
water to produce 1000 ml. Using sodium hydroxide (0.05 mol/l) VS, adjust the pH
to 6.9–7.3. Heat to boiling for 1 minute with constant shaking then sterilize in an
autoclave at 121 °C for 15 minutes.

MacConkey broth
Procedure. Dissolve 20 g of pancreatic digest of gelatin R, 10 g of lactose R, 5 g
of dehydrated ox bile R and 10 mg of bromocresol purple R in sufﬁcient water
to produce 1000 ml. Using sodium hydroxide (0.05 mol/l) VS, adjust the pH to
7.1–7.5. Sterilize in an autoclave at 121 °C for 15 minutes.

Sabouraud glucose agar with antibiotics
Procedure. Dissolve 10 g of dried peptone R (meat and casein), 40 g of glucose
hydrate R and 15 g of agar R in sufﬁcient water to produce 1000 ml. Using acetic
acid (~60 g/l) TS, adjust the pH to 5.4–5.8. Sterilize in an autoclave at 121 °C for
15 minutes. Immediately before use, add sterile solutions of 0.10 g of benzylpenicillin
sodium R and 0.1 g of tetracycline R per litre of medium or, alternatively, before
sterilization add 0.05 g of chloramphenicol R per litre of medium.

Soybean-casein-digest medium
Procedure. Dissolve 17 g of pancreatic digest of casein R, 3 g of papaic digest
of soybean meal R, 5 g of sodium chloride R, 2.5 g of dipotassium hydrogen
phosphate R and 2.5 g of glucose hydrate R in sufﬁcient water to produce 1000 ml.
Using sodium hydroxide (0.05 mol/l) VS, adjust the pH to 7.1–7.5. Sterilize in an
autoclave at 121 °C for 15 minutes.

Tetrathionate bile brilliant green broth
Procedure. Dissolve 8.6 g of dried peptone R, 8 g of dehydrated ox bile R, 6.4 g of
sodium chloride R, 20 g of calcium carbonate RI, 20 g of potassium tetrathionate R
and 0.07 g of brilliant green R in sufﬁcient water to produce 1000 ml. Using sodium
hydroxide (0.05 mol/l) VS, adjust the pH to 6.8–7.2. Heat just to boiling; do not
reheat.

Triple sugar iron agar
Procedure. Dissolve 3 g of beef extract R, 3 g of water-soluble yeast extract, 20 g
of dried peptone R (casein and beef), 5 g of sodium chloride R, 10 g of lactose R,
10 g of sucrose R, 1 g of glucose hydrate R, 0.3 g of brown ammonium iron(III)
citrate R, 0.3 g of sodium thiosulfate R, 25 mg of phenol red R and 12 g of agar R
in sufﬁcient water to produce 1000 ml. Heat to boiling for 1 minute with shaking.
Using sodium hydroxide (0.05 mol/l) VS, adjust the pH to 7.2–7.6. Distribute in
tubes and sterilize in an autoclave at 121 °C for 15 minutes. Allow to set in an
inclined position covered with a butt.


                                                                                           91
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Violet-red bile agar with glucose and lactose
          Procedure. Dissolve 3.0 g of water-soluble yeast extract R, 7.0 g of pancreatic digest
          of gelatin R, 1.5 g of bile salts R, 10.0 g of lactose R, 5.0 g of sodium chloride R, 10.0 g
          of glucose hydrate R, 15.0 g of agar R, 30 mg of neutral red R and 2.0 mg of crystal
          violet R in sufﬁcient water to produce 1000 ml. Heat to boiling and adjust the pH
          to 7.2–7.6 using sodium hydroxide (0.05 mol/l) VS. Do not heat in an autoclave.

          Xylose, lysine, deoxycholate agar
          Procedure. Dissolve 3.5 g of xylose R, 5 g of L-lysine R, 7.5 g of lactose R, 7.5 g of
          sucrose R, 5 g of sodium chloride R, 3 g of water-soluble yeast extract R, 0.08 g of
          phenol red R, 13.5 g of agar R, 2.5 g of sodium deoxycholate R, 6.8 g of sodium
          thiosulfate R and 0.8 g of brown ammonium iron(III) citrate R in sufﬁcient water
          to produce 1000 ml. Using sodium hydroxide (0.05 mol/l) VS, adjust the pH to
          7.2–7.6. Heat just to boiling, cool to 50 °C and pour into Petri dishes. Do not heat
          in an autoclave.


Strains of microorganisms
          The microorganism strains referred to throughout the text are suitable, but others
          may be used if they have similar properties. The designations of the strains and the
          addresses from which they may be obtained are listed in Table 18.

Table 18. Addresses for obtaining strains of microorganism
 Designation           Address
 ATCC                  American Type Culture Collection, 12301 Park Lawn Drive, Rockville, MD 20852,
                       USA
 CIP                   Collection de l’Institut Pasteur, Service de la Collection Nationale de Cultures de
                       Microorganismes (CNCM), 25 rue du Docteur Roux, F 75015 Paris, France
 IFO                   Institute for Fermentation, Osaka (IFO) microorganism strains, The Culture
                       Collection Division, The NITE Biological Resource Center (NBRC), Department
                       of Biotechnology, National Institute of Technology and Evaluation (NITE), 2-5-8,
                       Kazusa-kamatari, Kisarazu City, Chiba 292-0818, Japan
 NCIMB                 National Collection of Industrial and Marine Bacteria, 23 St Machar Drive, Aberdeen
                       AB24 3RY, Scotland
 NCPF                  National Collection of Pathogenic Fungi, PHLS Mycology Reference Laboratory,
                       Public Health Laboratory, Kingsdown, Bristol BS2 8EL, England
 NCTC                  National Collection of Type Cultures, Central Public Health Laboratory,
                       61 Colindale Avenue, London NW9 5HT, England




92
                           Speciﬁcations for adsorbents for use in thin-layer chromatography




            22. Speciﬁcations for adsorbents
        for use in thin-layer chromatography

Cellulose
Description. A ﬁne, white, homogeneous powder with an average particle size of
less than 30 μm.

Preparation. Suspend 15 g in 100 ml of water and homogenize for 60 seconds in
an electric mixer. Carefully coat cleaned plates with a layer 0.25 mm thick using a
spreading device. Allow the coated plates to dry in air.

Separating power. Apply separately to the adsorbent layer 10 μl of 0.25 mg/ml
solutions containing respectively brilliant black BN R, amaranth SR, fast yellow
AB R and tropaeolin O R in a mixture of equal volumes of methanol R and water.
Develop the plate using a mixture of 50 volumes of 1-propanol R, 10 volumes of
ethyl acetate R and 40 volumes of water over a distance of 10 cm. The chromatogram
shows four clearly separated spots.

Cellulose, microcrystalline
Description. A ﬁne, white, homogeneous powder with an average particle size of
less than 30 μm.

Preparation. Suspend 25 g in 90 ml of water and homogenize for 60 seconds in an
electric mixer. Carefully coat cleaned plates with a layer 0.25 mm thick using a
spreading device. Allow the coated plates to dry in air.

Separating power. Apply separately to the adsorbent layer 10 μl of 0.25 mg/ml
solutions containing respectively brilliant black BN R, amaranth S R, fast yellow
R and tropaeolin O R in a mixture of equal volumes of methanol R and water.
Develop the plate using a mixture of 50 volumes of 1-propanol R, 10 volumes of
ethyl acetate R and 40 volumes of water over a distance of 10 cm. The chromatogram
shows four clearly separated spots.

Cellulose F254
Description. A ﬁne, white, homogeneous powder with an average particle size of less
than 30 μm containing a ﬂuorescent indicator with an optimal intensity at 254 nm.

Preparation. Suspend 25 g in 100 ml of water and homogenize for 60 seconds using
an electric mixer. Carefully coat cleaned plates with a layer 0.25 mm thick using a
spreading device. Allow the coated plates to dry in air.

Separating power. Apply separately to the adsorbent layer 10 μl of 0.25 mg/ml
solutions containing respectively brilliant black BN R, amaranth S R, fast yellow
R and tropaeolin O R in a mixture of equal volumes of methanol R and water.
Develop the plate using a mixture of 50 volumes of 1-propanol R, 10 volumes of




                                                                                         93
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          ethyl acetate R and 40 volumes of water over a distance of 10 cm. The chromatogram
          shows four clearly separated spots.

          Fluorescence. Prepare a 1.0 mg/ml solution of benzoic acid R in a mixture of
          9 volumes of 2-propanol R and 1 volume of formic acid (~1080g/l) TS. Apply to the
          adsorbent layer at 10 points of application, increasing the quantities of the solution
          from 1 μl to 10 μl. Develop the chromatogram using a mixture of 9 volumes of
          2-propanol R and 1 volume of formic acid (~1080g/l) TS. Allow the solvents to
          evaporate and examine the chromatogram in ultraviolet light at 254 nm. The
          benzoic acid appears as dark spots on a ﬂuorescent background in the upper third
          of the chromatogram for amounts of 2 μg and more.


          Kieselguhr G
          Description. A ﬁne, greyish white powder with an average particle size of between
          10 and 40 μm containing about 150 g of calcium sulfate, hemihydrate per kg
          (The grey colour becomes more pronounced when the powder is triturated with
          water).

          Content of calcium sulfate. Place about 0.25 g, accurately weighed, in a ﬂask with
          a ground-glass stopper, add 3 ml of hydrochloric acid (~70 g/l) TS and 100 ml of
          water and shake vigorously for 30 minutes. Filter through a sintered-glass ﬁlter
          and wash the residue. Using the combined ﬁltrate and washings, carry out the
          assay for calcium by complexometry (5). Each ml of disodium edetate (0.05 mol/l)
          VS is equivalent to 7.26 mg of CaSO4, 1/2H2O (Mr 145.1).

          pH. Shake 1 g with 10 ml of carbon-dioxide-free water R for 5 minutes. Measure the
          pH potentiometrically (5) ; pH should be between 7 and 8.

          Preparation. Suspend 30 g in 60 ml of sodium acetate (1.6g/l) TS, shaking vigorously
          for 30 seconds. Carefully coat cleaned plates with a layer 0.25 mm thick using a
          spreading device. Allow the coated plates to dry in air.

          Separating power. Apply separately to the adsorbent layer 5 μl of 0.10 mg/ml
          solutions containing respectively lactose R, sucrose R, glucose R, D-fructose R
          and D-galactose R in pyridine R. Develop the plate using a mixture of 65 volumes
          of ethyl acetate R, 23 volumes of 2-propanol R and 12 volumes of water. After
          removing the plate from the chromatographic chamber, dry it in an oven at 105-
          110 °C and allow to cool. Spray the plate with about 10 ml of anisaldehyde TS
          and heat to 100-105 °C for 5–10 minutes. The chromatogram shows ﬁve clearly
          separated spots without tailing.


          Kieselguhr GF254
          Description. A ﬁne, greyish white powder with an average particle size of between
          10 and 40 μm containing about 150 g of calcium sulfate, hemihydrate per kg and a
          ﬂuorescent indicator with an optimal intensity at 254 nm (The grey colour becomes
          more pronounced when the powder is triturated with water).

          Content of calcium sulfate. Place about 0.25 g, accurately weighed, in a ﬂask with
          a ground-glass stopper, add 3 ml of hydrochloric acid (~70g/l) TS and 100 ml of
          water and shake vigorously for 30 minutes. Filter through a sintered-glass ﬁlter
          and wash the residue. Using the combined ﬁltrate and washings, carry out the


94
                            Speciﬁcations for adsorbents for use in thin-layer chromatography



assay for calcium by complexometry (5). Each ml of disodium edetate (0.05 mol/l)
VS is equivalent to 7.26 mg of CaSO4, 1/2H2O (Mr 145.1).

pH. Shake 1 g with 10 ml of carbon-dioxide-free water R for 5 minutes. Measure the
pH potentiometrically (5); pH is between 7 and 8.

Preparation. Suspend 30 g in 60 ml of sodium acetate (1.6 g/l) TS shaking vigorously
for 30 seconds. Carefully coat cleaned plates with a layer 0.25 mm thick using a
spreading device. Allow the coated plates to dry in air.

Separating power. Apply separately to the adsorbent layer 5 μl of 0.10 mg/ml
solutions containing respectively lactose R, sucrose R, glucose R, D-fructose R
and D-galactose R in pyridine R. Develop the plate using a mixture of 65 volumes
of ethyl acetate R, 23 volumes of 2-propanol R and 12 volumes of water. After
removing the plate from the chromatographic chamber, dry it in an oven at 105–
110 °C and allow to cool. Spray the plate with about 10 ml of anisaldehyde TS
and heat to 100–105 °C for 5–10 minutes. The chromatogram shows ﬁve clearly
separated spots without tailing.

Fluorescence. Prepare a 1.0 mg/ml solution of benzoic acid R in a mixture of
9 volumes of 2-propanol R and 1 volume of formic acid (~1080g/l) TS. Apply to the
adsorbent layer at 10 points of application, increasing the quantities of the solution
from 1 μl to 10 μl. Develop the chromatogram using a mixture of 9 volumes of
2-propanol R and 1 volume of formic acid R. Allow the solvents to evaporate and
examine the chromatogram in ultraviolet light at 254 nm. The benzoic acid appears
as dark spots on a ﬂuorescent background in the upper third of the chromatogram
for amounts of 2 μg and more.

Kieselguhr H
Description. A ﬁne, greyish white powder with an average particle size of between
10 and 40 μm (The grey colour becomes more pronounced when the powder is
triturated with water).

pH. Shake 1 g with 10 ml of carbon-dioxide-free water R for 5 minutes. Measure the
pH potentiometrically (5); pH is between 6.4 and 8.0.

Preparation. Suspend 30 g in 60 ml of sodium acetate (1.6 g/l) TS, shaking vigorously
for 30 seconds. Carefully coat cleaned plates with a layer 0.25 mm thick using a
spreading device. Allow the coated plates to dry in air.

Separating power. Apply separately to the adsorbent layer 5 μl of 0.10 mg/ml
solutions containing respectively lactose R, sucrose R, glucose R, D-fructose R
and D-galactose R in pyridine R. Develop the plate using a mixture of 65 volumes
of ethyl acetate R, 23 volumes of 2-propanol R and 12 volumes of water. After
removing the plate from the chromatographic chamber, dry it in an oven at 105–
110 °C and allow to cool. Spray the plate with about 10 ml of anisaldehyde TS
and heat to 100–105 °C for 5–10 minutes. The chromatogram shows ﬁve clearly
separated spots without tailing.

Silica gel G
Description. A ﬁne, white, homogeneous powder with an average particle size of
between 10 and 40 μm containing about 130 g of calcium sulfate, hemihydrate per kg.


                                                                                          95
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Content of calcium sulfate. Place about 0.25 g, accurately weighed, in a ﬂask with
          a ground-glass stopper, add 3 ml of hydrochloric acid (~70g/l) TS and 100 ml of
          water and shake vigorously for 30 minutes. Filter through a sintered-glass ﬁlter
          and wash the residue. Using the combined ﬁltrate and washings, carry out the
          assay for calcium by complexometry (5). Each ml of disodium edetate (0.05 mol/l)
          VS is equivalent to 7.26 mg of CaSO4, 1/2H2O (MW 145.1).

          pH. Shake 1 g with 10 ml of carbon-dioxide-free water R for 5 minutes. Measure the
          pH potentiometrically (5); pH is about 7.

          Preparation. Suspend 30 g in 60 ml of water, shaking vigorously for 30 seconds.
          Carefully coat the cleaned plates with a layer 0.25 mm thick using a spreading
          device. Allow the coated plates to dry in air.

          Separating power. Apply separately to the adsorbent layer 10 μl of 0.10 mg/ml
          solutions containing respectively indophenol blue R, sudan red G R and dimethyl
          yellow R in toluene R. Develop the plate with the same solvent over a distance
          of 10 cm. The chromatogram shows three clearly separated spots, the spot of
          indophenol blue near the points of application, that of dimethyl yellow in the
          middle of the chromatogram, and that of sudan red G between the two.

          Silica gel GF254
          Description. A ﬁne, white, homogeneous powder with an average particle size of
          between 10 and 40 μm containing about 130 g of calcium sulfate, hemihydrate per
          kg and about 150 g of a ﬂuorescent indicator per kg with an optimal intensity at
          254 nm.

          Content of calcium sulfate. Place about 0.25 g, accurately weighed, in a ﬂask with
          a ground-glass stopper, add 3 ml of hydrochloric acid (~70g/l) TS and 100 ml of
          water and shake vigorously for 30 minutes. Filter through a sintered-glass ﬁlter
          and wash the residue. Using the combined ﬁltrate and washings, carry out the
          assay for calcium by complexometry (5). Each ml of disodium edetate (0.05 mol/l)
          VS is equivalent to 7.26 mg of CaSO4, 1/2H2O (Mr 145.1).

          pH. Shake 1 g with 10 ml of carbon-dioxide-free water R for 5 minutes. Measure the
          pH potentiometrically (5); pH is about 7.

          Preparation. Suspend 30 g in 60 ml of water, shaking vigorously for 30 seconds.
          Carefully coat the cleaned plates with a layer 0.25 mm thick using a spreading
          device. Allow the coated plates to dry in air.

          Separating power. Apply separately to the adsorbent layer 10 μl of 0.10 mg/ml
          solutions containing respectively indophenol blue R, sudan red G R and dimethyl
          yellow R in toluene R. Develop the plate with the same solvent over a distance
          of 10 cm. The chromatogram shows three clearly separated spots, the spot of
          indophenol blue near the point of application, that of dimethyl yellow in the
          middle of the chromatogram, and that of sudan red G between the two.

          Fluorescence. Prepare a 1.0 mg/ml solution of benzoic acid R in a mixture of
          9 volumes of 2-propanol R and 1 volume of formic acid (~1080g/l) TS. Apply to the
          adsorbent layer at 10 points of application, increasing the quantities of the solution
          from 1 μl to 10 μl. Develop the chromatogram using a mixture of 9 volumes of


96
                            Speciﬁcations for adsorbents for use in thin-layer chromatography



2-propanol R and 1 volume of formic acid (~1080g/l) TS. Allow the solvents to
evaporate and examine the chromatogram in ultraviolet light at 254 nm. The
benzoic acid appears as dark spots on a ﬂuorescent background in the upper third
of the chromatogram for amounts of 2 μg and more.


Silica gel H
Description. A ﬁne, white, homogeneous powder with an average particle size of
between 10 and 40 μm.

pH. Shake 1 g with 10 ml of carbon-dioxide-free water R for 5 minutes. Measure the
pH potentiometrically (5); pH is about 7.

Preparation. Suspend 30 g in 60 ml of water, shaking vigorously for 30 seconds.
Carefully coat the cleaned plates with a layer 0.25 mm thick using a spreading
device. Allow the coated plates to dry in air.

Separating power. Apply separately to the adsorbent layer 10 μl of 0.10 mg/ml
solutions containing respectively indophenol blue R, sudan red G R and dimethyl
yellow R in toluene R. Develop the plate with the same solvent over a distance
of 10 cm. The chromatogram shows three clearly separated spots, the spot of
indophenol blue near the point of application, that of dimethyl yellow in the
middle of the chromatogram, and that of sudan red G between the two.


Silica gel HF254
Description. A ﬁne, white, homogeneous powder with an average particle size of
between 10 and 40 μm containing about 150 g of a ﬂuorescent indicator per kg with
an optimal intensity at 254 nm.

pH. Shake 1 g with 10 ml of carbon-dioxide-free water R for 5 minutes. Measure the
pH potentiometrically (5); pH is about 7.

Preparation. Suspend 30 g in 60 ml of water, shaking vigorously for 30 seconds.
Carefully coat the cleaned plates with a layer 0.25 mm thick using a spreading
device. Allow the coated plates to dry in air.

Separating power. Apply separately to the adsorbent layer 10 μl of 0.10 mg/ml
solutions containing respectively indophenol blue R, sudan red G R and dimethyl
yellow R in toluene R. Develop the plate with the same solvent over a distance
of 10 cm. The chromatogram shows three clearly separated spots, the spot of
indophenol blue near the point of application, that of dimethyl yellow in the
middle of the chromatogram, and that of sudan red G between the two.

Fluorescence. Prepare a 1.0 mg/ml solution of benzoic acid R in a mixture of
9 volumes of 2-propanol R and 1 volume of formic acid (~1080g/l) TS. Apply to the
adsorbent layer at 10 points of application, increasing the quantities of the solution
from 1 μl to 10 μl. Develop the chromatogram using a mixture of 9 volumes of
2-propanol R and 1 volume of formic acid (~1080g/l) TS. Allow the solvents to
evaporate and examine the chromatogram in ultraviolet light at 254 nm. The
benzoic acid appears as dark spots on a ﬂuorescent background in the upper third
of the chromatogram for amounts of 2 μg and more.


                                                                                          97
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Silica gel, HF254, silanized
          Description. A ﬁne, white, homogeneous powder which, after shaking with water,
          ﬂoats on the surface because of its water-repellent properties. It contains about
          150 g of a ﬂuorescent indicator per kg with an optimal intensity at 254 nm.

          Preparation. Suspend 30 g with 60 ml of a mixture of 2 volumes of water and 1
          volume of methanol R shaking vigorously for 2 minutes. Carefully coat the cleaned
          plates with a layer 0.25 mm thick using a spreading device. Allow the coated plates
          to dry in air, then dry for 30 minutes in an oven at 100-105 °C.

          Separating power. Prepare a mixture containing 0.1 g of each of methyl laurate R,
          methyl myristate R, methyl palmitate R and methyl stearate R. Then add 40 ml of a
          0.3 g/ml decanted solution of potassium hydroxide R in ethanol (~710g/l) TS and
          heat under reﬂux on a water-bath for 1 hour. Cool, add 100 ml of water, acidify with
          hydrochloric acid (~70g/l) TS and extract with three 1-ml volumes of chloroform
          R. Dry the combined chloroform extracts over anhydrous sodium sulfate R,
          ﬁlter and evaporate to dryness. Dissolve the residue in 50 ml of chloroform R.
          Apply separately to the adsorbent layer, three 10-μl portions of this solution and
          develop the chromatogram in a mixture of 65 volumes of dioxan R, 25 volumes of
          water and 10 volumes of glacial acetic acid R. After removing the plate from the
          chromatographic chamber, heat it in an oven at 120 °C for 30 minutes. Allow to
          cool, spray with a solution containing 35 mg of phosphomolybdic acid R per ml of
          2-propanol R and heat at 50 °C until the spots become visible. Expose the plate to
          ammonia vapour until the adsorbent turns white. The chromatogram shows four
          clearly separated spots.

          Fluorescence. Prepare a 1.0 mg/ml solution of benzoic acid R in a mixture of
          9 volumes of 2-propanol R and 1 volume of formic acid (~1080g/l) TS. Apply to the
          adsorbent layer at 10 points of application, increasing the quantities of the solution
          from 1 μl to 10 μl. Develop the chromatogram using a mixture of 9 volumes of
          2-propanol R and 1 volume of formic acid (~1080 g/l) TS. Allow the solvents
          to evaporate and examine the chromatogram in ultraviolet light at 254 nm. The
          benzoic acid appears as dark spots on a ﬂuorescent background in the upper third
          of the chromatogram for amounts of 2 μg and more.




98
                                                                   Reagents and solutions




                            23. Reagents and solutions

The reagents, test solutions and volumetric solutions mentioned in this publication
are described below. Reagents are denoted by the abbreviation R, test solutions
by the abbreviation TS, and volumetric solutions by the abbreviations VS.
The concentration of the reagent solutions is expressed in g/l, that is, grams of
anhydrous substance per litre of water or solvent, as indicated. Where no solvent is
indicated, demineralized water should be used. The procedures for the preparation
of test solutions that require special attention are given in detail. The designation
of d denotes the relative density d20 20
                                         :, i.e. measured in air at 20 °C in relation to
water at 20 °C. Colour index (CI) numbers are provided for stains.

Acetic acid, glacial, R. C2H4O2; d ~1.048.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Acetic acid (~300 g/l) TS. A solution of glacial acetic acid R containing about 300 g
of C2H4O2 per litre (approximately 5 mol/l); d ~ 1.037.

Acetic acid (~60 g/l) TS. Acetic acid (~300 g/l) TS, diluted to contain about 60 g of
C2H4O2 per litre (approximately 1 mol/l); d ~ 1.008.

Acetic acid, dilute.
Dilute 6 g of glacial acetic acid with water to make 100 ml (1 mol/l).

Acetone R. C3H6O.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Acetonitrile R. Methyl cyanide, C2H3N.
Description. A clear, colourless liquid.
Miscibility. Freely soluble with water.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Acidic tin (II) chloride TS.
Dissolve 8 g of tin (II) chloride dihydrate in 500 ml of hydrochloric acid. Preserve
in glass-stoppered bottles. Use within 3 months.

Aﬂatoxin mixture TS.
Procedure. Prepare a mixed working standard in a mixture of 98 volumes of
chloroform R and 2 volumes of acetonitrile R, containing 0.5 μg of each of
aﬂatoxins B1 and G1 per ml, and 0.1 μg of each of aﬂatoxins B2 and G2 per ml.
Note. Aﬂatoxins are highly toxic and should be handled with care. National legal
requirements should be followed.
Suitable commercially available working standards.

Agar R.
A suitable commercially available reagent.



                                                                                      99
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Aluminium chloride R. AlC13.6H2O.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Aluminium oxide, puriﬁed, R. Al2O3.
          A suitable commercially available reagent for column chromatography.

          Amaranth S R. C.I. 16185; acid red 27; C20H11N2Na3O10S3.
          Description. A deep brown or deep reddish brown, ﬁne powder.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          1,2,4-Aminonaphtholsulfonic acid R. C10H9NO4S.
          Description. A white to slightly brownish pink powder.
          Solubility. Sparingly soluble in water.

          Aminonaphtholsulfonic acid TS.
          Procedure. Add 0.25 g of 1,2,4-aminonaphtholsulfonic acid R to 100 ml of freshly
          prepared sodium metabisulﬁte (150 g/l) TS with mechanical stirring. After
          stirring for 15 minutes, add 0.5 g of anhydrous sodium sulﬁte R. After stirring
          for an additional 5 minutes, ﬁlter the mixture.
          Storage. Keep in a brown bottle.
          Note. This reagent should be prepared freshly every week.

          Ammonia solution. NH4OH (R or TS)
          Ammonia water. A suitable commercially available reagent: speciﬁc gravity: about
          0.90; density: 0.908 g/ml; content: 28–30%.

          Ammonia TS.
          To 400 ml of ammonia solution add water to make 1000 ml (10%).

          Ammonia (~260g/l) TS. d~0.894.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Ammonia (~100 g/l) TS. Ammonia (~260 g/l) TS, diluted to contain about 100 g of
          NH3 per litre (approximately 6 mol/l); d 0.956.

          Ammonium dihydrogen phosphate R. (NH4)H2PO4.
          Monobasic ammonium phosphate. A white, crystalline powder or colourless
          crystals, freely soluble in water.

          Ammonium iron(III) citrate, brown, R. Ferric ammonium citrate, brown; soluble
          ferric citrate.
          Contains about 9% of NH3, 16.5–18.5% of Fe, and about 65% of hydrated citric acid.
          Description. Reddish brown granules, garnet-red transparent scales, or brownish
          yellow powder; odourless or slight odour of NH3. Very deliquescent.
          Solubility. Very soluble in water; practically insoluble in ethanol (~750 g/l) TS.
          Storage. Store in a well closed container, protected from light.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Ammonium molybdate R. (NH4)6Mo7O24.4H2O.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Ammonium molybdate (40 g/l) TS. A solution of ammonium molybdate R
          containing about 40 g of (NH4)6Mo7O24.4H2O per litre.


100
                                                                  Reagents and solutions



Ammonium nitrate R. NH4NO3.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Ammonium oxalate R. C2H8N2O4.H2O.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Ammonium oxalate (25 g/l) TS. A solution of ammonium oxalate R containing
about 27 g of C2H8N2O4 per litre.

Ammonium thiocyanate R. CH4N2S.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Ammonium thiocyanate (75 g/l) TS.
A solution of ammonium thiocyanate R containing about 75 g of CH4N2S per litre
(approximately 1 mol/l).

Anisaldehyde R. 4-Methoxybenzaldehyde; C8H8O2.
Description. A colourless to pale yellow, oily liquid with an aromatic odour.
Boiling point. About 248°C.
Mass density (ρ20). About 1.125 kg/l.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Anisaldehyde TS.
Procedure. Mix in the following order: 0.5 ml of anisaldehyde R, 10 ml of glacial
acetic acid R, 85 ml of methanol R and 5 ml of sulfuric acid (~1760 g/l) TS.

Argon R. Ar.
Contains not less than 999.95 ml of Ar per litre.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Argon-methane R.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Arsenic, dilute, AsTS.
One millilitre contains 10 μg of arsenic.
Procedure. Dilute 1 ml of strong arsenic AsTS with sufﬁcient water to produce 100 ml.
Note. Dilute arsenic AsTS must be freshly prepared.

Arsenic, strong, AsTS.
Procedure. Dissolve 0.132 g of arsenic trioxide R in 6 ml of sodium hydroxide (~80 g/l)
TS, by gentle heating. Dilute the cooled solution with 20 ml of water, and add 50 ml
of hydrochloric acid (~250 g/l) TS and sufﬁcient water to produce 100 ml.

Arsenic trioxide R. As2O3.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Beads for gel chromatography.
A suitable commercially available material for gel chromatography.

Beef extract R. A residue from beef broth obtained by extracting fresh, sound, lean
beef by cooking with water and evaporating the resulting broth at a low temperature,
usually under reduced pressure until a thick pasty residue is obtained.
A suitable commercially available reagent.


                                                                                    101
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Benzoic acid R. C7H6O2. Contains not less than 99.8% of C7H6O2.
          Description. Colourless, light, feathery crystals or a white, microcrystalline powder;
          characteristic, faint odour.
          Solubility. Slightly soluble in water; freely soluble in ethanol (~750 g/l) TS, ether R,
          and chloroform R.
          Methanol-insoluble substances. Dissolve 20 g in 200 ml of methanol R and digest
          under complete reﬂux for 30 minutes. Filter through a tared ﬁltering crucible,
          wash thoroughly with methanol R, and dry at 105°C; leaves a residue of not more
          than 1.0 mg.
          Assay. Dissolve about 0.5 g, accurately weighed, in 15 ml of ethanol (~750 g/l)
          TS, previously neutralized to phenol red/ethanol TS, add 20 ml of water and
          titrate with sodium hydroxide (0.1 mol/l) VS, using phenol red/ethanol TS
          as indicator. Repeat the operation without the substance being examined and
          make any necessary correction. Each ml of sodium hydroxide (0.1 mol/l) VS is
          equivalent to 12.21 mg of C7H6O2.

          Benzylpenicillin sodium R. C16H17N2NaO4S.
          Quality conforms to the monograph in The international pharmacopoeia (5).

          Bile salts R.
          Description. A concentrate of beef bile, the principal constituent of which is sodium
          desoxycholate, determined as cholic acid.
          Solubility. Soluble in water and in ethanol (~750 g/l) TS.
          Acidity. pH of a 0.02 g/ml solution 5.8–6.2.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Brilliant black BN R. C.I. 28440; C28H17N5Na4O14S4.
          Description. A bluish violet or greyish black powder or ﬁne crystals.
          Solubility. Freely soluble in water, practically insoluble in ethanol (~750 g/l) TS,
          acetone R, chloroform R and ether R.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Brilliant green R. Malachite green G; basic green 1; C.I. 42040; C27H34N2O4S.
          Description. Small, glistening golden crystals.
          Solubility. Soluble in water and ethanol (~750 g/l) TS.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Bromine R. Br2.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Bromine AsTS.
          Procedure. Dissolve 30 g of potassium bromide R in 40 ml of water, add 30 g
          of bromine R and dilute with sufﬁcient water to produce 100 ml. The solution
          complies with the following test. Evaporate 10 ml nearly to dryness on a water-
          bath, add 50 ml of water, 10 ml of hydrochloric acid (~250 g/l) AsTS, and sufﬁcient
          stannous chloride AsTS to reduce the remaining bromine, and apply the general
          test for arsenic. The colour of the stain produced is not more intense than that
          produced from a 1-ml standard stain, showing that the amount of arsenic does
          not exceed 1 μg/ml.

          Bromocresol purple R. C21H16Br2O5S.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.


102
                                                                   Reagents and solutions



Calcium carbonate R1. CaCO3.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Calcium carbonate R2. Calcium carbonate R1 of suitable quality to serve as a
primary standard for the standardization of disodium edetate solutions.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Calcon R. Monosodium salt of 2-hydroxy-1-[(2-hydroxy-1-naphthyl)azo]
naphthalene-4-sulfonic acid; C.I. Mordant Black 17, C.I. 15705, Eriochrome Blue
Black R, Solochrome Dark Blue; C20H13NaO5S.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Calcon carboxylic acid R. 2-Hydroxy-1-(2-hydroxy-4-sulfo-1-naphthylazo)-3-
naphthoic acid; C21H14N2O7S,3H2O.
Description. A dark-brown powder with a violet tint.
Solubility. Practically insoluble in water; slightly soluble in methanol R and in
ethanol (~750 g/l) TS; freely soluble in solutions of alkali hydroxides.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Calcon carboxylic acid indicator mixture R.
Procedure. Mix 0.1 g of calcon carboxylic acid R with 10 g of anhydrous sodium
sulfate R.

Calcon indicator mixture R.
Procedure. Mix 0.1 g of calcon R with 10g of anhydrous sodium sulfate R.

Carbophenothion. C11H16ClO2PS3. O,O-Diethyl S-[[(4-chlorophenyl)thio] methyl]-
phosphorodithionate.
Yellowish liquid, practically insoluble in water, miscible with organic solvents. d25
                                                                                   4
                                                                                     :
about 1.27.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Cetrimide R. Contains not less than 96.0% and not more than 101.0% of
alkyltrimethylammonium bromide, calculated as C17H38BrN with reference to
the dried substance.
Description. A white or almost white, voluminous, free-ﬂowing powder; slight
characteristic odour.
Solubility. Soluble in two parts of water; freely soluble in ethanol (~750 g/l) TS.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Chinese ink TS. Indian ink.
A suitable commercially available reagent.
Note. Before use, dilute 1 ml of black Chinese ink TS with 2 ml of water; if necessary,
further dilute up to 1:10. It must be freshly prepared.

Chloral hydrate R. C2H3Cl3O2.
Description. Colourless, hygroscopic crystals with a sharp odour.
Melting temperature. About 55°C.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Chloral hydrate TS.
Procedure. Dissolve 50 g of chloral hydrate R in 20 ml of water.


                                                                                     103
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Chloramphenicol R. C11H12Cl2N2O5. Quality conforms to the monograph in The
          international pharmacopoeia (5).

          Chloroform R. CHCl3.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Chromic acid TS.
          Procedure. Dissolve 84 g of chromium trioxide R in 700 ml of water and add slowly,
          with stirring, 400 ml of sulfuric acid (~1760 g/l) TS.

          Chromium trioxide R. CrO3.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Copper (II) sulfate R. CuSO4,5H2O.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Crystal violet R. C25H30ClN3.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Cuoxam TS. Tetramine copper dihydroxide, Schweizer’s reagent.
          Procedure. Dissolve 10 g of copper(II) sulfate R in 100 ml of water, and add sufﬁcient
          sodium hydroxide (~240 g/l) TS until alkaline. Filter the precipitate and wash
          with cold water, previously made sulfate-free. To the moist copper hydroxide add,
          while stirring, ammonia (~100 g/l) TS until dissolved.
          Note. Cuoxam TS must be freshly prepared.

          Cyclohexane R. C6H12.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Desmetryn R. C9H17N5S. 2-methylmercapto-4-methylamino-6-isopropylamino-S-
          triazine.
          A commercially available reagent suitable for use as a reference material.

          Dichloromethane R. Methylene chloride, CH2Cl2.
          Description. A clear colourless, mobile liquid.
          Miscibility. Freely miscible with ethanol (~750 g/l) TS and ether R.
          Boiling range. Not less than 95% distils between 39 and 41 °C.
          Residue on evaporation. After evaporation on a water-bath and drying at 105 °C,
          leaves not more than 0.5 mg/ml.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Dimethyl sulfoxide R. C2H6OS.
          Description. A colourless liquid; odourless or with a slight unpleasant odour.
          Mass density (ρ20). 1.10 kg/l.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Dimethyl yellow R. C.I. 11020; 4-dimethylaminoazobenzene; C14H15N3.
          Caution. Dimethyl yellow R is carcinogenic.
          Description. Produces a red colour in moderately acidic alcoholic solutions and
          yellow colour in weakly acidic and alkaline solutions.
          Homogeneity. Carry out the method for thin-layer chromatography, using silica gel
          G as the coating substance and dichloromethane R as the mobile phase. Apply


104
                                                                 Reagents and solutions



10 μl of a 0.1 mg/ml solution in dichloromethane R. After removing the plate from
the chromatographic chamber allow it to dry in air. Only one spot appears on the
chromatogram.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Dioxan R. 1,4-Dioxane, C4H8O2.
Caution. It is dangerous to determine the boiling range or the residue on evaporation
before ensuring that the reagent complies with the test for peroxides, described
below.
Description. A clear, colourless liquid.
Miscibility. Miscible with water, ethanol (~750 g/l) TS and ether R.
Boiling range. Not less than 95% distils between 101 and 105°C.
Melting temperature. Solidiﬁes when cooled in ice and does not completely remelt
at temperatures below 10°C.
Residue on evaporation. Evaporate on a water-bath and dry to constant weight at
105°C; leaves a residue of not more than 0.1 mg/ml.
Mass density (ρ20). About 1.031 kg/l.
Water. Determined by the Karl Fischer method, not more than 5.0 mg/ml.
Peroxides. Add 5 ml to a mixture of 1 g of potassium iodide R dissolved in 10 ml of
water, 5 ml of hydrochloric acid (~70 g/l) TS, and 2 ml of starch TS, and mix; not
more than a faint blue or brown colour is produced.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Dipotassium hydrogen phosphate R. K2HPO4.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Disodium edetate R. C10H14N2Na2O8.2H2O.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Disodium edetate (0.05 mol/l) VS. Disodium edetate R, dissolved in water to
contain 16.81 g of C10H14N2Na2O8 in 1000 ml.
Method of standardization. Ascertain the exact concentration by an appropriate
method. The following method is suitable: transfer about 200 mg of calcium
carbonate R2, accurately weighed, to a 400-ml beaker, add 10 ml of water, and
swirl to form a slurry. Cover the beaker with a watch glass, and introduce 2 ml
of hydrochloric acid (~70 g/l) TS from a pipette inserted between the lip of the
beaker and the edge of the watch glass. Swirl the contents of the beaker to dissolve
the calcium carbonate. Wash down the sides of the beaker, the outer surface of the
pipette, and the watch glass with water, and dilute with water to about 100 ml.
While stirring the solution, preferably with a magnetic stirrer, add about 30 ml of
the disodium edetate solution from a 50-ml burette. Add 10 ml of sodium hydroxide
(~80 g/l) TS and 0.3 g of calcon indicator mixture R or of calcon carboxylic acid
indicator mixture R and continue the titration with the disodium edetate solution
to a blue end-point. Each 5.005 mg of calcium carbonate is equivalent to 1 ml of
disodium edetate (0.05 mol/l) VS.

Disodium hydrogen phosphate R. Na2HPO4.12H2O.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Ethanol R.
A suitable commercially available reagent.


                                                                                   105
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Ethanol (~750 g/l) TS.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Ethanol (~710g/l) TS. A solution of about 950 ml of ethanol (~750 g/l) TS diluted
          with water to 1000 ml.

          Ethanol (~375 g/l) TS. A solution of about 525 ml of ethanol (~750 g/l) TS diluted
          with water to 1000 ml.

          Ethanol (~188 g/l) TS. A solution of about 260 ml of ethanol (~750 g/l) TS diluted
          with water to 1000 ml.

          Ethanol (~150g/l) TS. A solution of about 210 ml of ethanol (~750 g/l) TS diluted
          with water to 1000 ml.

          Ether R. C4H10O.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Ether/light petroleum TS1.
          Procedure. Dilute 60 ml of ether R with sufﬁcient distilled light petroleum R to
          produce 1000 ml.

          Ether/light petroleum TS2.
          Procedure. Dilute 150 ml of ether R with sufﬁcient distilled light petroleum R to
          produce 1000 ml.

          Ether/light petroleum TS3.
          Procedure. Dilute 500 ml of ether R with sufﬁcient distilled light petroleum R to
          produce 1000 ml.

          Ethyl acetate R. C 4H8O2.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Fast yellow R. C.I. 13015; E105; C12H9N3Na2O6S2.
          Description. An orange-yellow to red powder.
          Solubility. Freely soluble in water; slightly soluble in ethanol (~750 g/l) TS;
          practically insoluble in ether R and chloroform R.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Ferric ammonium sulfate R. FeH4NO8S2.12H2O.
          This reagent should be free of chlorides.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Ferric ammonium sulfate (0.25 mol/l) VS. Ferric ammonium sulfate R, dissolved
          in nitric acid (~750 g/l) TS to contain 120.5 g of FeH4NO8S2.12H2O in 1000 ml.
          Procedure. Dissolve 120.5 g of ferric ammonium sulfate R in a sufﬁcient quantity of
          nitric acid (~750 g/l) TS to produce 1000 ml. The reagent should be free of chlorides.

          Ferric chloride R. FeCl3,6H2O.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Ferric chloride (50g/l) TS.
          Procedure. Dissolve 5 g of ferric chloride R in 100 ml of water.


106
                                                                    Reagents and solutions



Ferrous sulfate. FeSO4.7 H2O
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Florisil R.
A suitable commercially available material for column chromatography.

Formic acid (~1080 g/l) TS. CH2O2; d ~ 1.2.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

D-Fructose R. C6H12O6.
Description. A white, crystalline powder.
Melting point. About 103°C with decomposition.
Speciﬁc optical rotation. Use a 0.10 g/ml solution in water containing 0.05 ml of
ammonia (~100 g/l) TS; [α]20°C
                             D
                                = about -92°.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

D-Galactose R. C6H12O6.
Description. A white, crystalline powder.
Melting point. About 164°C.
Speciﬁc optical rotation. Use a 0.10 g/ml solution in water; [α]20°C
                                                                D
                                                                     = about +80°.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Glucose R. Dextrose; C6H12O6. Quality conforms to the monograph in The
international pharmacopoeia (5).

Glucose hydrate R. Monohydrate of α-D’glucopyranose, C6H12O6.H2O. Contains
not less than 99.0% and not more than 101.5% of C6H12O6, calculated with reference
to the dried substance.
Description. Colourless crystals or a white crystalline or granular powder; odourless.
Solubility. Soluble in about 1 part of water and in about 60 parts of ethanol (~750 g/l)
TS; more soluble in boiling water and in boiling ethanol (~750 g/l) TS.
Acidity. Dissolve 5 g in 50 ml of carbon-dioxide-free water R. Neutralization
requires not more than 0.5 ml of carbonate-free sodium hydroxide (0.02 mol/l) VS,
phenolphthalein/ethanol TS being used as indicator.
Speciﬁc optical rotation. Dissolve 100 mg, previously dried to constant weight, in 1
ml of water, and add a few drops of ammonia (~100 g/l) TS; [α]20°C    D
                                                                         = + 52 to + 53°.
Soluble starch or sulﬁtes. Dissolve 1 g in 10 ml of water and add 1 drop of iodine TS;
the liquid is coloured yellow.
Loss on drying. Dry to constant weight at 105 °C; loses not less than 80 mg/g and
not more than 100 mg/g.
Sulfated ash. Not more than 1.0 mg/g.
Assay. Dissolve about 0.1 g, accurately weighed, in 50 ml of water, add 30 ml of
iodine (0.1 mol/l) VS and 10 ml of sodium carbonate (50 g/l) TS, and allow to stand
for 20 minutes. Add 15 ml of hydrochloric acid (~70 g/l) TS and titrate the excess
of iodine with sodium thiosulfate (0.1 mol/l) VS, using starch TS as indicator.
Perform a blank determination and make any necessary corrections. Each ml of
iodine (0.1 mol/l) VS is equivalent to 9.008 mg of C6H12O6.

Glycerol R. Propane- 1,2,3-triol with small amounts of water, C3H8O3. Contains not
less than 970 g/kg of C3H8O3.
Description. A clear, almost colourless, syrupy and hygroscopic liquid; odourless.


                                                                                      107
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Miscibility. Miscible with water and ethanol (~750 g/l) TS; practically immiscible
          with ether R and chloroform R.
          Mass density (ρ20). Not less than 1.256 kg/l.
          Refractive index (nD20). Not less than 1.469.
          Acrolein and other reducing substances. Mix 1 ml with 1 ml of ammonia (~100 g/l) TS
          and heat in a water-bath at 60 °C for 5 minutes; the liquid is not coloured yellow.
          Remove from the water-bath and add 3 drops of silver nitrate (40 g/l) TS; the
          liquid does not become coloured within 5 minutes.
          Sulfated ash. Not more than 0.5 mg/ml.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Glycerol-ethanol TS.
          Procedure. Mix equal volumes of glycerol R, water and ethanol (~750 g/l) TS.

          Glycine R. Aminoacetic acid, C2H5NO2.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Helium R. He. Contains not less than 999.95 ml of He per litre.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Helium for chromatography. He.
          Contains not less than 99.995 per cent V/V of He.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Hexane. C6H14.
          A colourless, ﬂammable liquid, practically insoluble in water, miscible with ethanol
          and with ether.
           20
          d20 : 0.659 to 0.663.
           20
          nD : 1.375 to 1.376
          Distillation range. Not less than 95 per cent distils between 67 °C and 69 °C.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Hexane R. n-Hexane, C6H14.
          Description. A colourless, mobile, highly inﬂammable liquid.
          Boiling range. Distils completely over a range of 1 °C between 67.5 and 69.5 °C.
          Mass density (ρ20). 0.658–0.659 kg/l.
          Refractive index (nD20). 1.374–1.375.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Hide powder R.
          A suitable commercially available reference material.

          Hydrochloric acid R. HCl
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Hydrochloric acid (1 mol/l) VS. Hydrochloric acid (~250 g/l) TS, diluted with
          water to contain 36.47 g of HCl in 1000 ml.
          Method of standardization. Ascertain the exact concentration of the 1 mol/l solution
          in the following manner. Dissolve about 1.5 g, accurately weighed, of anhydrous
          sodium carbonate R (previously dried at 270 °C for 1 hour) in 50 ml of water and
          titrate with the hydrochloric acid solution, using methyl orange/ethanol TS as


108
                                                               Reagents and solutions



indicator. Each 52.99 mg of anhydrous sodium carbonate R is equivalent to 1 ml of
hydrochloric acid (1 mol/l) VS.

Hydrochloric acid (~420 g/l) TS. d ~1.18.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Hydrochloric acid (~ 250 g/l) AsTS. Hydrochloric acid (~250 g/l) TS that complies
with the following tests A and B.
A. Dilute 10 ml with sufﬁcient water to produce 50 ml, add 5 ml of ammonium
thiocyanate (75 g/l) TS and stir immediately; no colour is produced.
B. To 50 ml add 0.2 ml of bromine AsTS, evaporate on a water-bath until reduced
to 16 ml, adding more bromine AsTS if necessary to ensure that an excess, as
indicated by the colour, is present throughout the evaporation. Add 50 ml of
water and 5 drops of stannous chloride AsTS and apply the general test for
arsenic. The colour of the stain produced is not more intense than that produced
from a 0.2-ml standard stain, showing that the amount of arsenic does not exceed
0.05 μg/ml.

Hydrochloric acid (~ 250 g/l) TS. A solution of hydrochloric acid (~420 g/l) TS in
water, containing approximately 250 g of HCl per litre; d ~1.12.

Hydrochloric acid (~ 250 g/l), stannated, AsTS.
Procedure. Dilute 1 ml of stannous chloride AsTS with sufﬁcient hydrochloric acid
(~250 g/l) AsTS to produce 100 ml.

Hydrochloric acid (~ 70 g/l) TS.
Procedure. Dilute 260 ml of hydrochloric acid (~250 g/l) TS with sufﬁcient water to
produce 1000 ml (approximately 2 mol/l); d ~1.035.

Hydrochloric acid, dilute, R
Dilute 23.6 ml of hydrochloric acid with water to make 100 ml (10%).

Hydrogen for chromatography. H2.
Contains not less than 99.95 per cent V/V of H2.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Indian ink see Chinese ink TS.

Indophenol blue R. C.I. 49700; C18H26N2O.
Description. A violet-black powder.
Solubility. Practically insoluble in water; soluble in chloroform R.
Homogeneity. Carry out the method for thin-layer chromatography, using silica gel
G as the coating substance and dichloromethane R as the mobile phase. Apply
10 μl of a 0.1 mg/ml solution in dichloromethane R and develop. After removing
the plate from the chromatographic chamber allow it to dry in air. Only one spot
appears on the chromatogram.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Iodine R. I2.
A suitable commercially available reagent.


                                                                                 109
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Iodine TS.
          Procedure. Dissolve 2.6 g of iodine R and 3 g of potassium iodide R in sufﬁcient
          water to produce 100 ml (approximately 0.1 mol/l).

          Iodine (0.1 mol/l) VS. Iodine R and potassium iodide R, dissolved in water to
          contain 25.38 g of I2 and 36.0 g of KI in 1000 ml.
          Method of standardization. Ascertain the exact concentration of the 0.1 mol/l solution
          by titrating 25.0 ml with sodium thiosulfate (0.1 mol/l) VS, using starch TS as
          indicator.

          Iodine (0.02 mol/l) VS. Iodine R and potassium iodide R, dissolved in water to
          contain 5.076 g of I2 and 7.2 g of KI in 1000 ml.
          Method of standardization. Ascertain the exact concentration of the solution following
          the method described under iodine (0.1 mol/l) VS.

          Iodine/ethanol TS.
          Procedure. Dissolve 10 g of iodine R in sufﬁcient ethanol (~750 g/l) TS to produce 1000 ml.

          Iron(III) citrate R. Ferric citrate, C6H5FeO7.H2O.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Lactic acid R. C3H6O3. Quality conforms to the monograph in The international
          pharmacopoeia (5).

          Lactochloral TS.
          Procedure. Dissolve 50 g of chloral hydrate R in 50 g of lactic acid R by gentle heating.

          Lactophenol TS.
          Procedure. To a mixture of 20 g of lactic acid R and 40 g of glycerol R dissolved in
          20 ml of water, add 20 g of phenol R and mix.

          Lactose R. C12H22O11.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Lead acetate R. C4H6O4Pb.3H2O.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Lead acetate (80 g/l) TS. A solution of lead acetate R in freshly boiled water
          containing about 80 g/l of C4H6O4Pb (approximately 0.25 mol/l).

          Lead(II) acetate TS.
          To 9.5 g of lead(II) acetate trihydrate add freshly boiled and cooled water to make
          100 ml. Preserve in tightly stoppered bottles (0.25 mol/l).

          Lithium chloride R. LiCl.
          Description. White, deliquescent crystals or granules.
          Solubility. Freely soluble in water; soluble in acetone R and ethanol (~ 750 g/l) TS.
          Storage. Store in a tightly closed container.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          L-Lysine R. C6H14N2O2.
          Description. Crystalline needles or hexagonal plates.


110
                                                                  Reagents and solutions



Solubility. Soluble in water; very slightly soluble in ethanol (~750 g/l) TS; insoluble
in ether R.
Melting point. About 213 °C with decomposition.
Speciﬁc optical rotation. Dissolve 0.2 g in 10 ml of hydrochloric acid (~250 g/l) TS;
[α]20°C
   D
        = about +21.5 °.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Magnesium chloride R. MgCl2.6H2O.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Magnesium nitrate R. Mg(NO3)2
See Magnesium nitrate hexahydrate.

Magnesium nitrate hexahydrate R. Mg(NO3)2.6H2O
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Mercuric bromide R. HgBr2.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Mercuric bromide AsTS.
Procedure. Dissolve 5 g of mercuric bromide R in sufﬁcient ethanol (~ 750 g/l) TS
to produce 100 ml.

Mercuric bromide paper AsR.
Procedure. Use smooth, white ﬁlter-paper weighing 65–120 g/m2. The thickness
of the paper in mm should be approximately equal numerically to the weight
expressed as above, divided by 400. Soak pieces of ﬁlter-paper, not less than
25 mm in width, in mercuric bromide AsTS, decant the superﬂuous liquid,
suspend the paper over a non-metallic thread and allow it to dry, protected from
light.
Storage. Store the mercuric bromide paper AsR in stoppered bottles in the dark.
Note. Paper that has been exposed to sunlight or to vapours of ammonia must not
be used as it produces only a pale stain or no stain at all.

Mercuric nitrate TS. Millon’s reagent; nitric acid solution of mercury.
Procedure. Dissolve 1 ml of mercury R in 9 ml of fuming nitric acid R, keeping the
mixture well cooled during the reaction. When the reaction is complete, dilute the
solution with an equal volume of water. It should be protected from light and used
within two months of preparation.

Mercuric thiocyanate R. C2HgN2S2.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Mercuric thiocyanate TS. A saturated solution of mercuric thiocyanate R in ethanol
(~ 750 g/l) TS.

Mercury R. Hg.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Methane R. CH4.
A suitable commercially available reagent.


                                                                                    111
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Methanol R. CH4O.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Methyl laurate R. C13H26O2.
          Description. A colourless or pale yellow liquid.
          Mass density (ρ20). About 0.87 kg/l.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Methyl myristate R. C15H30O2.
          Description. A colourless or slightly yellow liquid.
          Mass density (ρ20). About 0.87 kg/l.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Methyl orange R. Sodium salt of 4’-dimethylaminoazobenzene-4-sulfonic acid,
          C14H14N3NaO3S.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Methyl orange TS.
          Dissolve 0.1 g of methyl orange in 100 ml of water, and ﬁlter if necessary.

          Methyl orange/ethanol TS.
          Procedure. Dissolve 0.04 g of methyl orange R in sufﬁcient ethanol (~ 150 g/l) TS to
          produce 100 ml.

          Methyl palmitate R. Methyl hexadecanoate; C17H34O2.
          Description. A colourless, waxy solid.
          Freezing point. About 27°C.
          Mass density (ρ20). About 0.86 kg/l.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Methyl red. C.I. 13020. 2-(4-Dimethylamino-phenylazo)benzoic acid. C15H15N3O2.
          A dark-red powder or violet crystals, practically insoluble in water, soluble in
          alcohol.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Methyl stearate R. C19H38O2.
          Description. A white or pale yellow, crystalline mass.
          Melting point. About 38°C.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          1-Naphthol R. C10H8O.
          Description. Colourless crystals or a white, crystalline powder; odour, characteristic.
          Solubility. Soluble in 5 parts of ethanol (~750 g/l) TS (may form a slightly opalescent,
          colourless or almost colourless solution).
          Melting range. 93-96°C.
          Sulfated ash. Not more than 0.5 mg/g.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          1-Naphthol TS.
          Procedure. Dissolve 20 g of 1-naphthol R in 100 ml of ethanol (~750 g/l) TS. Protect
          from light and use within a few days of preparation.


112
                                                              Reagents and solutions



Neutral red R. C.I. 50040; C.I. Basic red; C15H17ClN4.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Nitric acid, fuming, R. HNO3.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Nitric acid (~ 1000 g/l) TS. d ~ 1.41.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Nitric acid (~ 750 g/l) TS.
Procedure. Dilute 750 ml of nitric acid (~1000 g/l) TS with sufﬁcient water to
produce 1000 ml (approximately 12 mol/l).

Nitric acid (~500 g/l) TS.
Procedure. Dilute 500 ml of nitric acid (~1000 g/l) TS with sufﬁcient water to
produce 1000 ml (approximately 8 mol/l).

Nitric acid (~225 g/l) TS.
Procedure. Dilute 225 ml of nitric acid (~1000 g/l) TS with sufﬁcient water to
produce 1000 ml (approximately 3.5 mol/l).

Nitric acid R. HNO3 (concentration: 69–70%, density: about 1.42 g/ml)
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Nitro-chromic acid TS.
Procedure. Mix equal volumes of nitric acid (~225 g/l) TS and chromic acid TS.

Nitrogen. N2.
Nitrogen, washed and dried.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Nitrogen for chromatography.
Contains not less than 99.95 per cent V/V of N2.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Nitrogen, oxygen-free.
Nitrogen R which has been freed from oxygen by passing it through alkaline
pyrogallol solution R.

Nitrogen R. N2.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Oracet blue 2R. CI 61110. 1-amino-4-(phenylamino)anthracene-9,10-dione.
C20H14N2O2. mp: about 194 °C.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Ox bile, dehydrated, R. Dehydrated, puriﬁed fresh bile.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Pancreatic digest of casein R.
A suitable commercially available reagent.


                                                                                 113
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Pancreatic digest of gelatin R.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Papaic digest of soybean meal R.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Parafﬁn, liquid, R.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Peptone, dried, R. A variety of peptones are available from casein, meat, beef or a
          mixture of these.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Perchloric acid (~ 1170 g/l) TS. d ~ 1.67.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Petroleum, light, R.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Phenol R. C6H6O
          Description. Colourless, or at most faintly pink, cohering or separate acicular
          crystals, or crystalline masses; characteristic odour. Corrosive, and blanches the
          skin and mucous membranes.
          Solubility. Soluble in about 15 parts of water and in about 100 parts of liquid
          parafﬁn R; freely soluble in ethanol (~750 g/l) TS, ether R and chloroform R.
          Completeness of solution. 1.0 g dissolves completely in 15 ml of water at 15°C.
          Congealing temperature. Not below 40.5°C.
          Residue on evaporation. Evaporate on a water-bath and dry to constant weight at
          105°C; leaves not more than 0.5 mg/g of residue.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Phenolphthalein R. C20H14O4.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Phenolphthalein TS.
          Dissolve 1 g of phenolphthalein in 100 ml of ethanol R.

          Phenolphthalein/ethanol TS.
          Procedure. Dissolve 1.0 g of phenolphthalein R in sufﬁcient ethanol (~ 750 g/l) TS
          to produce 100 ml.

          Phenol red R. Phenolsulfonphthalein, C19HI4O5S.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Phenol red/ethanol TS.
          Procedure. Dissolve 0.05 g of phenol red R in a mixture of 2.85 ml of sodium
          hydroxide (0.05 mol/l) VS and 5 ml of ethanol (~710 g/l) TS. Warm the solution
          slightly and after cooling dilute with sufﬁcient ethanol (~150 g/l) TS to produce
          250 ml.

          Phloroglucinol R. Benzene-1,3,5-triol dihydrate; C6H6O3,2H2O.
          Description. White or pale cream crystals.


114
                                                                Reagents and solutions



Melting point. About 220°C.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Phloroglucinol TS.
Procedure. Dissolve 1 g of phloroglucinol R in 100 ml of ethanol (~750 g/l) TS.

Phosphate buffer, pH 7.4, TS.
Procedure. Dissolve 6.8 g of potassium dihydrogen phosphate R in 250 ml of water
and add 393.4 ml of sodium hydroxide (0.1 mol/l) VS.

Phosphate buffer solution, pH 7.2.
Mix 50 ml of 0.2 mol/l potassium dihydrogen phosphate TS for buffer solution
and 34.7 ml of 0.2 mol/l sodium hydroxide VS, and add water to make 200 ml.

Phosphomolybdic acid R. H3PO4,12MoO3,24H2O.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Phosphorus pentoxide R. P2O5.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Poly(dimethyl)(diphenyl)siloxane.
Contains 95 per cent of methyl groups and 5 per cent of phenyl groups. DB-5, SE52.
Stationary phase for gas chromatography.
A suitable commercially available material for column chromatography.

Poly(dimethyl)siloxane.
Silicone gum rubber (methyl). Organosilicon polymer with the appearance of a
semi-liquid, colourless gum.
A suitable commercially available material for column chromatography.

Polysorbate 20 R. Quality conforms to the monograph in The international
pharmacopoeia (5).

Polysorbate 80 R. Quality conforms to the monograph in The international
pharmacopoeia (5).

Potassium bromide R. KBr.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Potassium chlorate R. KClO3.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Potassium dichromate R. K2Cr2O7.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Potassium dichromate (0.0167 mol/l) VS. Potassium dichromate R, dissolved in
water to contain 4.904 g of K2Cr2O7 in 1000 ml.
Method of standardization. Ascertain the exact concentration of the 0.0167 mol/l
solution in the following manner: Place 25.0 ml of the potassium dichromate
solution into a glass-stoppered ﬂask. Add 2 g of potassium iodide R, dilute with
200 ml of water, add 5 ml of hydrochloric acid (~420 g/l) TS, allow to stand for
10 minutes in a dark place, and titrate the liberated iodine with sodium thiosulfate


                                                                                  115
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          (0.1 mol/l) VS, adding 3 ml of starch TS as the end-point is approached. Correct
          for a blank determined using the same quantities of the same reagents.

          Potassium dihydrogen phosphate R. KH2PO4.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Potassium dihydrogen phosphate TS (0.2 mol/l)
          Dissolve 27.22 g of potassium dihydrogen phosphate in water to make 1000 ml.

          Potassium hydrogen phthalate R. C8H5KO4.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Potassium hydroxide. KOH
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Potassium hydroxide R. KOH.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Potassium hydroxide (~110 g/l) TS. A solution of potassium hydroxide R
          containing about 112 g of KOH per litre (approximately 2 mol/l).

          Potassium hydroxide (~55 g/l) TS. A solution of potassium hydroxide R containing
          about 56 g of KOH per litre (approximately 1 mol/l).

          Potassium iodide R. KI.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Potassium iodide TS.
          Dissolve 16.5 g of potassium iodide in water to make 100 ml. Preserve in light-
          resistant containers. Prepare before use (1 mol/l).

          Potassium iodide AsR.
          Potassium iodide R that complies with the following test: Dissolve 10 g of potassium
          iodide R in 25 ml of hydrochloric acid (~ 250 g/l) as TS and 35 ml of water, add 2
          drops of stannous chloride AsTS and apply the general test for arsenic; no visible
          stain is produced.

          Potassium iodide (80 g/l) TS. A solution of potassium iodide R containing about
          83 g of KI per litre (approximately 0.5 mol/l).

          Potassium sulfate R. K2SO4.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Potassium tellurite R. K2TeO3 (approx.)
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Potassium tetrathionate R. K2S4O6.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Prometryn R. C10H19N5S.
          A commercially available reagent suitable for use as a reference material.


116
                                                                Reagents and solutions



1-Propanol R. n-Propanol; propan-1-ol, C3H8O.
Description. A clear, colourless liquid.
Miscibility. Miscible with water and ethanol (~750 g/l) TS.
Boiling range. Not less than 95% distils between 95 and 98°C.
Mass density (ρ20). About 0.803 kg/l.
Residue on evaporation. Evaporate on a water-bath and dry to constant weight at
105°C; leaves a residue of not more than 0.1 mg/g.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

2-Propanol R. Isopropyl alcohol; C3H8O.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Propylene glycol R. Propane diol, C3H8O2.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Pyridine R. C5H5N.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Pyrogallol R. C6H6O3. Benzene-1,2,3-triol.
White crystals, becoming brownish on exposure to air and light, very soluble in
water, in alcohol and in ether, slightly soluble in carbon disulﬁde. On exposure to
air, aqueous solutions, and more rapidly alkaline solutions, become brown owing
to the absorption of oxygen.
mp: about 131 °C.
Store protected from light.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Pyrogallol solution, alkaline.
Dissolve 0.5 g pyrogallol R in 2 ml of carbon dioxide-free water R. Dissolve 12 g
of potassium hydroxide R in 8 ml of carbon dioxide-free water R. Mix the two
solutions immediately before use.

Quinine hydrochloride R. C20H24N2O2,HCl,2H2O. Quality of substance conforms
to the monograph in The international pharmacopoeia (5).

Saponin R.
A suitable commercially available reference material.

Silica gel G
Description. A ﬁne, white, homogeneous powder with an average particle size
of between 10 and 44 μm containing about 130 g of calcium sulfate, hemihydrate
per kg.
Content of calcium sulfate. Place about 0.25 g, accurately weighed, in a ﬂask with a
ground-glass stopper, add 3 ml of hydrochloric acid (~ 70 g/l) TS and 100 ml of
water and shake vigorously for 30 minutes. Filter through a sintered-glass ﬁlter
and wash the residue. Using the combined ﬁltrate and washings, carry out the
assay for calcium by complexometry (5). Each ml of disodium edetate (0.05 mol/l)
VS is equivalent to 7.26 mg of CaSO4.1/2H2O (MW 145.1).
pH. Shake 1 g with 10 ml of carbon-dioxide-free water R for 5 minutes. Measure the
pH potentiometrically (5); pH is about 7.


                                                                                  117
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Preparation. Suspend 30 g in 60 ml of water, shaking vigorously for 30 seconds.
          Carefully coat the cleaned plates with a layer 0.25 mm thick using a spreading
          device. Allow the coated plates to dry in air.
          Separating power. Apply separately to the adsorbent layer 10 μl of 0.10 mg/ml
          solutions containing respectively indophenol blue R, Sudan red G R and dimethyl
          yellow R in toluene R. Develop the plate with the same solvent over a distance
          of 10 cm. The chromatogram shows three clearly separated spots, the spot of
          indophenol blue near the points of application, that of dimethyl yellow in the
          middle of the chromatogram, and that of Sudan red G between the two.

          Silica gel R.
          A suitable commercially available material for column chromatography.

          Silica gel, desiccant, R.
          Description. An amorphous, partly hydrated SiO2, occurring in glassy granules of
          varying sizes. It is frequently coated with a substance that changes colour when the
          capacity to absorb water is exhausted. Such coloured products may be regenerated
          (i.e., may regain their capacity to absorb water) by heating at 110°C until the gel
          assumes the original colour.
          Loss on drying. Ignite 2 g, accurately weighed, at 950±50°C to constant weight; the
          loss is not more than 60 mg/g.
          Water absorption. Place about 10g in a tared weighing-bottle, and weigh. Then place
          the bottle, with the cover removed, for 24 hours in a closed container in which
          80% relative humidity is maintained by being in equilibrium with sulfuric acid
          having a relative density of 1.19. Weigh again; the increase in weight is not less
          than 310 mg/g.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Silver nitrate R. AgNO3.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Silver nitrate (40 g/l) TS. A solution of silver nitrate R containing about 42.5 g of
          AgNO3 per litre (approximately 0.25 mol/l).

          Simazine R. C7H12CIN5.
          A commercially available reagent suitable for use as a reference material.

          Soda lime R.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Sodium acetate R. C2H3NaO2,3H2O.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Sodium acetate (1.6g/l) TS. A solution of sodium acetate R containing about 1.64 g
          of C2H3NaO2 per litre (0.02 mol/l).

          Sodium carbonate R. Na2CO3,10H2O.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Sodium carbonate, anhydrous, R. Na2CO3.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.


118
                                                                  Reagents and solutions



Sodium carbonate (50 g/l) TS. A solution of sodium carbonate R containing about
50 g of Na2CO3 per litre (approximately 0.5 mol/l).

Sodium chloride R. NaCl.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Sodium chloride (400 g/l) TS. A solution of sodium chloride R containing about
400 g of NaCl per litre.

Sodium chloride (100g/l) TS. A solution of sodium chloride R containing about
100 g of NaCl per litre.

Sodium citrate R. C6H5Na3O7.2H2O.
Quality of substance conforms to the monograph in The international pharmacopoeia (5).

Sodium citrate (36.5 g/l) TS. A solution of sodium citrate R containing about 36.5 g
of C6H5Na3O7 per litre.

Sodium deoxycholate R. C23H39NaO4. Containing not less than 90% of C23H39NaO4.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Sodium hydroxide R. NaOH.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Sodium hydroxide (~ 240 g/l) TS. A solution of sodium hydroxide R containing
about 240 g of NaOH per litre of carbon-dioxide-free water R.

Sodium hydroxide (~80g/l) TS. A solution of sodium hydroxide R containing
about 80 g of NaOH per litre (approximately 2 mol/l).

Sodium hydroxide (1 M).
Dissolve 162 g of sodium hydroxide in 150 ml of carbon dioxide-free water R, cool
the solution to room temperature and ﬁlter through hardened ﬁlter paper. Dilute
54.5 ml of the clear ﬁltrate with carbon dioxide-free water R to 1000 ml.
Standardization. weigh accurately about 5 g of potassium hydrogen phthalate,
previously crushed lightly and dried at 120 °C for 2 hours, and dissolve in 75 ml
of carbon dioxide-free water R. Add 0.1 ml of phenolphthalein TS, and titrate with
the sodium hydroxide solution to the production of a permanent pink colour. Each
204.2 mg of potassium hydrogen phthalate is equivalent to 1 ml of 0.1 M sodium
hydroxide VS.
Storage. Solutions of alkali hydroxides absorb carbon dioxide when exposed to
air. They should therefore be stored in bottles with suitable non-glass, well-ﬁtting
stoppers, provided with a tube ﬁlled with the soda lime.
Note. Prepare solutions at lower concentrations (e.g., 0.1 M, 0.01 M) by quantitatively
diluting accurately measured volumes of the 1 M solution with sufﬁcient carbon
dioxide-free water R to yield the desired concentration.
Restandardize the solution frequently.

Sodium hydroxide (1 mol/l) VS. Sodium hydroxide R dissolved in water to
produce a solution containing 40.01 g of NaOH in 1000 ml.
Method of standardization. Ascertain the exact concentration of the 1 mol/l solution
in the following manner: dry about 5 g of potassium hydrogen phthalate R at 105 °C


                                                                                    119
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          for 3 hours and weigh accurately. If the potassium hydrogen phthalate is in the
          form of large crystals, they should be crushed before drying. Dissolve in 75 ml of
          carbon-dioxide-free water R and titrate with the sodium hydroxide solution, using
          phenolphthalein/ethanol TS as indicator. Each 0.2042 g of potassium hydrogen
          phthalate is equivalent to 1 ml of sodium hydroxide (1 mol/l) VS. Standard
          solutions of sodium hydroxide should be restandardized frequently.
          Storage. Solutions of alkali hydroxides absorb carbon dioxide when exposed to air.
          They should therefore be stored in bottles with suitable non-glass, tightly-ﬁtting
          stoppers, provided with a tube ﬁlled with soda lime R.

          Sodium hydroxide (0.5 mol/l) VS. Sodium hydroxide R dissolved in water to
          produce a solution containing 20.00 g of NaOH in 1000 ml.
          Method of standardization. Ascertain the exact concentration of the solution following
          the method described under sodium hydroxide (1 mol/l) VS.

          Sodium hydroxide (0.1 mol/l) VS. Sodium hydroxide R dissolved in water to
          produce a solution containing 4.001 g of NaOH in 1000 ml.
          Method of standardization. Ascertain the exact concentration of the solution following
          the method described under sodium hydroxide (1 mol/l) VS.

          Sodium hydroxide (0.05 mol/l) VS. Sodium hydroxide R, dissolved in water to
          produce a solution containing 2.000 g of NaOH in 1000 ml.
          Method of standardization. Ascertain the exact concentration of the solution following
          the method described under sodium hydroxide (1 mol/l) VS.

          Sodium hydroxide (0.02 mol/l), carbonate-free, VS. Sodium hydroxide R, dissolved
          in water to produce a solution containing 0.8001 g of NaOH in 1000 ml.
          Method of standardization. Ascertain the exact concentration of the solution following
          the method described under sodium hydroxide (1 mol/l) VS.

          Sodium hydroxide, methanolic TS.
          Procedure. Dissolve 2.5 g of sodium hydroxide R in 10 ml of carbon-dioxide-free
          water R. Add 1 ml of propylene glycol R and dilute to 100 ml with methanol R.

          Sodium hypochlorite TS. Containing 100-140 g of available chlorine per litre.
          Description. A yellowish liquid; odour of chlorine. A suitable commercially
          available reagent.

          Sodium metabisulﬁte R. Na2O5S2.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Sodium metabisulﬁte (150 g/l) TS.
          A solution of sodium metabisulﬁte R containing about 150 g of Na2O5S2 per litre.

          Sodium pyruvate R. C3H3NaO2.
          Description. An almost white to white powder or a crystalline powder.
          Solubility. Soluble in water.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Sodium sulfate, anhydrous, R. Na2SO3.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.


120
                                                                  Reagents and solutions



Sodium sulﬁde TS. Na2S
Dissolve 5 g of sodium sulﬁde ennaehydrate in a mixture of 10 ml of water and
30 ml of glycerin. Or dissolve 5 g of sodium hydroxide in a mixture of 30 ml of
water and 90 ml of glycerin, saturate half the volume of this solution with hydrogen
sulﬁde, while cooling, and mix with the remaining half. Preserve in well-ﬁlled,
light-resistant bottles. Use within 3 months.

Sodium sulﬁde ennaehydrate R. Na2S,9H2O
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Sodium sulﬁte, anhydrous, R. Na2SO3
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Sodium tetrahydroborate R. NaBH4.
Hygroscopic crystals, freely soluble in water, soluble in ethanol.

Sodium thiosulfate R. Na2S2O3,5H2O.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Sodium thiosulfate (0.1 mol/l) VS. Sodium thiosulfate R, dissolved in water to
produce a solution containing 15.82 g of Na2S2O3 in 1000 ml.
Method of standardization. Ascertain the exact concentration of the 0.1 mol/l solution
in the following manner: transfer 30.0 ml of potassium dichromate (0.0167 mol/l)
VS to a glass-stoppered ﬂask and dilute with 50 ml of water. Add 2 g of potassium
iodide R and 5 ml of hydrochloric acid (~250 g/l) TS, stopper and allow to stand
for 10 minutes. Dilute with 100 ml of water and titrate the liberated iodine with
the sodium thiosulfate solution, using starch TS as indicator. Sodium thiosulfate
solutions should be restandardized frequently.

Stannous chloride R. SnCl2,2H2O.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Stannous chloride TS.
Procedure. Dissolve 330 g of stannous chloride R in 100 ml of hydrochloric acid
(~250 g/l) TS and sufﬁcient water to produce 1000 ml.

Stannous chloride AsTS.
Procedure. Prepare from stannous chloride TS by adding an equal volume of
hydrochloric acid (~250 g/l) TS, boiling down to the original volume, and ﬁltering
through a ﬁne-grained ﬁlter-paper.
Test for arsenic. To 10 ml add 6 ml of water and 10 ml of hydrochloric acid (~250 g/l)
AsTS, and distil 16 ml. To the distillate add 50 ml of water and 2 drops of stannous
chloride AsTS and apply the general test for arsenic. The colour of the stain
produced is not more intense than that produced from a 1-ml standard stain,
showing that the amount of arsenic does not exceed 1 μg/ml.

Starch R.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Starch, soluble, R.
A suitable commercially available reagent.


                                                                                    121
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Starch TS.
          Procedure. Mix 0.5 g of starch R or of soluble starch R with 5 ml of water, and add
          this solution, with constant stirring, to sufﬁcient water to produce about 100 ml;
          boil for a few minutes, cool, and ﬁlter.
          Note. Starch TS should be freshly prepared.

          Styrene-divinylbenzene copolymer.
          Porous, rigid, cross-linked polymer beads. Several grades are available with
          different sizes of beads. The size range of the beads is speciﬁed after the name of
          the reagent in the tests where it is used.
          A suitable commercially available material.

          Sucrose R. C12H22O11.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Sudan red G R. 1-(4-Phenylazophenylazo)-2-naphthol; sudan III; solvent red 23;
          C.I. 26100; C22H16N4O.
          Description. A reddish brown powder.
          Solubility. Practically insoluble in water; soluble in chloroform R.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Sudan red TS.
          Procedure. Dissolve 0.5 g of sudan red G R in 100 ml of glacial acetic acid R.

          Sulfuric acid R. H2SO4
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Sulfuric acid (~1760 g/l) TS. d ~ 1.84.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Sulfuric acid (~1160 g/l) TS.
          Procedure. Add 660 ml of sulfuric acid (~1760 g/l) TS to sufﬁcient water to produce
          1000 ml.

          Sulfuric acid (~350 g/l) TS.
          Procedure. Add 200 ml of sulfuric acid (~1760 g/l) TS to sufﬁcient water to produce
          1000 ml.

          Sulfuric acid (~300 g/l) TS.
          Procedure. Add 171 ml of sulfuric acid (~ 1760 g/l) TS to sufﬁcient water to produce
          1000 ml (approximately 3 mol/l).

          Sulfuric acid (~ 37 g/l) TS.
          Procedure. Add 21.5 ml of sulfuric acid (~ 1760 g/l) TS to sufﬁcient water to produce
          1000 ml (approximately 0.375 mol/l).

          Tetracycline R. C22H24N2O8.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          N,N,N’,N’-Tetramethyl-p-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride R. C10H16N2, 2HCl.
          Description. Whitish grey crystals.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.


122
                                                                    Reagents and solutions



Thionine R. C.I. 52000; C12H10ClN3S.
Description. Blackish green glistening crystals.
Solubility. Freely soluble in hot water.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Thionine TS.
Procedure. Dissolve 0.2 g of thionine R in 100 ml of ethanol (~188 g/l) TS.

Toluene R. C7H8. Methylbenzene.
A clear, colourless, ﬂammable liquid, very slightly soluble in water, miscible with
alcohol. d20
          20
             : 0.865 to 0.870.
bp: about 110 °C.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Triﬂuoroacetic acid (TFA). CF3COOH.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

2,2,4-Trimethylpentane R. C8H18.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Trinitrophenol R. C6H3N3O7.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Trinitrophenol, ethanolic, TS.
Procedure. Dissolve 1 g of trinitrophenol R in 100 ml of ethanol (~750 g/l) TS.

Tropaeolin O R. C.I. 14270; E103: resorcin yellow; chrysoin S; sulpho orange; acid
orange 6; C12H9N2NaO5S.
Description. Produces a yellow colour in moderately alkaline solutions and an
orange colour in strongly alkaline solutions (pH range 11.0-12.7).
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Water, carbon-dioxide-free, R. Water that has been boiled vigorously for a few
minutes and protected from the atmosphere during cooling and storage.

Xylene R. C8H10.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

D-Xylose R. C5H10O5.
Description. A white, crystalline powder.
Speciﬁc optical rotation. Dissolve 1 g in 10 ml of water; [α]20°C
                                                             D
                                                                  = about +20°.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Yeast extract, water-soluble, R.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Zinc R. Zn; granulate, powder, or dust.
A suitable commercially available reagent.

Zinc, AsR, granulated. Granulated zinc R that complies with the following tests:


                                                                                      123
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          Limit of arsenic. Add 10 ml of stannated hydrochloric acid (~ 250 g/l) AsTS to 50 ml
          of water, and apply the general test for arsenic; use 10 g of granulated zinc R and
          allow the reaction to continue for 1 hour; no visible stain is produced.
          Test for sensitivity. Repeat the test for arsenic with the addition of 0.1 ml of dilute
          arsenic AsTS; a faint, but distinct yellow stain is produced.

          Zinc acetate R. C4H6O4Zn,2H2O.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Zinc acetate/aluminium chloride TS.
          Procedure. Dissolve 200 g of zinc acetate R and 5 g of aluminium chloride R in
          sufﬁcient water to produce 1000 ml.

          Zinc chloride R. ZnCl2.
          A suitable commercially available reagent.

          Zinc chloride, iodinated, TS.
          Procedure. Dissolve 40 g of zinc chloride R and 13 g of potassium iodide R in 21 ml
          of water. Add 1 g of iodine R and shake for 15 minutes. Filter if necessary.
          Storage. Store protected from light.




124
                                                                           References




                                                              References

1. Quality control methods. In: Remington: the science and practice of pharmacy, 19th
   ed. Easton, PA, MACK, 1995:118–119.

2. Lachman L et al. Quality control charts. In: The theory and practice of industrial
   pharmacy. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1986:817–824.

3. WHO guidelines for sampling of pharmaceutical products and related materials.
   In: WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations for Pharmaceutical Preparations.
   Thirty-ninth report. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2005 (WHO Technical
   Report Series, No. 929) Annex 4.

4. WHO guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) for herbal medicines.
   Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.

5. The international pharmacopoeia, 4th ed. Vol. 1 and Vol. 2. Geneva, World Health
   Organization, 2006; First supplement, 2008.

6. Lowe DA. Guide to international recommendations on names and symbols for
   quantities and on units of measurement. Geneva, World Health Organization,
   1975.

7. The SI for the health professions. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1977.




                                                                                 125
126
                                                                          Selected bibliography




                                               Selected bibliography

National and regional pharmacopoeias
      European Pharmacopoeia, 5th ed. Strasbourg. European Directorate for the Quality
      of Medicines, Council of Europe, 2004.

      Farmacopea Argentina, Vol. 1, 7th ed. Buenos Aires, Ministry of Health, 2003.

      The Japanese pharmacopoeia, 14th ed. (English ed.). Tokyo, Ministry of Health, Labour
      and Welfare, 2001.

      The Korean Pharmacopoeia, 8th ed. (English ed.). Seoul, Korea Food and Drug
      Administration, 2002.

      Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Vol. I (English ed.). Beijing, Chemical
      Industry Press, 2005.

      Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China. Vol. 2 (English ed.). Beijing, Chemical
      Industry Press, 2005.

      Thai herbal pharmacopoeia, Vol. 1. Bangkok, Department of Medical Sciences,
      Ministry of Public Health, 1998.

      Thai herbal pharmacopoeia, Vol. 2. Bangkok, Department of Medical Sciences,
      Ministry of Public Health, 2000.

      Thai pharmacopoeia, Vol. 1. Bangkok, Department of Medical Sciences, Ministry of
      Public Health, 1987.

      The United States pharmacopeia 28 and the National Formulary 23. Rockville, MD, The
      United States Pharmacopeia Convention, Inc., 2004.


Other publications
      WHO guidelines on Good Agricultural and Collection Practices (GACP) for Medicinal
      Plants, Geneva, World Health Organization, 2003

      WHO guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance systems,
      Geneva, World Health Organization, 2004

      WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to contaminants
      and residues, Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.

      WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants, Volume 1. Geneva, World Health
      Organization, 1999




                                                                                          127
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants, Volume 2. Geneva, World Health
          Organization, 2002

          WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants, Volume 3. Geneva, World Health
          Organization, 2007

          WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants, Volume 4. Geneva, World Health
          Organization, 2009

          WHO monographs on selected medicinal plants commonly used in the Newly Independent
          States (NIS), Geneva, World Health Organization, 2010




128
                                                                                                    Glossary




                                                                                       Glossary

       The terms that are relevant for the reader of this document are described for
       reference. These are extracted from the WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal
       medicines with reference to contaminants and residues.1

       The number in parentheses following a term refer to the number of the publications
       given in the reference list; sometimes it was necessary to adapt the deﬁnitions so
       that they would apply properly to herbal medicines. Where references are given,
       they identify the source documents from which terms have been abstracted or
       derived.


Terms relating to herbal medicines
       The terms and their deﬁnitions have been selected and adopted from other WHO
       documents and guidelines that are widely used by WHO Member States. Deﬁnitions
       of the terms may differ from those adopted in regulations and/or in common
       usage in some Member States. However, one of the purposes of these deﬁnitions is
       to provide consistency in terminology with other relevant WHO documents in this
       ﬁeld, such as the WHO General guidelines for methodologies on research and evaluation
       of traditional medicine (1) and WHO Good manufacturing practices (2,3). It should also
       be noted that these deﬁnitions have been developed to meet the demand for the
       establishment of standard, internationally acceptable deﬁnitions to be used in the
       evaluation and research of herbal medicines (1).

       Herbs (1)
       Herbs include crude plant material such as leaves, ﬂowers, fruit, seeds, stems,
       wood, bark, roots, rhizomes or other plant parts, which may be entire, fragmented
       or powdered.

       Herbal materials (1)
       Herbal materials are either whole plants or parts of medicinal plants in the crude
       state. They include herbs, fresh juices, gums, ﬁxed oils, essential oils, resins and
       dry powders of herbs. In some countries, these materials may be processed by
       various local procedures, such as steaming, roasting, or stir baking with honey,
       alcoholic beverages or other materials.2

       Herbal preparations (1)
       Herbal preparations are the basis for ﬁnished herbal products and may include
       comminuted or powdered herbal materials, or extracts, tinctures and fatty oils,
       expressed juices and processed exudates of herbal materials. They are produced
       with the aid of extraction, distillation, expression, fractionation, puriﬁcation,
       concentration, fermentation or other physical or biological processes. They also

       1
         WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues.
         Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
       2
         The wording of this deﬁnition has been modiﬁed from the original.



                                                                                                         129
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          include preparations made by steeping or heating herbal materials in alcoholic
          beverages and/or honey, or in other materials.

          Finished herbal products or herbal medicinal products (1)
          These terms refer to products containing as active substances exclusively herbal
          drugs or herbal drug preparations. They may consist of herbal preparations made
          from one or more herbs. If more than one herb is used, the term “mixed herbal
          product” may also be used. They may contain excipients in addition to the active
          ingredients. In some countries herbal medicines may contain, by tradition, natural
          organic or inorganic active ingredients, which are not of plant origin (e.g. animal
          materials and mineral materials). Generally however, ﬁnished products or mixed
          products to which chemically deﬁned active substances have been added, including
          synthetic compounds and/or isolated constituents from herbal materials, are not
          considered to be herbal.

          Medicinal plant materials (see Herbal materials)

          Medicinal plant (3)
          A plant, either growing wild or cultivated, used for its medicinal purposes.


Terms relating to contaminants and residues in herbal materials
          In general the following terms and their explanations as they relate to contaminants
          and residues in herbal medicines have been adopted verbatim or where necessary
          adapted from the deﬁnitions for pesticide residues in foods, developed by the
          Codex Alimentarius Commission (4) and the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on
          Pesticide Residues. Thus when Member States consider the terms relevant to
          their individual needs, these documents should be consulted. The reason for this
          suggestion is that in future the Joint FAO/WHO Meetings on Pesticide Residues
          (JMPR) will probably continue as the group mandated to evaluate the safety of
          pesticides and the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA)
          for contaminants in herbal medicines and in foods.

          The deﬁnitions contained in this glossary were originally quoted from various
          documents listed above; however, they were modiﬁed at the WHO Consultation
          on Contaminants and Residues to adapt them to the scope of this publication.1

          In general when countries are setting standards for their herbal medicines they
          should take into account the differences in dosages, quantities and frequency of
          use, and methods of preparation of herbal medicines relative to those of foods.

          Contamination (2)
          The undesired introduction of impurities of a chemical or microbiological nature,
          or of foreign matter, into or onto a starting material, intermediate product or
          ﬁnished herbal product during production, sampling, packaging or repackaging,
          storage or transport.



          1
              WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues.
              Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.



130
                                                                                            Glossary



Cross-contamination (2)
The contamination of a starting material, intermediate product or ﬁnished product
with another starting material or product during production.

Foreign matter (see Section 4)
Material consisting of any or all of the following:

— parts of the herbal material or materials other than those named with the limits
  speciﬁed for the herbal material concerned;
— any organism, part or product of an organism, other than that named in the
  speciﬁcation and description of the herbalmaterial concerned;
— mineral admixtures such as soil, stones, sand, and dust; and glass, metal and
  plastics or any other extraneous materials. These may be loose or adhering to
  these herbal materials.

Acceptable daily intake (ADI) of a chemical (4)
The estimated maximum amount of an agent, expressed on a body mass basis,
to which an individual in a (sub)population may be exposed daily over his or
her lifetime without appreciable health risk. ADIs are normally determined for
substances that are deliberately added (to foods) or are residues that are present as
a result of approved uses of the agent.

A daily intake, which, during an entire lifetime, appears to be without appreciable
risk to the health of the consumer, on the basis of all the known facts at the time
of the evaluation of the chemical by the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide
Residues. It is expressed in milligrams of the chemical per kilogram of body
weight.1

Acceptable residue level (ARL) (4)
The ARL is given in mg of pesticide per kg of medicinal plant material and can be
calculated from the maximum “acceptable daily intake” (ADI) of the pesticide for
humans, as recommended by FAO and WHO, and the mean daily intake (MDI) of
the medicinal plant material.

Acute reference dose (ARD) (4)
The acute reference dose of a chemical is an estimate of the amount of a substance,
normally expressed on a body-weight basis, that can be ingested in a period of
24 hours or less without appreciable health risk to the consumer on the basis of all
known facts at the time of the evaluation.

ARD is the amount of pesticide to which a person is exposed, usually, at one day’s
regimen of herbal medicines and which results in acute effects on the human body.
ARD estimations include a safety factor to ensure that the elderly, infants, children
and those whose systems are under stress because of illness, are protected.

Extraneous maximum residue limit (EMRL) (4)
A pesticide residue or a contaminant arising from environmental sources (including
former agricultural uses) other than the use of a pesticide or contaminant substance

1
    For additional information on ADIs relative to pesticide residues refer to the Report of the 1975
    Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues, FAO Plant Production and Protection Series No.
    1 or WHO Technical Report Series No. 592.



                                                                                                131
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          directly or indirectly on the herbal medicine. The concentration is expressed in
          milligrams of pesticide residue or contaminant per kilogram of the herbal medicine.

          Maximum residue limit (MRL) (4)
          The MRL is the maximum concentration of a pesticide residue (expressed as mg/
          kg) recommended by the Codex Alimentarius Commission to be legally permitted
          (in food commodities and animal feeds). MRLs are based on good agricultural
          practices (GAP) data established for foods, and foods derived from commodities
          that comply with the respective MRLs are intended to be toxicologically acceptable.

          Such MRL values might be used by analogy for herbal medicines.

          MRLs which are primarily intended to apply in international trade are derived
          from estimations made by the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting on Pesticide Residues
          (JMPR) following:

          O   Toxicological assessment of the pesticide and its residue and review of residue
               data from supervised trials and supervised uses including those reﬂecting
               national food agricultural practices. Data from supervised trials conducted at
               the highest nationally recommended, authorized or registered uses are usually
               included in the review.
          O   Consideration of the various dietary residue estimates and determinations both
               at the national and international levels in comparison with the ADI, should
               indicate that herbal medicines complying with MRLs proposed by the Codex
               Alimentarius Commission are safe for human consumption.
          O   In order to accommodate variations in national pest control requirements, Codex
               MRLs take into account the higher levels shown to arise in such supervised trials,
               which are considered to represent effective pest control practices. For herbal
               medicines, the levels recommended by the Codex Alimentarius Commission to
               be legally permitted in food commodities or in animal feeds could be applicable
               to herbal materials/preparations. Generally MRLs would be based on GAP
               data and are intended to be toxicologically acceptable.

          GAP includes the nationally authorized safe uses of pesticides under actual
          conditions necessary for effective and reliable pest control. It encompasses a range
          of levels of pesticide applications up to the highest authorized use, applied in a
          manner which leaves a residue that is the smallest amount practicable. Authorized
          safe uses are determined at the national level and include nationally registered
          or recommended uses, which take into account public and occupational health
          and environmental safety considerations. GAP applies at all stages of production,
          storage, transport, distribution and processing of herbal medicines.

          Permitted daily exposure
          The term “permitted daily exposure” (PDE) is deﬁned in the ICH guidelines as
          a pharmaceutically acceptable intake of residual solvents to avoid confusion of
          differing ADIs for the same substance (5).

          Pesticide
          For the purpose of this publication, pesticides are deﬁned as any substance intended
          for preventing, destroying, attracting, repelling, or controlling any pest — including
          unwanted species of plants or animals — during production, storage, transport,
          distribution and processing. The term includes substances intended for use as a


132
                                                                                  Glossary



plant-growth regulator, defoliant, desiccant, fruit thinning agent, or sprouting
inhibitor and substances applied to crops either before or after harvest to protect
the commodity from deterioration during storage and transport. The term normally
excludes fertilizers and plant nutrients.

Pesticide residue (4)
A pesticide residue is any speciﬁed substance in food, agricultural commodities or
animal feed resulting from the use of a pesticide. The term includes any derivatives
of a pesticide, such as conversion products, metabolites, reaction products and
impurities considered to be of toxicological signiﬁcance.

Persistent organic pollutants (POPs)
Persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are chemical substances that persist in the
environment, bioaccumulate through the food web and pose a risk of causing
adverse effects to human health and the environment. With the evidence of long-
range transport of these substances to regions where they have never been used or
produced and the consequent threats they pose to the environment of the whole
globe, the international community has, on several occasions, called for urgent
global action to reduce and eliminate releases of these chemicals.1

Tolerable intake (TI) — general deﬁnition
Tolerable intake is deﬁned as an estimate of the intake of a substance over a lifetime
that is considered to be without appreciable health risk (6).

           TI of a contaminant
           In the context of this publication, the TI is deﬁned as the estimated
           amount of a contaminant, expressed on a body mass basis, to which each
           individual in a (sub)population may be exposed over a speciﬁed period
           without appreciable risk. The term “tolerable” is used for agents that are
           not deliberately added, such as contaminants.

           TI of pesticide as a contaminant in herbal products
           The estimated amount of pesticide consumed as a contaminant in herbal
           products, together with other sources over a period of time, ranging from
           daily to lifetime, without causing harm to humans.

Residual solvents
These are residues of organic solvents that are used or produced in the manufacture
of and processing of herbal preparations/products. Solvents are classiﬁed by the
ICH (CPMP/ICH 283/95) according to their potential risk into:

— class 1 (solvents to be avoided such as benzene);
— class 2 (limited toxic potential such as methanol or hexane);
— class 3 (low toxic potential such as ethanol).




1
    United Nations Environment Programme (http://www.chem.unep.ch/pops/default.html).



                                                                                        133
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          References to the glossary
          1. General guidelines for methodologies on research and evaluation of traditional
             medicine. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2000 (Document WHO/EDM/
             TRM/2000.1).

          2. Good manufacturing practices for pharmaceutical products: main principles. In: WHO
             guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) for herbal medicines. Geneva,
             World Health Organization, 2007.

          3. Good manufacturing practices: updated supplementary guidelines for manufacture of
             herbal medicines. In: WHO guidelines for Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) for
             herbal medicines. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.

          4. Pesticide residues in food — methods of analysis and sampling. Codex Alimentarius.
             Vol. 2A, Part 1, 2nd ed. Rome, Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme,
             2000.

          5. International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for
             Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use. ICH Harmonized Tripartite
             Guideline, Impurities: Guidelines for Residual Solvents (Q3C (R3)) (http://www.
             ich.org/cache/compo/363-272-1.html#Q3C).

          6. International Programme on Chemical Safety. Assessing human health risks of
             chemicals: derivation of guidance values for health-based exposure limits. Geneva, World
             Health Organization, 1994. (Environmental Health Criteria 170.) (See: http://
             www.inchem.org/documents/ehc/ehc/ehc170.htm#SectionNumber:2.2).




134
                                                                                                                                Annex




                                         Annex
          WHO good practices for pharmaceutical
                   quality control laboratories1

Contents
              General considerations ......................................................................................136
              Glossary ...............................................................................................................138
              Part One. Management and infrastructure .....................................................143
              1. Organization and management ...............................................................143
              2. Quality management system ....................................................................144
              3. Control of documentation.........................................................................146
              4. Records ........................................................................................................146
              5. Data-processing equipment ......................................................................147
              6. Personnel .....................................................................................................148
              7. Premises .......................................................................................................149
              8. Equipment, instruments and other devices ...........................................150
              9. Contracts......................................................................................................151
              Part Two. Materials, equipment, instruments and other devices................151
              10. Reagents ......................................................................................................151
              11. Reference substances and reference materials .......................................153
              12. Calibration, veriﬁcation of performance and qualiﬁcation
                   of equipment, instruments and other devices .......................................155
              13. Traceability ..................................................................................................156
              Part Three. Working procedures ......................................................................156
              14. Incoming samples ......................................................................................156
              15. Analytical worksheet .................................................................................159
              16. Validation of analytical procedures .........................................................160
              17. Testing ..........................................................................................................162
              18. Evaluation of test results ...........................................................................162
              19. Certiﬁcate of analysis.................................................................................164
              20. Retained samples .......................................................................................165
              Part Four. Safety .................................................................................................165
              21. General rules ...............................................................................................165
              References ............................................................................................................166
              Appendix
              Equipment for a ﬁrst-stage and medium-sized pharmaceutical
              quality control laboratory .................................................................................169

      1
          Reproduced in its entirety from WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations for Pharmaceutical
          Preparations. Forty-fourth report. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2010 (WHO Technical Report
          Series, No. 957), Annex 1.



                                                                                                                                    135
Quality control methods for herbal materials



General considerations
          The WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations for Pharmaceutical Products
          adopted in 1999 the guidelines entitled WHO Good practices for national
          pharmaceutical control laboratories, which were published as Annex 3 of the
          WHO Technical Report Series, No. 902, 2002. As the other guidelines related to
          laboratory quality assurance have been updated and subsequent inspections for
          the compliance with the guidelines on good practices for national pharmaceutical
          control laboratories indicated that some sections were in need of improvement
          and clariﬁcation, it was considered necessary to prepare a revised text.

          These guidelines provide advice on the quality management system within
          which the analysis of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), excipients and
          pharmaceutical products should be performed to demonstrate that reliable results
          are obtained.

          Compliance with the recommendations provided in these guidelines will help
          promote international harmonization of laboratory practices and will facilitate
          cooperation among laboratories and mutual recognition of results.

          Special attention should be given to ensure the correct and efﬁcient functioning
          of the laboratory. Planning and future budgets should ensure that the necessary
          resources are available inter alia for the maintenance of the laboratory, as well as
          for an appropriate infrastructure and energy supply. Means and procedures should
          be in place (in case of possible supply problems) to ensure that the laboratory can
          continue its activities.

          These guidelines are applicable to any pharmaceutical quality control laboratory,
          be it national, commercial or nongovernmental. However, they do not include
          guidance for those laboratories involved in the testing of biological products,
          e.g. vaccines and blood products. Separate guidance for such laboratories is
          available.

          These guidelines are consistent with the requirements of the WHO guidelines for
          good manufacturing practices (1) and with the requirements of the International
          Standard ISO/IEC 17025:2005 (2), and provide detailed guidance for laboratories
          performing quality control of medicines. The guidance speciﬁc to microbiology
          laboratories can be found in the draft working document WHO guideline on good
          practices for pharmaceutical microbiology laboratories (reference QAS/09.297).

          The good practice outlined below is to be considered as a general guide and it
          may be adapted to meet individual needs provided that an equivalent level of
          quality assurance is achieved. The notes given provide clariﬁcation of the text or
          examples; they do not contain requirements which should be fulﬁlled to comply
          with these guidelines.

          Pharmaceutical quality control testing is usually a matter of repetitive testing
          of samples of APIs or of a limited number of pharmaceutical products, whereas
          national quality control laboratories have to be able to deal with a much wider
          range of pharmaceutical substances and products and, therefore, have to
          apply a wider variety of test methods. Speciﬁc recommendations for national
          pharmaceutical quality control laboratories are addressed in the following text.


136
                                                                               Annex



Particular consideration is given to countries with limited resources wishing
to establish a governmental pharmaceutical quality control laboratory, having
recently done so, or which are planning to modernize an existing laboratory.

Quality control laboratories may perform some or all quality control activities, e.g.
sampling, testing of APIs, excipients, packaging materials and/or pharmaceutical
products, stability testing, testing against speciﬁcations and investigative testing.

For the quality of a medicine sample to be correctly assessed:

O   The submission of a sample of an API, excipient or pharmaceutical product or
     a suspected counterfeit material to the laboratory, selected in accordance with
     national requirements, should be accompanied by a statement of the reason
     why the analysis has been requested.
O   The analysis should be correctly planned and meticulously executed.
O   The results should be competently evaluated to determine whether the sample
     complies with the speciﬁcations or other relevant criteria.

National pharmaceutical quality control laboratories
The government, normally through the national medicines regulatory authority
(NMRA), may establish and maintain a pharmaceutical quality control laboratory
to carry out the required tests and assays to verify that APIs, excipients and
pharmaceutical products meet the prescribed speciﬁcations. Large countries may
require several pharmaceutical quality control laboratories which conform to
national legislation, and appropriate arrangements should, therefore, be in place
to monitor their compliance with a quality management system. Throughout the
process of marketing authorization and postmarketing surveillance, the laboratory
or laboratories work closely with the NMRA.

A national pharmaceutical quality control laboratory provides effective support
for an NMRA acting together with its inspection services. The analytical results
obtained should accurately describe the properties of the samples assessed,
permitting correct conclusions to be drawn about the quality of the samples of
medicines analysed, and also serving as an adequate basis for any subsequent
administrative regulations and legal action.

National pharmaceutical quality control laboratories usually encompass essentially
two types of activity:

— compliance testing of APIs, pharmaceutical excipients and pharmaceutical
  products employing “ofﬁcial” methods including pharmacopoeial methods,
  validated analytical procedures provided by the manufacturer and approved
  by the relevant government authority for marketing authorization or validated
  analytical procedures developed by the laboratory; and
— investigative testing of suspicious, illegal, counterfeit substances or products,
  submitted for examination by medicine inspectors, customs or police.

To ensure patient safety, the role of the national pharmaceutical quality control
laboratory should be deﬁned in the general pharmaceutical legislation of the
country in such a way that the results provided by it can, if necessary, lead to
enforcement of the law and legal action.


                                                                                 137
Quality control methods for herbal materials



Glossary
          The deﬁnitions given below apply to the terms as used in these guidelines. They
          may have different meanings in other contexts.

          acceptance criterion for an analytical result
          Predeﬁned and documented indicators by which a result is considered to be within
          the limit(s) or to exceed the limit(s) indicated in the speciﬁcation.

          accuracy
          The degree of agreement of test results with the true value or the closeness of the
          results obtained by the procedure to the true value (1).

          Note: It is normally established on samples of the material to be examined that
          have been prepared to quantitative accuracy. Accuracy should be established
          across the speciﬁed range of the analytical procedure. It is generally acceptable
          to use a “spiked” placebo which contains a known quantity or concentration of a
          reference substance.

          active pharmaceutical ingredient (API)
          Any substance or mixture of substances intended to be used in the manufacture of a
          pharmaceutical dosage form and that, when so used, becomes an active ingredient
          of that pharmaceutical dosage form. Such substances are intended to furnish
          pharmacological activity or other direct effect in the diagnosis, cure, mitigation,
          treatment, or prevention of disease or to affect the structure and function of the
          body (1).

          analytical test report
          An analytical test report usually includes a description of the test procedure(s)
          employed, results of the analysis, discussion and conclusions and/or
          recommendations for one or more samples submitted for testing (see Part three,
          sections 18.7–18.11).

          analytical worksheet
          A printed form, an analytical workbook or electronic means (e-records) for
          recording information about the sample, as well as reagents and solvents used, test
          procedure applied, calculations made, results and any other relevant information
          or comments (see Part three, section 15).

          batch (or lot)
          A deﬁned quantity of starting material, packaging material or product processed in
          a single process or series of processes so that it is expected to be homogeneous. It
          may sometimes be necessary to divide a batch into a number of sub-batches which
          are later brought together to form a ﬁnal homogeneous batch. In the case of terminal
          sterilization the batch size is determined by the capacity of the autoclave. In continuous
          manufacture the batch should correspond to a deﬁned fraction of the production,
          characterized by its intended homogeneity. The batch size can be deﬁned either as a
          ﬁxed quantity or as the amount produced in a ﬁxed time interval (1).

          batch number (or lot number)
          A distinctive combination of numbers and/or letters which uniquely identiﬁes a
          batch on the labels, its batch records and corresponding certiﬁcates of analysis (1).


138
                                                                               Annex



calibration
The set of operations that establish, under speciﬁed conditions, the relationship
between values indicated by an instrument or system for measuring (especially
weighing), recording and controlling, or the values represented by a material
measure, and the corresponding known values of a reference standard. Limits for
acceptance of the results of measuring should be established (1).

certiﬁcate of analysis
The list of test procedures applied to a particular sample with the results obtained
and the acceptance criteria applied. It indicates whether or not the sample complies
with the speciﬁcation (3).

certiﬁed reference material
Reference material, characterized by a metrologically valid procedure for one or
more speciﬁed properties, accompanied by a certiﬁcate that provides the value of
the speciﬁed property, its associated uncertainty and a statement of metrological
traceability (4).

compliance testing
Analysis of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), pharmaceutical excipients,
packaging material or pharmaceutical products according to the requirements
of a pharmacopoeial monograph or a speciﬁcation in an approved marketing
authorization.

control sample
A sample used for testing the continued accuracy and precision of the procedure.
It should have a matrix similar to that of the samples to be analysed. It has an
assigned value with its associated uncertainty.

design qualiﬁcation (DQ)
Documented collection of activities that deﬁne the functional and operational
speciﬁcations of the instrument and criteria for selection of the vendor, based on
the intended purpose of the instrument.

Note: Selection and purchase of a new instrument should follow a conscious
decision process, based on the needs of the technical management. When designing
a new laboratory facility, the design speciﬁcation and the requirements for services
should be agreed between the management team and the agreed suppliers and
documented.

good manufacturing practice(s) (GMP)
That part of quality assurance which ensures that pharmaceutical products are
consistently produced and controlled to the quality standards appropriate to their
intended use and as required by the marketing authorization (1).

installation qualiﬁcation (IQ)
The performance of tests to ensure that the analytical equipment used in a laboratory
is correctly installed and operates in accordance with established speciﬁcations.

management review
A formal, documented review of the key performance indicators of a quality
management system performed by top management.


                                                                                 139
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          manufacturer
          A company that carries out operations such as production, packaging, testing,
          repackaging, labelling and/or relabelling of pharmaceuticals (1).

          marketing authorization (product licence, registration certiﬁcate)
          A legal document issued by the competent medicines regulatory authority that
          authorizes the marketing or free distribution of a pharmaceutical product in the
          respective country after evaluation for safety, efﬁcacy and quality. In terms of
          quality it establishes inter alia the detailed composition and formulation of the
          pharmaceutical product and the quality requirements for the product and its
          ingredients. It also includes details of packaging, labelling, storage conditions,
          shelf-life and approved conditions of use.

          measurement uncertainty
          Non-negative parameter characterizing the dispersion of quantity values being
          attributed to a measurand (analyte), based on the information used (4).

          metrological traceability
          Property of a measurement result whereby the result can be related to a reference
          through a documented, unbroken chain of calibrations, each contributing to the
          measurement uncertainty (4).

          operational qualiﬁcation (OQ)
          Documented veriﬁcation that the analytical equipment performs as intended over
          all anticipated operating ranges.

          out-of-speciﬁcation (OOS) result
          All test results that fall outside the speciﬁcations or acceptance criteria established
          in product dossiers, drug master ﬁles, pharmacopoeias or by the manufacturer (5).

          performance qualiﬁcation (PQ)
          Documented veriﬁcation that the analytical equipment operates consistently
          and gives reproducibility within the deﬁned speciﬁcations and parameters for
          prolonged periods.

          pharmaceutical excipient
          A substance, other than the active pharmaceutical ingredient (API), which has
          been appropriately evaluated for safety and is included in a medicines delivery
          system to:

          — aid in the processing of the medicines delivery system during its manufacture;
          — protect, support or enhance stability, bioavailability or patient acceptability;
          — assist in pharmaceutical product identiﬁcation; or
          — enhance any other attribute of the overall safety and effectiveness of the
            medicine during its storage or use (6, 7).

          pharmaceutical product
          Any material or product intended for human or veterinary use, presented in its
          ﬁnished dosage form or as a starting material for use in such a dosage form, which
          is subject to control by pharmaceutical legislation in the exporting state and/or the
          importing state (1).


140
                                                                               Annex



precision
The degree of agreement among individual results when the procedure is applied
repeatedly to multiple samplings of a homogeneous sample. Precision, usually
expressed as relative standard deviation, may be considered at three levels:
repeatability (precision under the same operating conditions over a short period
of time), intermediate precision (within laboratory variations — different days,
different analysts or different equipment) and reproducibility (precision between
laboratories).

primary reference substance (or standard)
A substance that is widely acknowledged to possess the appropriate qualities
within a speciﬁed context, and whose assigned content is accepted without
requiring comparison with another chemical substance (8).

Note: Pharmacopoeial chemical reference substances are considered to be primary
reference substances. In the absence of a pharmacopoeial reference substance, a
manufacturer should establish a primary reference substance.

qualiﬁcation of equipment
Action of proving and documenting that any analytical equipment complies with
the required speciﬁcations and performs suitably for its intended purpose (see Part
two, section 12).

quality control
All measures taken, including the setting of speciﬁcations, sampling, testing
and analytical clearance, to ensure that raw materials, intermediates, packaging
materials and ﬁnished pharmaceutical products conform with established
speciﬁcations for identity, strength, purity and other characteristics.

quality management system
An appropriate infrastructure, encompassing the organizational structure,
procedures, processes and resources, and systematic actions necessary to ensure
adequate conﬁdence that a product or service will satisfy given requirements for
quality (see Part one, section 2).

quality manager
A member of staff who has a deﬁned responsibility and authority for ensuring that the
management system related to quality is implemented and followed at all times (see
Part one, section 1.3(j)).

quality manual
A handbook that describes the various elements of the quality management system
for assuring the quality of the test results generated by a laboratory (see Part one,
sections 2.1–2.2).

quality unit(s)
An organizational unit, independent of production, which fulﬁls both quality
assurance and quality control responsibilities. This can be in the form of separate
quality assurance and quality control or a single individual or group, depending
on the size and structure of the organization.


                                                                                 141
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          reference material
          Material sufﬁciently homogeneous and stable with respect to one or more
          speciﬁed properties, which has been established to be ﬁt for its intended use in a
          measurement process (4).

          reference substance (or standard)
          An authenticated, uniform material that is intended for use in speciﬁed chemical and
          physical tests, in which its properties are compared with those of the product under
          examination, and which possesses a degree of purity adequate for its intended use (8).

          secondary reference substance (or standard)
          A substance whose characteristics are assigned and/or calibrated by comparison
          with a primary reference substance. The extent of characterization and testing of a
          secondary reference substance may be less than for a primary reference substance (8).

          Note: Often referred to as an “in-house” working standard.

          signature (signed)
          Record of the individual who performed a particular action or review. The record
          can be initials, full handwritten signature, personal seal or authenticated and
          secure electronic signature.

          speciﬁcation
          A list of detailed requirements (acceptance criteria for the prescribed test
          procedures) with which the substance or pharmaceutical product has to conform
          to ensure suitable quality.

          standard operating procedure (SOP)
          An authorized written procedure giving instructions for performing operations
          both general and speciﬁc.

          standard uncertainty
          Uncertainty of the result of a measurement expressed as a standard deviation (4, 9, 10).

          system suitability test
          A test which is performed to ensure that the analytical procedure fulﬁls the
          acceptance criteria which had been established during the validation of the
          procedure. This test is performed before starting the analytical procedure and is to
          be repeated regularly, as appropriate, throughout the analytical run to ensure that
          the system’s performance is acceptable at the time of the test.

          validation of an analytical procedure
          The documented process by which an analytical procedure (or method) is
          demonstrated to be suitable for its intended use.

          veriﬁcation of an analytical procedure
          Process by which a pharmacopoeial method or validated analytical procedure is
          demonstrated to be suitable for the analysis to be performed.

          veriﬁcation of performance
          Test procedure regularly applied to a system (e.g. liquid chromatographic system)
          to demonstrate consistency of response.


142
                                                                                   Annex



Part One. Management and infrastructure
1.   Organization and management
     1.1   The laboratory, or the organization of which it is part, should be an entity
           that is legally authorized to function and can be held legally responsible.
     1.2   The laboratory should be organized and operate so as to meet the
           requirements laid down in these guidelines.

     1.3   The laboratory should:
           (a) have managerial and technical personnel with the authority and
               resources needed to carry out their duties and to identify the occurrence
               of departures from the quality management system or the procedures
               for performing tests and/or calibrations, validation and veriﬁcation,
               and to initiate actions to prevent or minimize such departures;
           (b) have arrangements to ensure that its management and personnel are not
               subject to commercial, political, ﬁnancial and other pressures or conﬂicts
               of interest that may adversely affect the quality of their work;
           (c) have a policy and procedure in place to ensure conﬁdentiality of
               — information contained in marketing authorizations,
               — transfer of results or reports,
               — and to protect data in archives (paper and electronic);
           (d) deﬁne, with the aid of organizational charts, the organization and
               management structure of the laboratory, its place in any parent
               organization (such as the ministry or the NMRA in the case of a national
               pharmaceutical quality control laboratory), and the relationships
               between management, technical operations, support services and the
               quality management system;
           (e) specify the responsibility, authority and interrelationships of all
               personnel who manage, perform or verify work which affects the quality
               of the tests and/or calibrations, validations and veriﬁcations;
           (f) ensure the precise allocation of responsibilities, particularly in the
               designation of speciﬁc units for particular types of medicines;
           (g) nominate trained substitutes/deputies for key management and
               specialized scientiﬁc personnel;
           (h) provide adequate supervision of staff, including trainees, by persons
               familiar with the test and/or calibration, validation and veriﬁcation
               methods and procedures, as well as their purpose and the assessment of
               the results;
           (i) have management which has overall responsibility for the technical
               operations and the provision of resources needed to ensure the required
               quality of laboratory operations;
           (j) designate a member of staff as quality manager who, irrespective of
               other duties he/she may have, will ensure compliance with the quality
               management system. The nominated quality manager should have
               direct access to the highest level of management at which decisions are
               taken on laboratory policies or resources;
           (k) ensure adequate information ﬂow between staff at all levels. Staff are to
               be made aware of the relevance and importance of their activities;
           (l) ensure the traceability of the sample from receipt, throughout the stages
               of testing, to the completion of the analytical test report;


                                                                                     143
Quality control methods for herbal materials



                 (m) maintain an up-to-date collection of all speciﬁcations and related
                     documents (paper or electronic) used in the laboratory; and
                 (n) have appropriate safety procedures (see Part four).
          1.4    The laboratory should maintain a registry with the following functions:
                 (a) receiving, distributing and supervising the consignment of the samples
                     to the speciﬁc units; and
                 (b) keeping records on all incoming samples and accompanying documents.
          1.5    In a large laboratory, it is necessary to guarantee communication and
                 coordination between the staff involved in the testing of the same sample in
                 different units.


2.        Quality management system
          2.1    The laboratory or organization management should establish, implement
                 and maintain a quality management system appropriate to the scope of its
                 activities, including the type, range and volume of testing and/or calibration,
                 validation and veriﬁcation activities it undertakes. The laboratory management
                 should ensure that its policies, systems, programmes, procedures and
                 instructions are described to the extent necessary to enable the laboratory
                 to assure the quality of the test results that it generates. The documentation
                 used in this quality management system should be communicated, available
                 to, and understood and implemented by, the appropriate personnel. The
                 elements of this system should be documented, e.g. in a quality manual, for
                 the organization as a whole and/or for a laboratory within the organization.

                 Note: Quality control laboratories of a manufacturer may have this
                 information in other documents than a quality manual.
          2.2    The quality manual should contain as a minimum:

                 (a) a quality policy statement, including at least the following:
                     (i) a statement of the laboratory management’s intentions with respect
                           to the standard of service it will provide,
                     (ii) a commitment to establishing, implementing and maintaining an
                           effective quality management system,
                     (iii) the laboratory management’s commitment to good professional
                           practice and quality of testing, calibration, validation and
                           veriﬁcation,
                     (iv) the laboratory management’s commitment to compliance with the
                           content of these guidelines,
                     (v) a requirement that all personnel concerned with testing and
                           calibration activities within the laboratory familiarize themselves
                           with the documentation concerning quality and the implementation
                           of the policies and procedures in their work;
                 (b) the structure of the laboratory (organizational chart);
                 (c) the operational and functional activities pertaining to quality, so that the
                     extent and the limits of the responsibilities are clearly deﬁned;
                 (d) outline of the structure of documentation used in the laboratory quality
                     management system;
                 (e) the general internal quality management procedures;
                 (f) references to speciﬁc procedures for each test;


144
                                                                              Annex



      (g) information on the appropriate qualiﬁcations, experience and
          competencies that personnel are required to possess;
      (h) information on initial and in-service training of staff;
      (i) a policy for internal and external audit;
      (j) a policy for implementing and verifying corrective and preventive actions;
      (k) a policy for dealing with complaints;
      (l) a policy for performing management reviews of the quality management
          system;
      (m) a policy for selecting, establishing and approving analytical procedures;
      (n) a policy for handling of OOS results;
      (o) a policy for the employment of appropriate reference substances and
          reference materials;
      (p) a policy for participation in appropriate proﬁciency testing schemes and
          collaborative trials and the evaluation of the performance (applicable to
          national pharmaceutical quality control laboratories, but may be applied
          by other laboratories); and
      (q) a policy to select service providers and suppliers.
2.3   The laboratory should establish, implement and maintain authorized written
      SOPs including, but not limited to, administrative and technical operations,
      such as:
      (a) personnel matters, including qualiﬁcations, training, clothing and
          hygiene;
      (b) the change control;
      (c) internal audit;
      (d) dealing with complaints;
      (e) implementation and veriﬁcation of corrective and preventive actions;
      (f) the purchase and receipt of consignments of materials (e.g. samples,
          reagents);
      (g) the procurement, preparation and control of reference substances and
          reference materials (8);
      (h) the internal labelling, quarantine and storage of materials;
      (i) the qualiﬁcation of equipment (11);
      (j) the calibration of equipment;
      (k) preventive maintenance and veriﬁcation of instruments and equipment;
      (l) sampling, if performed by the laboratory, and visual inspection;
      (m) the testing of samples with descriptions of the methods and equipment
          used;
      (n) atypical and OOS results;
      (o) validation of analytical procedures;
      (p) cleaning of laboratory facilities, including bench tops, equipment, work
          stations, clean rooms (aseptic suites) and glassware;
      (q) monitoring of environmental conditions, e.g. temperature and humidity;
      (r) monitoring storage conditions;
      (s) disposal of reagents and solvent samples; and
      (t) safety measures.
2.4   The activities of the laboratory should be systematically and periodically
      audited (internally and, where appropriate, by external audits or
      inspections) to verify compliance with the requirements of the quality
      management system and to apply corrective and preventive actions,
      if necessary. The audits should be carried out by trained and qualiﬁed
      personnel, who are independent of the activity to be audited. The quality


                                                                                145
Quality control methods for herbal materials



                 manager is responsible for planning and organizing internal audits
                 addressing all elements of the quality management system. Such audits
                 should be recorded, together with details of any corrective and preventive
                 action taken.
          2.5    Management review of quality issues should be regularly undertaken (at
                 least annually), including:
                 (a) reports on internal and external audits or inspections and any follow-up
                     required to correct any deﬁciencies;
                 (b) the outcome of investigations carried out as a result of complaints
                     received, doubtful (atypical) or aberrant results reported in collaborative
                     trials and/or proﬁciency tests; and
                 (c) corrective actions applied and preventive actions introduced as a result
                     of these investigations.

3.        Control of documentation
          3.1    Documentation is an essential part of the quality management system. The
                 laboratory should establish and maintain procedures to control and review all
                 documents (both internally generated and from external sources) that form part
                 of the quality documentation. A master list identifying the current version status
                 and distribution of documents should be established and readily available.
          3.2    The procedures should ensure that:
                 (a) each document, whether a technical or a quality document, has a unique
                     identiﬁer, version number and date of implementation;
                 (b) appropriate, authorized SOPs are available at the relevant locations, e.g.
                     near instruments;
                 (c) documents are kept up to date and reviewed as required;
                 (d) any invalid document is removed and replaced with the authorized,
                     revised document with immediate effect;
                 (e) a revised document includes references to the previous document;
                 (f) old, invalid documents are retained in the archives to ensure traceability
                     of the evolution of the procedures; any copies are destroyed;
                 (g) all relevant staff are trained for the new and revised SOPs; and
                 (h) quality documentation, including records, is retained for a minimum of
                     ﬁve years.
          3.3    A system of change control should be in place to inform staff of new and
                 revised procedures. The system should ensure that:
                 (a) revised documents are prepared by the initiator, or a person who
                     performs the same function, reviewed and approved at the same level
                     as the original document and subsequently released by the quality
                     manager (quality unit); and
                 (b) staff acknowledge by a signature that they are aware of applicable
                     changes and their date of implementation.

4.        Records
          4.1    The laboratory should establish and maintain procedures for the
                 identiﬁcation, collection, indexing, retrieval, storage, maintenance and
                 disposal of and access to all quality and technical/scientiﬁc records.


146
                                                                                      Annex



     4.2   All original observations, including calculations and derived data,
           calibration, validation and veriﬁcation records and ﬁnal results, should
           be retained on record for an appropriate period of time in accordance
           with national regulations and, if applicable, contractual arrangements,
           whichever is longer. The records should include the data recorded in
           the analytical worksheet by the technician or analyst on consecutively
           numbered pages with references to the appendices containing the relevant
           recordings, e.g. chromatograms and spectra.
           The records for each test should contain sufﬁcient information to permit the
           tests to be repeated and/or the results to be recalculated, if necessary. The
           records should include the identity of the personnel involved in the sampling,
           preparation and testing of the samples. The records of samples to be used
           in legal proceedings should be kept according to the legal requirements
           applicable to them.
           Note: The generally accepted retention period of shelf-life plus one year for
           a pharmaceutical product on the market and 15 years for an investigational
           product is recommended, unless national regulations are more stringent or
           contractual arrangements do not require otherwise.
     4.3   All quality and technical/scientiﬁc records (including analytical test reports,
           certiﬁcates of analysis and analytical worksheets) should be legible, readily
           retrievable, stored and retained within facilities that provide a suitable
           environment that will prevent modiﬁcation, damage or deterioration and/
           or loss. The conditions under which all original records are stored should be
           such as to ensure their security and conﬁdentiality and access to them should
           be restricted to authorized personnel. Electronic storage and signatures
           may also be employed but with restricted access and in conformance with
           requirements for electronic records (12–16).
     4.4   Quality management records should include reports from internal (and
           external if performed) audits and management reviews, as well as records
           of all complaints and their investigations, including records of possible
           corrective and preventive actions.

5.   Data-processing equipment
     5.1   Detailed recommendations are provided in Appendix 5 to Annex 4 of the
           Fortieth report of the WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations for Pharmaceutical
           Preparations: Supplementary guidelines in good manufacturing practice:
           validation. Validation of computerized systems (12).
     5.2   For computers, automated tests or calibration equipment, and the collection,
           processing, recording, reporting, storage or retrieval of test and/or calibration
           data, the laboratory should ensure that:
           (a) computer software developed by the user is documented in sufﬁcient
               detail and appropriately validated or veriﬁed as being suitable for use;
           (b) procedures are established and implemented for protecting the integrity of
               data. Such procedures should include, but are not limited to, measures to
               ensure the integrity and conﬁdentiality of data entry or collection and the
               storage, transmission and processing of data. In particular, electronic data
               should be protected from unauthorized access and an audit trail of any
               amendments should be maintained;


                                                                                        147
Quality control methods for herbal materials



                 (c) computers and automated equipment are maintained so as to function
                      properly and are provided with the environmental and operating
                      conditions necessary to ensure the integrity of test and calibration data;
                 (d) procedures are established and implemented for making, documenting
                      and controlling changes to information stored in computerized systems;
                      and
                 (e) electronic data should be backed up at appropriate regular intervals
                      according to a documented procedure. Backed-up data should be
                      retrievable and stored in such a manner as to prevent data loss.
                 Note: For further guidance on validation of data-processing equipment, refer
                 to documents published by the International Society for Pharmaceutical
                 Engineering (13, 14), US Food and Drug Administration (15), European
                 Commission (16) and the Ofﬁcial Medicines Control Laboratories Network
                 of the Council of Europe (17).


6.        Personnel

          6.1    The laboratory should have sufﬁcient personnel with the necessary
                 education, training, technical knowledge and experience for their assigned
                 functions.
          6.2    The technical management should ensure the competence of all personnel
                 operating speciﬁc equipment, instruments or other devices, who are
                 performing tests and/or calibrations, validations or veriﬁcations. Their duties
                 also involve the evaluation of results as well as signing analytical test reports
                 and certiﬁcates of analysis (see Part three, sections 18.7–18.11 and 19).
          6.3    Staff undergoing training should be appropriately supervised and should be
                 assessed on completion of the training. Personnel performing speciﬁc tasks
                 should be appropriately qualiﬁed in terms of their education, training and
                 experience, as required.
          6.4    The laboratory personnel should be permanently employed or under
                 contract. The laboratory should ensure that additional technical and key
                 support personnel who are under contract are supervised and sufﬁciently
                 competent and that their work is in accordance with the quality management
                 system.
          6.5    The laboratory should maintain current job descriptions for all personnel
                 involved in tests and/or calibrations, validations and veriﬁcations. The
                 laboratory should also maintain records of all technical personnel, describing
                 their qualiﬁcations, training and experience.
          6.6    The laboratory should have the following managerial and technical
                 personnel:
                 (a) a head of laboratory (supervisor), who should have qualiﬁcations
                     appropriate to the position, with extensive experience in medicines
                     analysis and laboratory management in a pharmaceutical quality control
                     laboratory in the regulatory sector or in industry. The head of laboratory
                     is responsible for the content of certiﬁcates of analysis and analytical
                     testing reports. This person is also responsible for ensuring that:
                     (i) all key members of the laboratory staff have the requisite competence
                          for the required functions and their grades reﬂect their responsibilities,


148
                                                                                       Annex



               (ii) the adequacy of existing stafﬁng, management and training
                     procedures is reviewed periodically,
               (iii) the technical management is adequately supervised;
           (b) the technical management who ensure that:
               (i) procedures for performing calibration, veriﬁcation and (re-)
                     qualiﬁcation of instruments, monitoring of environmental and
                     storage conditions are in place and are conducted as required,
               (ii) regular in-service training programmes to update and extend the
                     skills of both professionals and technicians are arranged,
               (iii) the safekeeping of any materials subject to poison regulation or to
                     the controls applied to narcotic and psychotropic substances (see
                     Part one, section 7.12) kept in the workplace is under the supervision
                     of an authorized person,
               (iv) national pharmaceutical quality control laboratories regularly
                     participate in suitable proﬁciency testing schemes and collaborative
                     trials to assess analytical procedures or reference substances;
           (c) analysts, who should normally be graduates in pharmacy, analytical
               chemistry, microbiology or other relevant subjects, with the requisite
               knowledge, skills and ability to adequately perform the tasks assigned
               to them by management and to supervise technical staff;
           (d) technical staff, who should hold diplomas in their subjects awarded by
               technical or vocational schools; and
           (e) a quality manager (see Part one, section 1.3(j)).

7.   Premises
     7.1   The laboratory facilities are to be of a suitable size, construction and location.
           These facilities are to be designed to suit the functions and operations to be
           conducted in them. Rest and refreshment rooms should be separate from
           laboratory areas. Changing areas and toilets should be easily accessible and
           appropriate for the number of users.
     7.2   The laboratory facilities should have adequate safety equipment located
           appropriately and measures should be in place to ensure good housekeeping.
           Each laboratory should be equipped with adequate instruments and
           equipment, including work benches, work stations and fume hoods.
     7.3   The environmental conditions, including lighting, energy sources,
           temperature, humidity and air pressure, are to be appropriate to the
           functions and operations to be performed. The laboratory should ensure that
           the environmental conditions are monitored, controlled and documented
           and do not invalidate the results or adversely affect the quality of the
           measurements.
     7.4   Special precautions should be taken and, if necessary, there should be a
           separate and dedicated unit or equipment (e.g. isolator, laminar ﬂow work
           bench) to handle, weigh and manipulate highly toxic substances, including
           genotoxic substances. Procedures should be in place to avoid exposure and
           contamination.
     7.5   Archive facilities should be provided to ensure the secure storage and
           retrieval of all documents. The design and condition of the archives should
           be such as to protect the contents from deterioration. Access to the archives
           should be restricted to designated personnel.


                                                                                         149
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          7.6    Procedures should be in place for the safe removal of types of waste including
                 toxic waste (chemical and biological), reagents, samples, solvents and air
                 ﬁlters.
          7.7    Microbiological testing, if performed, should be contained in an appropriately
                 designed and constructed laboratory unit. For further guidance see the
                 draft working document WHO guideline on good practices for pharmaceutical
                 microbiology laboratories (reference QAS/09.297).
          7.8    If in vivo biological testing (e.g. rabbit pyrogen test) is included in the scope
                 of the laboratory activities then the animal houses should be isolated from
                 the other laboratory areas with a separate entrance and air-conditioning
                 system. The relevant guidance and regulations are to be applied (18).

          Laboratory storage facilities
          7.9 The storage facilities should be well organized for the correct storage of
               samples, reagents and equipment.
          7.10 Separate storage facilities should be maintained for the secure storage of
               samples, retained samples (see Part three, section 20), reagents and laboratory
               accessories (see Part two, sections 10.13– 10.14), reference substances and
               reference materials (see Part two, section 11). Storage facilities should be
               equipped to store material, if necessary, under refrigeration (2–8°C) and
               frozen (-20°C) and securely locked. All speciﬁed storage conditions should
               be controlled, monitored and records maintained. Access should be restricted
               to designated personnel.
          7.11   Appropriate safety procedures should be drawn up and rigorously
                 implemented wherever toxic or ﬂammable reagents are stored or used. The
                 laboratory should provide separate rooms or areas for storing ﬂammable
                 substances, fuming and concentrated acids and bases, volatile amines and
                 other reagents, such as hydrochloric acid, nitric acid, ammonia and bromine.
                 Self-igniting materials, such as metallic sodium and potassium, should also
                 be stored separately. Small stocks of acids, bases and solvents may be kept
                 in the laboratory store but the main stocks of these items should preferably
                 be retained in a store separate from the laboratory building.
          7.12 Reagents subject to poison regulations or to the controls applied to narcotic
               and psychotropic substances should be clearly marked as required by national
               legislation. They should be kept separately from other reagents in locked
               cabinets. A designated responsible member of staff should maintain a register
               of these substances. The head of each unit should accept personal responsibility
               for the safekeeping of any of these reagents kept in the workplace.
          7.13 Gases also should be stored in a dedicated store, if possible isolated from
               the main building. Wherever possible gas bottles in the laboratory are to
               be avoided and distribution from an external gas store is preferred. If gas
               bottles are present in the laboratory they should be safely secured.
                 Note: Consideration should be given to the installation of gas generators.

8.        Equipment, instruments and other devices
          8.1    Equipment, instruments and other devices should be designed, constructed,
                 adapted, located, calibrated, qualiﬁed, veriﬁed and maintained as required


150
                                                                                        Annex



            by the operations to be carried out in the local environment. The user should
            purchase the equipment from an agent capable of providing full technical
            support and maintenance when necessary.
      8.2   The laboratory should have the required test equipment, instruments and
            other devices for the correct performance of the tests and/or calibrations,
            validations and veriﬁcations (including the preparation of samples and the
            processing and analysis of test and/or calibration data).
      8.3   Equipment, instruments and other devices, including those used for
            sampling, should meet the laboratory’s requirements and comply with the
            relevant standard speciﬁcations, as well as being veriﬁed, qualiﬁed and/or
            calibrated regularly (see Part two, section 12).

9.    Contracts
      Purchasing services and supplies
      9.1 The laboratory should have a procedure for the selection and purchasing of
           services and supplies it uses that affect the quality of testing.
      9.2   The laboratory should evaluate suppliers of critical consumables, supplies
            and services which affect quality of testing, maintain records of these
            evaluations and list approved suppliers, which have been demonstrated to
            be of a suitable quality with respect to the requirements of the laboratory.

      Subcontracting of testing
      9.3 When a laboratory subcontracts work, which may include speciﬁc testing, it
           is to be done with organizations approved for the type of activity required.
           The laboratory is responsible for periodically assessing the competence of a
           contracted organization.
      9.4   When a laboratory performs testing for a customer and subcontracts part of
            the testing, it should advise the customer of the arrangement in writing and,
            if appropriate, gain his or her approval.
      9.5   There should be a written contract which clearly establishes the duties and
            responsibilities of each party, deﬁnes the contracted work and any technical
            arrangements made in connection with it. The contract should permit the
            laboratory to audit the facilities and competencies of the contracted organization
            and ensure the access of the laboratory to records and retained samples.
      9.6   The contracted organization should not pass to a third party any work
            entrusted to it under contract without the laboratory’s prior evaluation and
            approval of the arrangements.
      9.7   The laboratory should maintain a register of all subcontractors that it uses
            and a record of the assessment of the competence of subcontractors.
      9.8   The laboratory takes the responsibility for all results reported, including
            those furnished by the subcontracting organization.


Part Two. Materials, equipment, instruments and other devices
10.   Reagents
      10.1 All reagents and chemicals, including solvents and materials used in tests
           and assays, should be of appropriate quality.


                                                                                          151
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          10.2 Reagents should be purchased from reputable, approved suppliers and
               should be accompanied by the certiﬁcate of analysis, and the material safety
               data sheet, if required.
          10.3 In the preparation of reagent solutions in the laboratory:
                 (a) responsibility for this task should be clearly speciﬁed in the job
                     description of the person assigned to carry it out; and
                 (b) prescribed procedures should be used which are in accordance with
                     published pharmacopoeial or other standards where available. Records
                     should be kept of the preparation and standardization of volumetric
                     solutions.
          10.4 The labels of all reagents should clearly specify:
                 (a) content;
                 (b) manufacturer;
                 (c) date received and date of opening of the container;
                 (d) concentration, if applicable;
                 (e) storage conditions; and
                 (f) expiry date or retest date, as justiﬁed.
          10.5 The labels of reagent solutions prepared in the laboratory should clearly
               specify:
                 (a) name;
                 (b) date of preparation and initials of technician or analyst;
                 (c) expiry date or retest date, as justiﬁed; and
                 (d) concentration, if applicable.
          10.6 The labels for volumetric solutions prepared in the laboratory should clearly
               specify:
                 (a) name;
                 (b) molarity (or concentration);
                 (c) date of preparation and initials of technician/analyst;
                 (d) date of standardization and initials of technician/analyst; and
                 (e) standardization factor.
                 Note: The laboratory should ensure that the volumetric solution is suitable
                 for use at the time of use.
          10.7 In the transportation and subdivision of reagents:
                 (a) whenever possible they should be transported in the original containers;
                     and
                 (b) when subdivision is necessary, clean containers should be used and
                     appropriately labelled.


          Visual inspection
          10.8 All reagent containers should be visually inspected to ensure that the seals
                are intact, both when they are delivered to the store and when they are
                distributed to the units.
          10.9 Reagents that appear to have been tampered with should be rejected;
               however, this requirement may exceptionally be waived if the identity and
               purity of the reagent concerned can be conﬁrmed by testing.


152
                                                                                     Annex



      Water
      10.10 Water should be considered as a reagent. The appropriate grade for a speciﬁc
            test should be used as described in the pharmacopoeias or in an approved test
            when available.
      10.11 Precautions should be taken to avoid contamination during its supply,
            storage and distribution.
      10.12 The quality of the water should be veriﬁed regularly to ensure that the
            various grades of water meet the appropriate speciﬁcations.

      Storage
      10.13 Stocks of reagents should be maintained in a store under the appropriate
            storage conditions (ambient temperature, under refrigeration or frozen). The
            store should contain a supply of clean bottles, vials, spoons, funnels and
            labels, as required, for dispensing reagents from larger to smaller containers.
            Special equipment may be needed for the transfer of larger volumes of
            corrosive liquids.
      10.14 The person in charge of the store is responsible for looking after the storage
            facilities and their inventory and for noting the expiry date of chemicals and
            reagents. Training may be needed in handling chemicals safely and with the
            necessary care.


11.   Reference substances and reference materials
      11.1   Reference substances (primary reference substances or secondary reference
             substances (8)) are used for the testing of a sample.
             Note: Pharmacopoeial reference substances should be employed when
             available and appropriate for the analysis. When a pharmacopoeia reference
             substance has not been established then the manufacturer should use its
             own reference substance.
      11.2   Reference materials may be necessary for the calibration and/or qualiﬁcation
             of equipment, instruments or other devices.


      Registration and labelling
      11.3 An identiﬁcation number should be assigned to all reference substances,
            except for pharmacopoeial reference substances.
      11.4   A new identiﬁcation number should be assigned to each new batch.
      11.5   This number should be marked on each vial of the reference substance.
      11.6   The identiﬁcation number should be quoted on the analytical worksheet
             every time the reference substance is used (see Part three, section 15.5). In
             the case of pharmacopoeial reference substances the batch number and/or
             the batch validity statement should be attached to the worksheet.
      11.7   The register for all reference substances and reference materials should be
             maintained and contain the following information:
             (a) the identiﬁcation number of the substance or material;
             (b) a precise description of the substance or material;


                                                                                       153
Quality control methods for herbal materials



                 (c) the source;
                 (d) the date of receipt;
                 (e) the batch designation or other identiﬁcation code;
                 (f) the intended use of the substance or material (e.g. as an infrared
                     reference substance or as an impurity reference substance for thin-layer
                     chromatography);
                 (g) the location of storage in the laboratory, and any special storage
                     conditions;
                 (h) any further necessary information (e.g. the results of visual inspections);
                 (i) expiry date or retest date;
                 (j) certiﬁcate (batch validity statement) of a pharmacopoeial reference
                     substance and a certiﬁed reference material which indicates its use, the
                     assigned content, if applicable, and its status (validity); and
                 (k) in the case of secondary reference substances prepared and supplied by
                     the manufacturer, the certiﬁcate of analysis.
          11.8   A person should be nominated to be responsible for reference substances
                 and reference materials.
          11.9   If a national pharmaceutical quality control laboratory is required to establish
                 reference substances for use by other institutions, a separate reference
                 substances unit should be established.
          11.10 In addition a ﬁle should be kept in which all information on the properties
                of each reference substance is entered including the safety data sheets.
          11.11 For reference substances prepared in the laboratory, the ﬁle should include
                the results of all tests and veriﬁcations used to establish the reference
                substances and expiry date or retest date; these should be signed by the
                responsible analyst.

          Retesting (monitoring)
          11.12 All reference substances prepared in the laboratory or supplied externally
                should be retested at regular intervals to ensure that deterioration has not
                occurred. The interval for retesting depends on a number of factors, including
                stability of the substance, storage conditions employed, type of container and
                extent of use (how often the container is opened and closed). More detailed
                information on the handling, storage and retesting of reference substances
                is given in the WHO General guidelines for the establishment, maintenance and
                distribution of chemical reference substances (8).
          11.13 The results of these tests should be recorded and signed by the responsible
                analyst.
          11.14 In the case that the result of retesting of a reference substance is noncompliant,
                a retrospective check of tests performed using this reference substance since
                its previous examination should be carried out. For evaluation of outcomes
                of retrospective checks and consideration of possible corrective actions, risk
                analysis should be applied.
          11.15 Pharmacopoeial reference substances are regularly retested and the validity
                (current status) of these reference substances is available from the issuing
                pharmacopoeia by various means, e.g. web sites or catalogues. Retesting by
                the laboratory is not necessary, provided the reference substances are stored
                in accordance with the storage conditions indicated.


154
                                                                                      Annex



12.   Calibration, veriﬁcation of performance and qualiﬁcation
      of equipment, instruments and other devices
      12.1 Each item of equipment, instrument or other device used for testing,
           veriﬁcation and/or calibration should, when practicable, be uniquely
           identiﬁed.
      12.2 All equipment, instruments and other devices (e.g. volumetric glassware
           and automatic dispensers) requiring calibration should be labelled, coded or
           otherwise identiﬁed to indicate the status of calibration and the date when
           recalibration is due.
      12.3 Laboratory equipment should undergo design qualiﬁcation, installation
           qualiﬁcation, operation qualiﬁcation and performance qualiﬁcation (for
           deﬁnitions of these terms see the Glossary) (11). Depending on the function
           and operation of the instrument, the design qualiﬁcation of a commercially
           available standard instrument may be omitted as the installation qualiﬁcation,
           operational qualiﬁcation and performance qualiﬁcation may be considered
           to be a sufﬁcient indicator of its suitable design.
      12.4 As applicable, the performance of equipment should be veriﬁed at
           appropriate intervals according to a plan established by the laboratory.
      12.5 Measuring equipment should be regularly calibrated according to a plan
           established by the laboratory (11).
      12.6 Speciﬁc procedures should be established for each type of measuring
           equipment, taking into account the type of equipment, the extent of use and
           supplier’s recommendations. For example:
            — pH meters are veriﬁed with standard certiﬁed buffer solutions before use;
            — balances are to be checked daily using internal calibration and regularly
              using suitable test weights, and requaliﬁcation should be performed
              annually using certiﬁed reference weights.
      12.7 Only authorized personnel should operate equipment, instruments and
           devices. Up-to-date SOPs on the use, maintenance, veriﬁcation, qualiﬁcation
           and calibration of equipment, instruments and devices (including any relevant
           manuals provided by the manufacturer) should be readily available for use by
           the appropriate laboratory personnel together with a schedule of the dates on
           which veriﬁcation and/or calibration is due.
      12.8 Records should be kept of each item of equipment, instrument or other
           device used to perform testing, veriﬁcation and/or calibration. The records
           should include at least the following:
            (a) the identity of the equipment, instrument or other device;
            (b) the manufacturer’s name and the equipment model, serial number or
                other unique identiﬁcation;
            (c) the qualiﬁcation, veriﬁcation and/or calibration required;
            (d) the current location, where appropriate;
            (e) the equipment manufacturer’s instructions, if available, or an indication of
                their location;
            (f) the dates, results and copies of reports, veriﬁcations and certiﬁcates of
                all calibrations, adjustments, acceptance criteria and the due date of the
                next qualiﬁcation, veriﬁcation and/or calibration;


                                                                                        155
Quality control methods for herbal materials



                 (g) the maintenance carried out to date and the maintenance plan; and
                 (h) a history of any damage, malfunction, modiﬁcation or repair.
                 It is also recommended that records should be kept and additional
                 observations made of the time for which the equipment, instruments or
                 devices were used.
          12.9 Procedures should include instructions for the safe handling, transport and
               storage of measuring equipment. On reinstallation, requaliﬁcation of the
               equipment is required to ensure that it functions properly.
          12.10 Maintenance procedures should be established, e.g. regular servicing should
                be performed by a team of maintenance specialists, whether internal or
                external, followed by veriﬁcation of performance.
          12.11 Equipment, instruments and other devices, either subjected to overloading
                or mishandling, giving suspect results, shown to be defective or outside
                speciﬁed limits, should be taken out of service and clearly labelled or
                marked. Wherever possible they should not be used until they have been
                repaired and requaliﬁed.
          12.12 When the equipment, instruments and other devices are outside the direct
                control of the laboratory for a certain period or have undergone major repair,
                the laboratory should requalify the equipment to ensure its suitability for
                use.
                 Note: For further guidance on calibration, veriﬁcation of performance and
                 qualiﬁcation of equipment refer to:
                 O Procedures for verifying and calibrating refractometers, thermometers used in
                    determinations of melting temperatures and potentiometers for pH determinations
                    and methods for verifying the reliability of scales for ultraviolet and infrared
                    spectrophotometers and spectroﬂuorometers in The International Pharmacopoeia (19);
                 O Speciﬁc guidelines for qualiﬁcation of equipment elaborated by the European

                    Network of Ofﬁcial Medicines Control Laboratories (OMCL) (20); and
                 O General chapter of the US Pharmacopeia on Analytical instrument qualiﬁcation (21).




13.       Traceability
          13.1 The result of an analysis should be traceable, when appropriate, ultimately
               to a primary reference substance.
          13.2 All calibrations or qualiﬁcation of instruments should be traceable to certiﬁed
               reference materials and to SI units (metrological traceability).


Part Three. Working procedures
14.       Incoming samples
          Sections 14.1–14.3 are applicable to national pharmaceutical quality control
          laboratories.
          14.1 Samples received by a laboratory may be for compliance testing or for
               investigative testing. Samples for compliance testing include routine samples
               for control, samples suspected of not complying with the speciﬁcations or
               samples submitted in connection with a marketing authorization process.


156
                                                                                  Annex



      Close collaboration with the providers of the samples is important. In
      particular it is important that the sample is large enough to enable, if required,
      a number of replicate tests to be carried out (see Part three, section 14.3) and
      for part of the sample to be retained (see Part three, section 20).
14.2 Samples for investigative testing may be submitted by various sources
     including customs, police and medicines inspectors. These samples comprise
     suspicious, illegal or counterfeit substances or products. Usually, the primary
     objective of investigative testing is to identify the substance or the ingredient
     in the product and, if sufﬁcient substance or product is available, to estimate
     the purity or content. Well-documented screening procedures should be in
     place as well as conﬁrmatory analytical procedures to positively identify the
     substance or the ingredient(s). If an estimation of the content of an identiﬁed
     ingredient is required then an appropriate quantitative analytical procedure
     should be applied. The value obtained should be reported with an indication
     of the uncertainty of measurement if required (see Part three, section 18.10).
14.3 It is common for a sample to be taken and divided into three approximately
     equal portions for submission to the laboratory:
      — one for immediate testing;
      — the second for conﬁrmation of testing if required; and
      — the third for retention in case of dispute.
14.4 If the laboratory is responsible for sampling of substances, materials or
     products for subsequent testing then it should have a sampling plan and
     an internal procedure for sampling available to all analysts and technicians
     working in the laboratory. Samples should be representative of the batches
     of material from which they are taken and sampling should be carried out so
     as to avoid contamination and other adverse effects on quality, or mix-up of
     or by the material being sampled. All the relevant data related to sampling
     should be recorded.
      Note: Guidelines for sampling of pharmaceutical products and related
      materials were adopted by the WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations
      for Pharmaceutical Preparations at its thirty-ninth meeting (22).

Test request
14.5 A standard test request form should be ﬁlled out and should accompany
       each sample submitted to the laboratory. In the case of a pharmaceutical
       manufacturer’s laboratory the requirements may be given in the master
       production instructions.
14.6 The test request form should provide or leave space for the following
     information:
      (a) the name of the institution or inspector that supplied the sample;
      (b) the source of the material;
      (c) a full description of the medicine, including its composition, international
          nonproprietary name (INN) (if available) and brand name(s);
      (d) dosage form and concentration or strength, the manufacturer, the batch
          number (if available) and the marketing authorization number;
      (e) the size of the sample;
      (f) the reason for requesting the analysis;
      (g) the date on which the sample was collected;


                                                                                    157
Quality control methods for herbal materials



                 (h) the size of the consignment from which it was taken, when appropriate;
                 (i) the expiry date (for pharmaceutical products) or retest date (for APIs
                     and pharmaceutical excipients);
                 (j) the speciﬁcation to be used for testing;
                 (k) a record of any further comments (e.g. discrepancies found or associated
                     hazard); and
                 (l) the required storage conditions.
          14.7 The laboratory should review the test request to ensure that:
                 (a) the requirements are adequately deﬁned and the laboratory has the
                     capability and resources to meet them; and
                 (b) the appropriate tests and/or methods are selected and are capable of
                     meeting customers’ requirements.
                 Any issue should be resolved with the originator of the request for analysis
                 before testing starts and a record of the review should be kept.

          Registration and labelling
          14.8 All newly delivered samples and accompanying documents (e.g. the test
                request) should be assigned a registration number. Separate registration
                numbers should be assigned to requests referring to two or more medicines,
                different dosage forms, or different batches of the same medicine or different
                sources of the same batch. If applicable, a unique registration number
                should also be assigned to any incoming retained sample (see Part three,
                section 20).
          14.9 A label bearing the registration number should be afﬁxed to each container
               of the sample. Care should be taken to avoid obscuring any other markings
               or inscriptions.
          14.10 A register should be kept, which may be a record book, a card ﬁle or data-
                processing equipment, in which the following information is recorded:
                 (a) the registration number of the sample;
                 (b) the date of receipt; and
                 (c) the speciﬁc unit to which the sample was forwarded.

          Visual inspection of the submitted sample
          14.11 The sample received should be visually inspected by laboratory staff to
                ensure that the labelling conforms with the information contained in the test
                request. The ﬁndings should be recorded, dated and signed. If discrepancies
                are found, or if the sample is obviously damaged, this fact should be recorded
                without delay on the test request form. Any queries should be immediately
                referred back to the provider of the sample.

          Storage
          14.12 The sample prior to testing, the retained sample (see Part three, section
                20) and any portions of the sample remaining after performance of all
                the required tests should be stored safely, taking into account the storage
                conditions (22, 23) speciﬁed for the sample.

          Forwarding to testing
          14.13 The speciﬁc unit to which the sample is sent for testing is determined by the
                person responsible.


158
                                                                                    Annex



      14.14 The examination of a sample should not be started before the relevant test
            request has been received.
      14.15 The sample should be properly stored until all relevant documentation has
            been received.
      14.16 A request for analysis may be accepted verbally only in emergencies. All
            details should immediately be placed on record pending the receipt of
            written conﬁrmation.
      14.17 Unless a computerized system is used, copies or duplicates of all
            documentation should accompany each numbered sample when sent to the
            speciﬁc unit.
      14.18 Testing should be performed as described under Part three, section 17.


15.   Analytical worksheet
      15.1 The analytical worksheet is an internal document to be used by the
           analyst for recording information about the sample, the test procedure,
           calculations and the results of testing. It is to be complemented by the raw
           data obtained in the analysis.

      Purpose
      15.2 The analytical worksheet contains documentary evidence either:
            — to conﬁrm that the sample being examined is in accordance with the
              requirements; or
            — to support an OOS result (see Part three, sections 18.1–18.3).

      Use
      15.3 A separate analytical worksheet should usually be used for each numbered
           sample or group of samples.
      15.4 Analytical worksheets from different units relating to the same sample
           should be assembled together.

      Content
      15.5 The analytical worksheet should provide the following information:
            (a) the registration number of the sample (see Part three, section 14.9);
            (b) page numbering, including the total number of pages (and including
                annexes);
            (c) the date of the test request;
            (d) the date on which the analysis was started and completed;
            (e) the name and signature of the analyst;
            (f) a description of the sample received;
            (g) references to the speciﬁcations and a full description of test methods by
                which the sample was tested, including the limits;
            (h) the identiﬁcation of the test equipment used (see Part two, section 12.1);
            (i) the identiﬁcation number of any reference substance used (see Part two,
                section 11.5);
            (j) if applicable, the results of the system suitability test;
            (k) the identiﬁcation of reagents and solvents employed;
            (l) the results obtained;


                                                                                      159
Quality control methods for herbal materials



                 (m) the interpretation of the results and the ﬁnal conclusions (whether or not
                     the sample was found to comply with the speciﬁcations), approved and
                     signed by the supervisor; and
                 (n) any further comments, for example, for internal information (see Part
                     three, section 17.1), or detailed notes on the speciﬁcations selected and
                     the methods of assessment used (see Part three, section 15.9), or any
                     deviation from the prescribed procedure, which should be approved and
                     reported, or whether and when portions of the sample were forwarded
                     to other units for special tests and the date on which the results were
                     received.
          15.6 All values obtained from each test, including blank results, should
               immediately be entered on the analytical worksheet and all graphical data,
               whether obtained from recording instruments or plotted by hand, should be
               attached or be traceable to an electronic record ﬁle or document where the
               data are available.
          15.7 The completed analytical worksheet should be signed by the responsible
               analyst(s), veriﬁed and approved and signed by the supervisor.
          15.8 When a mistake is made in an analytical worksheet or when data or text
               need to be amended, the old information should be deleted by putting a
               single line through it (it should not be erased or made illegible) and the
               new information added alongside. All such alterations should be signed
               by the person making the correction and the date of the change inserted.
               The reason for the change should also be given on the worksheet (suitable
               procedures should be in place for amending electronic worksheets).

          Selection of the speciﬁcations to be used
          15.9 The speciﬁcation necessary to assess the sample may be that given in the
                test request or master production instructions. If no precise instruction is
                given, the speciﬁcation in the ofﬁcially recognized national pharmacopoeia
                may be used or, failing this, the manufacturer’s ofﬁcially approved or other
                nationally recognized speciﬁcation. If no suitable method is available:
                 (a) the speciﬁcation contained in the marketing authorization or product
                     licence may be requested from the marketing authorization holder or
                     manufacturer and veriﬁed by the laboratory; or
                 (b) the requirements may be set by the laboratory itself on the basis of
                     published information and any procedure employed is to be validated
                     by the testing laboratory (see Part three, section 16).
          15.10 For ofﬁcial speciﬁcations the current version of the relevant pharmacopoeia
                should be available.

          Filing
          15.11 The analytical worksheet should be kept safely together with any attachments,
                 including calculations and recordings of instrumental analyses.


16.       Validation of analytical procedures
          16.1 All analytical procedures employed for testing should be suitable for the
               intended use. This is demonstrated by validation (24). Validation also
               serves to establish acceptance criteria for system suitability tests which


160
                                                                                                             Annex



                   are subsequently employed for the veriﬁcation of the analytical procedure
                   before analysis.
           16.2 Validation should be performed according to a validation protocol, which
                includes analytical performance characteristics to be veriﬁed for various
                types of analytical procedures. Typical characteristics which should be
                considered are listed in Table 1 (in the development phase of an analytical
                procedure, robustness, i.e. the ability of the procedure to provide results of
                acceptable accuracy and precision under a variety of conditions should also
                be considered). The results are to be documented in the validation report.

Table 1. Characteristics to consider during validation of analytical procedures
   Type of analytical procedure    Identiﬁcation          Testing for impurities                     Assay

                                                      Quantitative          Limit             • dissolution
                                                         tests              tests          (measurement only)
                                                                                            • content/potency

 Characteristics
 Accuracy                               –                   +                 –                       +
 Precision                              –                   +                 –                       +
 Repeatability                          –                   +                 –                       +
 Intermediate precisiona                +                   +                 +                       +
 Speciﬁcity                             –                   –b                +                       –
 Detection limit                        –                   +                 –                       –
 Quantitation limit                     –                   +                 –                       +
 Linearity                              –                   +                 –                       +
 Range
– Characteristic is normally not evaluated; + characteristic should normally be evaluated.
a
  In cases where a reproducibility study has been performed, intermediate precision is not needed.
b
  May be needed in some cases.


           16.3 Pharmacopoeial methods are considered to be validated for the intended
                use as prescribed in the monograph(s). However, the laboratory should also
                conﬁrm that, for example, for a particular ﬁnished pharmaceutical product
                (FPP) examined for the ﬁrst time, no interference arises from the excipients
                present, or that for an API, impurities coming from a new route of synthesis
                are adequately differentiated. If the pharmacopoeial method is adapted for
                another use then it should be validated for such a use to demonstrate that it
                is ﬁt-for-purpose.
           16.4 System suitability testing is an integral part of many analytical procedures.
                The tests are based on the fact that the equipment, electronics, analytical
                operations and samples to be analysed contribute to the system. Which system
                suitability tests are to be applied depends on the type of procedure to be used.
                System suitability tests are employed for the veriﬁcation of pharmacopoeial
                methods or validated analytical procedures and should be performed prior to
                the analysis. Provided the system suitability criteria are fulﬁlled the method
                or procedure is considered to be suitable for the intended purpose.
                   Note: If a large number of samples is being analysed in sequence, then
                   appropriate system suitability tests are to be performed throughout
                   the sequence to demonstrate that the performance of the procedure is
                   satisfactory.
                   Veriﬁcation is not required for basic pharmacopoeial methods such as (but
                   not limited to) pH, loss on drying and wet chemical methods.


                                                                                                                161
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          16.5 A major change to the analytical procedure, or in the composition of the
               product tested, or in the synthesis of the API, will require revalidation of the
               analytical procedure.
                 Note: Further guidance on validation of analytical procedures is available in
                 the following:
                 O Guideline elaborated by the International Conference on Harmonisation of
                    Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use
                    (ICH) (25);
                 O Guideline elaborated by the European Network of Ofﬁcial Medicines Control

                    Laboratories (OMCL) (26);
                 O General chapters of the US Pharmacopeia on Validation of compendial procedures

                    and on Veriﬁcation of compendial procedures (27).


17.       Testing
          17.1 The sample should be tested in accordance with the work plan of the
               laboratory after completion of the preliminary procedures. If this is not
               feasible the reasons should be noted, e.g. in the analytical worksheet (see Part
               three, section 15), and the sample should be stored in a special place which is
               kept locked (see Part three, section 14.12).
          17.2 Speciﬁc tests required may need to be carried out by another unit or by a
               specialized external laboratory (see Part one, section 9). The responsible
               person should prepare the request and arrange for the transfer of the required
               number of units (bottles, vials or tablets) from the sample. Each of these
               units should bear the correct registration number. When the analytical test
               report contains results of tests performed by subcontractors, these results
               should be identiﬁed as such.
          17.3 Detailed guidance on ofﬁcial pharmacopoeial requirements is usually
               given in the general notices and speciﬁc monographs of the pharmacopoeia
               concerned. Test procedures should be described in detail and should provide
               sufﬁcient information to allow properly trained analysts to perform the
               analysis in a reliable manner. Where system suitability criteria are deﬁned in
               the method they should be fulﬁlled. Any deviation from the test procedure
               should be approved and documented.


18.       Evaluation of test results
          18.1 Test results should be reviewed and, where appropriate, evaluated statistically
               after completion of all the tests to determine whether they are mutually
               consistent and if they meet the speciﬁcations used. The evaluation should
               take into consideration the results of all the tests (all test data). Whenever
               doubtful (atypical) results are obtained they should be investigated. The
               complete testing procedure needs to be checked according to the internal
               quality management system (see also Part one, section 2).
          18.2 When a doubtful result (suspected OOS result) has been identiﬁed, a review
               of the different procedures applied during the testing process is to be
               undertaken by the supervisor with the analyst or technician before retesting
               is permitted. The following steps should be followed:


162
                                                                               Annex



      (a) conﬁrm with the analyst or technician that the appropriate procedure(s)
          was (were) applied and followed correctly;
      (b) examine the raw data to identify possible discrepancies;
      (c) check all calculations;
      (d) check that the equipment used was qualiﬁed and calibrated, and that
          system suitability tests were performed and were acceptable;
      (e) ensure that the appropriate reagents, solvents and reference substances
          were used;
      (f) conﬁrm that the correct glassware was used; and
      (g) ensure that original sample preparations are not discarded until the
          investigation is complete.
18.3 The identiﬁcation of an error which caused an aberrant result will invalidate
     the result and a retest of the sample will be necessary. Doubtful results can
     be rejected only if they are clearly due to an identiﬁed error. Sometimes the
     outcome of the investigation is inconclusive — no obvious cause can be
     identiﬁed — in which case a conﬁrmatory determination is to be performed
     by another analyst who should be at least as experienced and competent
     in the analytical procedure as the original analyst. A similar value would
     indicate an OOS result. However, further conﬁrmation using another
     validated method, if available, may be advised.
18.4 An SOP should be in place for the conduct of an investigation of an OOS
     test result. The SOP should give clear guidance on the number of retests
     allowed (based on sound statistical principles). All investigations and their
     conclusions should be recorded. In the event of an error, any corrective
     action taken and any preventive measure introduced should be recorded
     and implemented.
18.5 All individual results (all test data) with acceptance criteria should be
     reported.
18.6 All conclusions should be entered on the analytical worksheet (see Part
     three, section 15) by the analyst and signed by the supervisor.
      Note: Further guidance on evaluation and reporting of test results is available
      in the following:
      O Guideline elaborated by the US Food and Drug Administration (5);
      O Guideline elaborated by the European Network of Ofﬁcial Medicines Control

         Laboratories (OMCL) (28).


Analytical test report
18.7 The analytical test report is a compilation of the results and states the
     conclusions of the examination of a sample. It should be:
      (a) issued by the laboratory; and
      (b) based on the analytical worksheet (see Part three, section 15).
18.8 Any amendments to the original analytical test report will require the issue
     of a new corrected document.
18.9 Pharmacopoeial content limits are set taking into account the uncertainty
     of measurement, and the production capability and acceptance criteria for
     an analytical result should be predeﬁned. Under presently applicable rules
     neither the pharmacopoeias nor the NMRAs require the value found to be


                                                                                 163
Quality control methods for herbal materials



                 expressed with its associated expanded uncertainty for compliance testing.
                 However, when reporting the results of investigative testing, although the
                 primary objective is to identify a substance in the sample, a determination
                 of its concentration may be also requested, in which case the estimated
                 uncertainty should also be given.
          18.10 Measurement uncertainty can be estimated in a number of ways, e.g.:
                 (a) by preparing an uncertainty budget for each uncertainty component
                     identiﬁed in an analytical procedure (bottom-up approach);
                 (b) from validation data and control charts (29); and
                 (c) from the data obtained from proﬁciency tests or collaborative trials (top-
                     down approach).
                 Note: Further guidance can be found in various guidelines (9, 10, 30, 31, 32).

          Content of the analytical test report
          18.11 The analytical test report should provide the following information:
                 (a) the laboratory registration number of the sample;
                 (b) the laboratory test report number;
                 (c) the name and address of the laboratory testing the sample;
                 (d) the name and address of the originator of the request for analysis;
                 (e) the name, description and batch number of the sample, where
                     appropriate;
                 (f) an introduction giving the background to and the purpose of the
                     investigation;
                 (g) a reference to the speciﬁcations used for testing the sample or a detailed
                     description of the procedures employed (sample for investigative testing),
                     including the limits;
                 (h) the results of all the tests performed or the numerical results with the
                     standard deviation of all the tests performed (if applicable);
                 (i) a discussion of the results obtained;
                 (j) a conclusion as to whether or not the sample(s) was (were) found
                     to be within the limits of the speciﬁcations used, or for a sample for
                     investigative testing, the substance(s) or ingredient(s) identiﬁed;
                 (k) the date on which the test(s) was (were) completed;
                 (l) the signature of the head of the laboratory or authorized person;
                 (m) the name and address of the original manufacturer and, if applicable,
                     those of the repacker and/or trader;
                 (n) whether or not the sample(s) complies (comply) with the requirements;
                 (o) the date on which the sample was received;
                 (p) the expiry date or retest date, if applicable; and
                 (q) a statement indicating that the analytical test report, or any portion
                     thereof, cannot be reproduced without the authorization of the
                     laboratory.


19.       Certiﬁcate of analysis
          19.1 A certiﬁcate of analysis is prepared for each batch of a substance or product
               and usually contains the following information:
                 (a) the registration number of the sample;
                 (b) date of receipt;


164
                                                                                    Annex



            (c) the name and address of the laboratory testing the sample;
            (d) the name and address of the originator of the request for analysis;
            (e) the name, description and batch number of the sample where appropriate;
            (f) the name and address of the original manufacturer and, if applicable,
                those of the repacker and/or trader;
            (g) the reference to the speciﬁcation used for testing the sample;
            (h) the results of all tests performed (mean and standard deviation, if
                applicable) with the prescribed limits;
            (i) a conclusion as to whether or not the sample was found to be within the
                limits of the speciﬁcation;
            (j) expiry date or retest date if applicable;
            (k) date on which the test(s) was (were) completed; and
            (l) the signature of the head of laboratory or other authorized person.
            Note: The Guideline on model certiﬁcate of analysis was adopted by the WHO
            Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations for Pharmaceutical Preparations at its
            thirty-sixth meeting (3).


20.   Retained samples
      20.1 Samples should be retained as required by the legislation or by the originator
           of the request for analysis. There should be a sufﬁcient amount of retained
           sample to allow at least two re-analyses. The retained sample should be kept
           in its ﬁnal pack.


Part Four. Safety
21.   General rules
      21.1 General and speciﬁc safety instructions reﬂecting identiﬁed risk, should
           be made available to each staff member and supplemented regularly as
           appropriate (e.g. with written material, poster displays, audiovisual material
           and occasional seminars).
      21.2 General rules for safe working in accordance with national regulations and
           SOPs normally include the following requirements:
            (a) safety data sheets should be available to staff before testing is carried
                out;
            (b) smoking, eating and drinking in the laboratory should be prohibited;
            (c) staff should be familiar with the use of ﬁre-ﬁghting equipment, including
                ﬁre extinguishers, ﬁre blankets and gas masks;
            (d) staff should wear laboratory coats or other protective clothing, including
                eye protection;
            (e) special care should be taken, as appropriate, in handling, for example,
                highly potent, infectious or volatile substances;
            (f) highly toxic and/or genotoxic samples should be handled in a specially
                designed facility to avoid the risk of contamination;
            (g) all containers of chemicals should be fully labelled and include
                prominent warnings (e.g. “poison”, “ﬂammable”, “radioactive”)
                whenever appropriate;
            (h) adequate insulation and spark-prooﬁng should be provided for electrical
                wiring and equipment, including refrigerators;


                                                                                      165
Quality control methods for herbal materials



                 (i) rules on safe handling of cylinders of compressed gases should
                     be observed and staff should be familiar with the relevant colour
                     identiﬁcation codes;
                 (j) staff should be aware of the need to avoid working alone in the laboratory;
                     and
                 (k) ﬁrst-aid materials should be provided and staff instructed in ﬁrst-aid
                     techniques, emergency care and the use of antidotes.
          21.3 Protective clothing should be available, including eye protection, masks and
               gloves. Safety showers should be installed. Rubber suction bulbs should
               be used on manual pipettes and siphons. Staff should be instructed in the
               safe handling of glassware, corrosive reagents and solvents and particularly
               in the use of safety containers or baskets to avoid spillage from containers.
               Warnings, precautions and instructions should be given for work with violent,
               uncontrollable or dangerous reactions when handling speciﬁc reagents (e.g.
               mixing water and acids, or acetone–chloroform and ammonia), ﬂammable
               products, oxidizing or radioactive agents and especially biologicals such
               as infectious agents. Peroxide-free solvents should be used. Staff should be
               aware of methods for the safe disposal of unwanted corrosive or dangerous
               products by neutralization or deactivation and of the need for safe and
               complete disposal of mercury and its salts.
          21.4 Poisonous or hazardous products should be singled out and labeled
               appropriately, but it should not be taken for granted that all other chemicals
               and biologicals are safe. Unnecessary contact with reagents, especially
               solvents and their vapours, should be avoided. The use of known carcinogens
               and mutagens as reagents should be limited or totally excluded if required
               by national regulations. Replacement of toxic solvents and reagents by
               less toxic materials or reduction of their use should always be the aim,
               particularly when new techniques are developed.


References
           1. Quality assurance of pharmaceuticals. A compendium of guidelines and related
              materials. Vol. 2, 2nd updated edition. Good manufacturing practices and inspection.
              Geneva, World Health Organization, 2007.
           2. International Organization for Standardization. General requirements for the
              competence of testing and calibration laboratories. ISO/IEC 17025:2005.
           3. Model certiﬁcate of analysis. In: WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations
              for Pharmaceutical Preparations. Thirty-sixth report. Geneva, World Health
              Organization, 2002, Annex 10 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 902).
           4. International vocabulary of metrology — Basic and general concepts and associated
              terms. VIM 3rd ed., Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM) 200:2008
              (http://www.bipm.org/utils/common/documents/jcgm/JCGM_200_2008.
              pdf).
           5. Guidance for industry — Investigating out-of-speciﬁcation test results for
              pharmaceutical production. US Food and Drug Administration, Center for
              Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER), October 2006 (http://www.fda.
              gov/downloads/Drugs/GuidanceComplianceRegulatoryInformation/
              Guidances/UCM070287.pdf).
           6. Guidelines for inspection of drug distribution channels. In: WHO Expert
              Committee on Speciﬁcations for Pharmaceutical Preparations. Thirty-ﬁfth report.


166
                                                                                   Annex



    Geneva, World Health Organization, 1999, Annex 6 (WHO Technical Report
    Series, No. 885).
 7. Good manufacturing practices: supplementary guidelines for the manufacture
    of pharmaceutical excipients. In: WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations
    for Pharmaceutical Preparations. Thirty-ﬁfth report. Geneva, World Health
    Organization, 1999, Annex 5 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 885).
 8. General guidelines for the establishment, maintenance and distribution of
    chemical reference substances. In: WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations
    for Pharmaceutical Preparations. Forty-ﬁrst report. Geneva, World Health
    Organization, 2007, Annex 3 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 943).
 9. International Organization for Standardization. Guidance for the use of
    repeatability, reproducibility and trueness estimates in measurement uncertainty
    estimation. 2004 (ISO Guide 21748).
10. International Organization for Standardization/International Electrotechnical
    Commission. Uncertainty of measurement — Part 3: Guide to the expression of
    uncertainty in measurement (GUM:1995) 2008 (ISO/IEC Guide 98-3).
11. Supplementary guidelines in good manufacturing practice: validation.
    Qualiﬁcation of systems and equipment. In: WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations
    for Pharmaceutical Preparations. Fortieth report. Geneva, World Health Organization,
    2006, Annex 4, Appendix 6 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 937).
12. Supplementary guidelines in good manufacturing practice: validation. Validation
    of computerized systems. In: WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations for
    Pharmaceutical Preparations. Fortieth report. Geneva, World Health Organization,
    2006, Annex 4, Appendix 5 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 937).
13. Good automated manufacturing practice (GAMP) Good Practice Guides: Validation
    of laboratory computerized systems. International Society for Pharmaceutical
    Engineering (ISPE), 2005.
14. Good automated manufacturing practice (GAMP) Good Practice Guides: Electronic
    data archiving. International Society for Pharmaceutical Engineering (ISPE),2007.
15. Title 21 Code of Federal Regulations (21 CFR Part 11): Electronic records; electronic
    signatures. US Food and Drug Administration. The current status of 21 CFR
    Part 11 Guidance is located under Regulations and Guidance at: http://www.
    fda.gov/cder/gmp/index.htm — see background: http://www.fda.gov/
    OHRMS/DOCKETS/98fr/03-4312.pdf.
16. Computerised systems. In: The rules governing medicinal products in the European
    Union. Vol. 4. Good manufacturing practice (GMP) guidelines. Annex 11 (http://
    ec.europa.eu/health/ﬁles/eudralex/vol-4/pdfs-en/anx11_en.pdf).
17. Ofﬁcial Medicines Control Laboratories Network of the Council of Europe,
    Quality Assurance Documents: PA/PH/OMCL (08) 69 3R — Validation of
    computerised systems — core document (http://www.edqm.eu/medias/ﬁchiers/
    Validation_of_Computerised_Systems_Core_Document.pdf) and its annexes:
    – PA/PH/OMCL (08) 87 2R — Annex 1: Validation of computerized calculation
        systems: example of validation of in-house software (http://www.edqm.
        eu/medias/fichiers/NEW_Annex_1_Validation_of_computerised_
        calculation.pdf)
    – PA/PH/OMCL (08) 88 R — Annex 2: Validation of Databases
        (DB),Laboratory Information Management Systems (LIMS) and Electronic
        Laboratory       Notebooks      (ELN)        (http://www.edqm.eu/site/NEW_
        Annex_2_ Validation_of_Databases_DB_Laboratory_pdf-en-8392-2.html),
    – PA/PH/OMCL (08) 89 R — Annex 3: Validation of computers as part of
        test equipment (http://www.edqm.eu/site/NEW_Annex_3_Validation_
        of_computers_as_part_of_tespdf-en-8393-2.html).


                                                                                     167
Quality control methods for herbal materials



          18. Guidelines for good laboratory practice and guidelines for the testing of chemicals.
              Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development(OECD),
              Environment Directorate, Chemical Safety. (http://www.oecd.org/ document
              /63/0,3343,en_2649_34381_2346175_1_1_1_1,00.html).
          19. The International Pharmacopoeia, Fourth Edition (including First Supplement).
              Vol. 2. Methods of analysis. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2008 (http://
              www.who.int/phint).
          20. Ofﬁcial Medicines Control Laboratories Network of the Council of Europe,
              Quality Assurance Documents:
              – PA/PH/OMCL (08) 73 — Qualiﬁcation of equipment (http://www.edqm.
                  eu/medias/ﬁchiers/NEW_Qualiﬁcation_of_Equipment_core_document.
                  pdf),
              – PA/PH/OMCL (07) 17 DEF –Annex 1: Qualiﬁcation of HPLC equipment
                  (http://www.edqm.eu/medias/fichiers/Annex_1_Qualification_of_
                  HPLC_Equipment.pdf),
              – PA/PH/OMCL (06) 86 DEF — Annex 2: Qualiﬁcation of GC Equipment
                  (http://www.edqm.eu/medias/ﬁchiers/Annex_2_Qualiﬁcation_of_GC_
                  equipment.pdf),
              – PA/PH/OMCL (07) 11 DEF CORR — Annex 3: Qualiﬁcation of UV-visible
                  spectrophotometers (http://www.edqm.eu/medias/ﬁchiers/Annex_3_
                  Qualiﬁcation_of_UV_Visible_spectrophotometers.pdf),
              – PA/PH/OMCL (07) 12 DEF CORR - Annex 4: Qualiﬁcation of IR
                  spectrophotometers (http://www.edqm.eu/medias/ﬁchiers/Annex_4_
                  Qualiﬁcation_of_IR_spectrophotometers.pdf),
              – PA/PH/OMCL (07) 108 3R — Annex 5: Qualiﬁcation of automatic titrators
                  (http://www.edqm.eu/medias/ﬁchiers/NEW_Annex_5_Qualiﬁcation_
                  of_Automatic_Titrators.pdf).
          21. US Pharmacopeia, 32nd ed. General chapters: <1058> Analytical instrument
              qualiﬁcation. Rockville, MD, 2009.
          22. WHO guidelines for sampling of pharmaceutical products and related materials.
              In: WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations for Pharmaceutical Preparations.
              Thirty-ninth report. Geneva, World Health Organization, 2005, Annex 4 (WHO
              Technical Report Series, No. 929).
          23. Stability testing of active pharmaceutical ingredients and ﬁnished
              pharmaceutical products. In: WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations
              for Pharmaceutical Preparations. Forty-third report. Geneva, World Health
              Organization, 2009, Annex 2 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 953).
          24. Supplementary guidelines in good manufacturing practice: validation.
              Analytical method validation. In: WHO Expert Committee on Speciﬁcations for
              Pharmaceutical Preparations. Fortieth report. Geneva, World Health Organization,
              2006, Annex 4, Appendix 4 (WHO Technical Report Series, No. 937).
          25. Guideline of the International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical
              Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH)
              Q2(R1): Validation of analytical procedures: text and methodology (http://
              www.ich.org/LOB/media/MEDIA417.pdf).
          26. Ofﬁcial Medicines Control Laboratories Network of the Council of Europe,
              Quality Assurance Documents: PA/PH/OMCL (05) 47 DEF — Validation of
              analytical procedures (http://www.edqm.eu/medias/ﬁchiers/Validation_of_
              Analytical_Procedures.pdf).
          27. The US Pharmacopeia, 32nd ed. General chapters: <1225> Validation of compendial
              procedures and <1226> Veriﬁcation of compendial procedures. Rockville, MD,
              2009.


168
                                                                                         Annex



     28. Ofﬁcial Medicines Control Laboratories Network of the Council of Europe,
         Quality Assurance Documents: PA/PH/OMCL (07) 28 DEF CORR —
         Evaluation and reporting of results (http://www.edqm.eu/medias/ﬁchiers/
         Evaluation_Reporting_of_Results.pdf).
     29. Shewhart control charts. International Organization for Standardization, 1991
         (ISO 8258).
     30. Ofﬁcial Medicines Control Laboratories Network of the Council of Europe,
         Quality Assurance Documents:
        – PA/PH/OMCL (05) 49 DEF CORR — Uncertainty of measurement — Part
            1: General OMCL policy for implementation of measurement uncertainty in
            compliance testing (http://www.edqm.eu/medias/ﬁchiers/Uncertainty_
            of_Measurements_Part_I_Compliance_testing.pdf),
        – PA/PH/OMCL (07) 106 DEF — Uncertainty of measurement — Part 2:
            OMCL policy on the estimation and application of uncertainty in analytical
            measurement      (http://www.edqm.eu/medias/ﬁchiers/Uncertainty_of_
            Measurements_Part_II_Other_than_compliance_testing.pdf).
     31. EURACHEM/Cooperation on International Traceability in Analytical
         Chemistry (CITAC) Guides. Quantifying uncertainty in analytical measurement,
         2nd ed, EURACHEM/CITAC, 2000.
     32. EURACHEM/ Cooperation on International Traceability in Analytical
         Chemistry (CITAC) Guides. Use of uncertainty information in compliance assessment,
         EURACHEM/CITAC, 2007 (http://www.measurementuncertainty.org/).




Appendix
Equipment for a ﬁrst-stage and medium-sized
pharmaceutical quality control laboratory

      A list of equipment considered by the Committee to be adequate either for a ﬁrst-
      stage or medium-sized pharmaceutical quality control laboratory is given in the
      table. In the case of a medium-sized laboratory, speciﬁc sections are devoted to
      a microbiology unit and pharmacognosy/phytochemistry unit. For a ﬁrst-stage
      laboratory testing herbal medicines, the additional equipment recommended is
      speciﬁed in the table.

      This list does not represent any requirements which should be fulﬁlled to comply with
      these guidelines. NMRAs or laboratories wishing to perform pharmaceutical analyses
      may consider the following list in the establishment or upgrading of their testing
      facilities. For budgetary reasons it is necessary, besides the cost of equipment, to take
      into consideration the cost of reference materials, reagents, solvents, glassware, other
      laboratory commodities and personnel. Experience has shown that for sustainability,
      a laboratory should allow a margin of 10–15% per year of the purchasing expenditure
      on equipment to cover the cost of maintenance.




                                                                                           169
Quality control methods for herbal materials



Table. Equipment for a ﬁrst-stage and medium-sized pharmaceutical quality control
laboratory
 First-stage laboratory

 Equipment and major instruments                                      Quantity
 Top-loading balance                                                  1
 Analytical balance (5 digits)                                        1 or 2
 Melting-point apparatus                                              1
 pH meter (with assorted electrodes)                                  1
 Microscope                                                           1
 Polarimeter                                                          1
 High-performance liquid chromatograph with ultraviolet detector      2
 Ultraviolet/visible spectrophotometer                                1
 Infrared spectrophotometer with pellet press                         1
 Karl Fischer titrator (semi-micro determination of water)            1
 Agate mortar with pestle                                             1
 Equipment for thin-layer chromatography                              1
 Thin-layer chromatography spotter                                    1
 Developing chambers                                                  6 + 1a
 Atomizers                                                            6
 Ultraviolet viewing lamp                                             1
 Disintegration test equipment (1 basket for 6 tablets)               1
 Dissolution apparatus                                                1
 Soxhlet extraction apparatus (60 ml)                                 3 + 1a
 Micrometer callipers                                                 1
 Pycnometers                                                          2
 Burettes/pipettes (10 ml and 25 ml/1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 25, 50 ml)       3 of each
 Desiccator                                                           1 + 1a
 Centrifuge (table-top model, 4-place swing rotor)                    1
 Water-bath (20 litres)                                               1
 Hot plates with magnetic stirrers                                    3
 Vacuum pump (rotary, oil)                                            1
 Drying oven (60 litres)                                              1
 Vacuum oven (17 litres)                                              1
 Mufﬂe furnace                                                        1
 Refrigerator (explosion-proof)                                       1
 Water distilling apparatus (8 litres/hour)                           1
 Water deionizer (10 litres/hour)                                     1
 Dehumidiﬁer (where needed)                                           1
 Fume hood                                                            1

 Optional items
 Analytical microbalance                                              1
 Flame photometer (including air compressor)                          1



170
                                                                              Annex



First-stage laboratory (cont.)

Refractometer                                                     1
Viscometer                                                        1
Vortex mixer                                                      1
Shaker (wrist-action)                                             1
Pipette rinser                                                    1
Constant temperature water-bath                                   1
Ultrasonic cleaner (5 litres)                                     1

Medium-sized laboratory

Equipment and major instruments                                   Quantity

Top-loading balance                                               1 or 2
Analytical balance (5 digits)                                     2
Analytical microbalance                                           1
Microscope                                                        1 or 2
Equipment for thin-layer chromatography                           1
Thin-layer chromatography multispotter                            1
Developing chambers                                               6
Atomizers                                                         6
Ultraviolet viewing lamp                                          1
Potentiometric titrimeter                                         1
Micro-Kjeldahl equipment (including fume ﬂasks)                   1
Soxhlet extraction apparatus (60 ml)                              3
Pycnometers                                                       2
Burettes/pipettes (10 ml and 25 ml/1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 25, 50 ml)    6 of each
Micrometer callipers                                              1
Heating mantles for ﬂasks (assorted sizes: 50, 200 and 2000 ml)   6
Sieves (assorted sizes)                                           1 set
Centrifuge (ﬂoor model)                                           1
Shaker (wrist-action)                                             1
Vortex mixers                                                     2
Water-bath (electrical, 20 litres)                                2 or 3
Hot plates with magnetic stirrers                                 3 or 4
Vacuum pump (rotary, oil)                                         2
Vacuum rotary evaporator                                          1
Drying oven (60 litres)                                           2 or 3
Mufﬂe furnace (23 litres)                                         1
Vacuum oven (17 litres)                                           1
Desiccators                                                       2
Refrigerator (explosion-proof)                                    2
Freezer                                                           1
Ultrasonic cleaners (5 litres)                                    2
Laboratory glassware washing machine                              1
Water distilling apparatus (8 litres/hour)                        1
Water deionizing equipment (10 litres/hour)                       1



                                                                               171
Quality control methods for herbal materials



 Medium-sized laboratory (cont.)

 Fume hoods                                                                                2
 Melting-point apparatus                                                                   1
 Polarimeter                                                                               1
 pH meters (with assorted electrodes)                                                      2
 High-performance liquid chromatograph with variable wavelength
 Ultraviolet/visible detector                                                              3 or 4
 Ultraviolet/visible spectrophotometer, double-beam                                        1
 Infrared spectrophotometer with pellet press                                              1
 Agate mortar with pestle                                                                  1
 Gas chromatograph (ﬂame ionization, direct and static head space injection)               1
 Refractometer                                                                             1
 Karl Fischer titrators (1 semi-micro and 1 coulometric for microdetermination of water)   2
 Oxygen ﬂask combustion apparatus                                                          1
 Disintegration test equipment (1 basket for 6 tablets)                                    1
 Dissolution test equipment (for 6 tablets/capsules)                                       1

 Optional items

 Atomic absorption spectrophotometer                                                       1
 Spectroﬂuorometer                                                                         1
 High-performance liquid chromatograph detectors:
 — ﬂuorescence                                                                             1
 — diode-array                                                                             1
 — refractive index                                                                        1
 — evaporative light scattering (ELSD)                                                     1
 — charged aerosol (CAD)                                                                   1
 — mass spectrometric (MS)                                                                 1
 Gas chromatograph detectors:
 — conductivity                                                                            1
 — nitrogen/phosphorous (NPD)                                                              1
 — mass spectrometric (MS)                                                                 1
 Capillary electrophoresis equipment                                                       1
 Thin-layer chromatography scanner                                                         1
 Crushing strength tester                                                                  1
 Friability tester                                                                         1
 Viscometer                                                                                1
 Ice machine                                                                               1
 Solvent-recovery apparatus                                                                1

 Equipment for microbiology unit
 pH meter                                                                                  1
 Ultraviolet/visible spectrophotometer, single-beam                                        1
 Microscopes (for bacteriology)                                                            2
 Membrane ﬁlter assembly for sterility tests                                               1




172
                                                                                                                      Annex



    Medium-sized laboratory (cont.)

    Colony counter with magniﬁer                                                                       1
    Laminar air ﬂow unit                                                                               1
    Hot-air sterilizer                                                                                 1
    Incubators, 60 litres                                                                              2 or 3
    Anaerobic jar                                                                                      1
    Zone reader                                                                                        1
    Centrifuge                                                                                         1
    Water-bath (thermostatically controlled)                                                           2
    Autoclaves (100 litres, top-loading)                                                               2
    Refrigerators (340 litres)                                                                         2
    Deep freeze                                                                                        1
    Laboratory glassware washing machine                                                               1

    Equipment for pharmacognosy/phytochemistry unit

    Grinder/mill (for preparation of sample of herbal materials)                                       1
    Top loading balance                                                                                1
    Sieves                                                                                             1 set
                  b
    Microscope                                                                                         1
    Soxhlet extraction apparatus                                                                       2 or 3
    Water-bath                                                                                         1
    Heating mantles for ﬂasks                                                                          1 or 2
    Hot plates with magnetic stirrers                                                                  2
    Equipment for thin-layer chromatography                                                            1 or 2
    Developing chambers                                                                                3 or 4
    Desiccators                                                                                        2
    Rotary vacuum apparatus                                                                            1
    Distillation equipment                                                                             1
    Conical percolators                                                                                2 or 3
    Apparatus for determination of water content by azeotropic method (p. 33, 34)*
                                                                                b
                                                                                                       1
    Apparatus for determination of volatile oils (p. 37, 38)*
                                                    b
                                                                                                       1
    Apparatus for determination of arsenic limit test (p. 67, 68)*
                                                         c
                                                                                                       1
a
    Needed in the case that herbal medicines are also tested.
b
    Quality control methods for medicinal plant materials. Geneva, World Health Organization, 1998.
c
    WHO guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to contaminants and residues. Geneva, World Health
    Organization, 2006.




* Since information on this apparatus is included in the present publication, the relevant page numbers in the present
    publication have been inserted for easy reference. These page numbers did not appear in the appendix as originally
    published.




                                                                                                                         173
