Crop Rotation
   on Organic Farms
     A PLANNING MANUAL
    Charles L. Mohler & Sue Ellen Johnson, editors




 Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE)
         Plant and Life Sciences Publishing (PALS)
CROP ROTATION ON ORGANIC FARMS
                   a planning manual
       Charles L. Mohler and Sue Ellen Johnson, editors




Published by the Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE) program.
SARE is supported by the National Institute of Food and Agriculture, U.S. Deparment
  of Agriculture. Formerly published by Plant and Life Sciences Publishing (PALS).
                                     NRAES-177
     Published July 2009 (NRAES-177)
     Reprinted 2020
     This book was first published in 2009 by the Natural Resource, Agriculture, and Engineering Service (NRAES).
     As of 2020 it is published by the Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE) program. SARE is
     supported by the USDA’s National Institute of Food and Agriculture under award No. 2019-38640-29881. Learn
     more about NRAES and SARE on pages 155-156.

     ISBN 978-1-933395-21-0

     Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

     Crop rotation on organic farms : a planning manual / Charles L. Mohler and Sue Ellen Johnson, editors.
         p. cm. -- (Cooperative Extension NRAES ; 177)
      Includes bibliographical references and index.
      ISBN 978-1-933395-21-0
     1. Crop rotation--Handbooks, manuals, etc. 2. Organic farming--Handbooks, manuals, etc. I. Mohler,
     Charles L., date II. Johnson, Sue Ellen, date III. Natural Resource, Agriculture, and Engineering Service.
     Cooperative Extension. IV. Series: NRAES (Series) ; 177.
      S603.C756 2009
      631.5’82--dc22
                                        200901605


     Disclaimer
     The SARE program provides information to everyone, without regard to race, religion, national origin, sex, age,
     disability, familial or veteran status. Every effort has been made to make this publication as complete and as
     accurate as possible. It is only a guide, however, and should be used in conjunction with other information
     sources. The editors/authors and publisher disclaim any liability, loss or risk, personal or otherwise, which is
     incurred as a consequence, directly or indirectly, of the use and application of any if the contents of this
     publication. Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations expressed in this publication are those of
     the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of the USDA or SARE.


     Ordering information
     For online orders visit www.sare.org/webstore. Call (301) 779-1007 to order by phone with credit card payment.
     To pay by check or purchase order, make payable to Sustainable Agriculture Publications and send to:
     SARE Outreach Publications
     c/o International Fulfillment Corporation
     3570 Bladensburg Rd.
     Brentwood, MD 20722


     Cost:
     • $24 for orders of 1-9 books
     • $18 for 10-24 books (a 25% discount)
     • $12 for 25 or more books (a 50% discount)


     Shipping:
     • $6.95 for first book (within the United States). Add $2 s/h for each additional book—up to nine books—shipped
     within the United States.
     • For s/h on orders of 10 or more books, call (301) 779-1007 or visit www.sare.org/WebStore.


     International orders:
     Call (301) 779-1007 or visit www.sare.org/WebStore.




ii
                                  CONTENTS

Acknowledgments…………………………………………………………………………….…………………………v
About the Authors……………………………………………………………………………..………………………...vi

Chapter 1: Introduction………………………………………………………..…………….…………………1
      Charles L. Mohler

      How This Manual Was Constructed……………………….…………………………………….…………2
      How to Use This Manual………………………………………………………………………………………2


Chapter 2: How Expert Organic Farmers Manage Crop Rotations……………………………………3
      Sue Ellen Johnson and Eric Toensmeier

      Why Rotate Crops?……………………………………………………………………………………………3
      Basics of Crop Rotation………………………………………………………………………………………5
      Crop Rotation and Farm Management………………………….………….……………………………6
      The NEON “Managing a Crop Rotation System” Chart……….………………………………………9
      Key Responsibilities and Related Tasks in the Chart………………………………………………...10


Chapter 3: Physical and Biological Processes in Crop Rotation………………………….………....…21
      What This Chapter Is About ……………………………………………………………....………………21
      Charles L. Mohler

      Crop Rotation and Soil Tilth………………………………………………………..…………………....…23
      Harold van Es

      Crop Rotation Effects on Soil Fertility and Plant Nutrition………….………………..…………...…27
      Anusuya Rangarajan

      Managing Plant Diseases with Crop Rotation……………………………………………………....…32
      Margaret Tuttle McGrath

      Management of Insect Pests with Crop Rotation and Field Layout……………..………………41
      Kimberly A. Stoner

      The Role of Crop Rotation in Weed Management………………………….………..………….…..44
      Charles L. Mohler


Chapter 4: Crop Sequences from Expert Farmers’ Fields……………………………….....……..……47
      Sue Ellen Johnson

      Reading the “Real Fields on Real Farms” Tables………………………………………...……………47
      Observation on the Sample Sequences……………………………………………..……....…………56
      Summary……………………………………………………………………………………………...…………57




                                                                                           iii
     Chapter 5: A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure……………………….…………………..……………58
                  Charles L. Mohler

                  Tips for Sequencing Crops……………………………………………………………………....…….……59
                  A Complete, Step-by-Step Rotation Planning Guide……………………………………..…………69
                  A More Complex Example: Summer Acres Vegetable Farm………………………………………83


     Chapter 6: Crop Rotation during the Transition from
     Conventional to Organic Agriculture………………………………………..……………………..………91
                  Charles L. Mohler

                  Transition from Old Sod to Vegetable Production……………………………………………....……91
                  Transition from Conventional Cropping on a Farm with Forages……………………………...…92
                  Transition to Cash Grain or Vegetables on a Farm without Forages…………….………….…...93


     Chapter 7: Guidelines for Intercropping…………………………………………………………………...95
                  Charles L. Mohler and Kimberly A. Stoner

                  Interplanting Crops with Partially Overlapping Growing Seasons……………………………......96
                  Intercropping Legumes with Nonlegumes……………………………………………………....……..96
                  Using Tall Crops to Reduce Drought or Heat Stress of Shorter Crops……………………....…….96
                  Using Intercropping to Disrupt Host Finding by Some Host-Specific Insect Pests…………......98
                  How Intercrops Affect Populations of Beneficial Parasitoids and Pest Predators………….....99
                  Using Trap Crops to Reduce Pests………………………………………………………………….....….99
                  A Glossary of Intercropping Terms………………………………………………………………….......100

     Appendix 1: Characteristics of Crops Commonly Grown in the Northeastern United States....101
                  Charles L. Mohler and Anusuya Rangarajan

     Appendix 2: Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities…………………………………….....…104
                  Charles L. Mohler

     Appendix 3: Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States……....124
                  Margaret Tuttle McGrath

     Appendix 4: Characteristics of Common Agricultural Weeds Relevant to Crop Rotation.....…138
                  Charles L. Mohler

     Appendix 5: Crop Disease Pathogens Hosted by Common Agricultural Weeds………….…....142
                  Charles L. Mohler and Margaret Tuttle McGrath

     Appendix 6: Linking a Field Map and Spreadsheet in Microsoft Excel…………………………....148
                  Jody Bolluyt, Peter Lowy, and Charles L. Mohler

     References………………………………………………………..………………………………………………………..150
     About SARE……..………………………………………………………………………………………………………155
     About PALS........................................................................................................................................................... 156




iv
                                ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Production of Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual was made possible with
funding from Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE). See page 155 for more
                                  information about SARE.

    This project was a collaboration between researchers, extension educators, and growers. The
authors especially thank the twelve farmers who participated in the DACUM process, and whose
efforts created the foundation for this project: Polly Amour, Four Winds Farm, Gardiner, NY; Paul
Arnold, Pleasant Valley Farm, Argyle, NY; David Blyn, Riverbank Farm, Roxbury, CT; Roy Brubaker,
Village Acres Farm, Mifflintown, PA; Jean-Paul Courtens, Roxbury Farm, Kinderhook, NY; Jim
Gerritsen, Wood Prairie Farm, Bridgewater, ME; Brett Grohsgal, Even Star Organic Farm, Lexington
Park, MD; Jack Gurley, Calvert’s Gift Farm, Sparks, MD; Don Kretschmann, Kretschmann Farm,
Rochester, PA; Drew Norman, One Straw Farm, White Hall, MD; Eero Ruuttila, Nesenkeag Farm,
Litchfield, NH; and Will Stevens, Golden Russet Farm, Shoreham, VT. Tina Overtoom, The Center
on Education and Training for Employment, The Ohio State University, was the DACUM facilitator,
and Eric Toensmeier, then with the New England Small Farm Institute, assisted her. Many additional
growers reviewed and verified the DACUM chart: Frank Albani, Jay Armour, Mike and Terra
Brownback, Judy Dornstreitch, Pam Flory, Darrell Frey, Les and Debbie Guile, Rick Hood, Jason
Kafka, Dwain Livengood, Bryan O’Hara, Robin Ostfeld, L. Smith, Ed Stockman, Paul Volcklawen,
and several anonymous reviewers.
    The authors also thank the following reviewers for the many improvements they suggested:
Brian Caldwell, farm education coordinator, NOFA-NY; Kathryne L. Everts, associate professor,
Plant Pathology, University of Maryland and University of Delaware; Caragh B. Fitzgerald, extension
educator, Maryland Cooperative Extension; Eric Gallandt, assistant professor, Weed Ecology and
Management, University of Maine; Vern Grubinger, vegetable and berry specialist, University of
Vermont Extension and regional coordinator, Northeast SARE; Jerzy Nowak, professor, Horticulture
Department, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University; Ginny Rozenkranz, extension
educator, Maryland Cooperative Extension; Elsa Sanchez, assistant professor, Horticulture Systems
Management, The Pennsylvania State University; Abby Seaman, senior extension associate, Cornell
Cooperative Extension; Eric Sideman, organic crop specialist, Maine Organic Farmers & Gardeners
Association; Eric Toensmeier; and growers Polly Amour; Kurt Forman, Clearview Farm, Palmyra, NY;
Brett Grohsgal; Jack Gurley; Brett Kreher, Kreher’s Poultry Farms, Clarence, NY; Don Kreher, Kreher’s
Poultry Farms, Clarence, NY; Will Stevens; and Jon Thorne, Anchor Run Farm, Wrightstown, PA.
    Additionally, the authors are grateful to Steve Gilman, Ruckytucks Farm, Saratoga, NY; Dave
Colson, New Leaf Farm, Durham, ME; and Andy Caruso, Upper Forty Farm, Cromwell, CT for
patiently working through early versions of the planning procedure. Steve Vanek, PhD candidate,
Cornell University; Brian Caldwell; and Steve Gilman assembled the information for several of
the crop rotation examples in Chapter 4. Klaas and Mary Howell Martens, Lakeview Organic
Grains, Penn Yan, NY; John Myer, Myer Farm, Ovid, NY; Edwin Fry, Fair Hills Farm, Chestertown, MD;
and Eric and Anne Nordell, Beech Grove Farm, Trout Run, PA assisted in the study of their farms.
Cornell University students Jennifer Rodriguez, Hui Ouyong, Erin Finan, Danya Glabau, and Samuel
Greenwood helped assemble information for the tables. Anusuya Rangarajan, senior extension
associate, Cornell University, provided gentle and joyful guidance of the NEON project.
    The book was edited by Jill Mason, MasonEdit.com and designed by Yen Chiang, NRAES. Marty
Sailus, NRAES Director, managed book production from manuscript peer review through printing.
Holly Hyde, editor, provided production support. Additional production support was provided
Violet Stone, Cornell University Department of Horticulture.
    Support for this project was provided through a grant from the USDA Initiative for Future
Agriculture and Food Systems; and Hatch funds (Regional Project NE-1000, NY(C)–183458) from the
Cornell Agricultural Experiment Station.


                                                                                                        v
                                  About the Authors
                                    (listed in alphabetical order)



     Jody Bolluyt, producer, Roxbury Farm, Kinderhook, New York

     Sue Ellen Johnson, research leader, New England Small Farm Institute, Belchertown,
     Massachusetts; currently assistant professor and forage specialist, Department of Crop
     Science, North Carolina State University

     Peter Lowy, intern, Roxbury Farm, Kinderhook, New York

     Margaret Tuttle McGrath, associate professor, Department of Plant Pathology, Long Island
     Horticultural Research Laboratory, Cornell University

     Charles L. Mohler, senior research associate, Department of Crop and Soil Sciences,
     Cornell University

     Anusuya Rangarajan, senior extension associate, Department of Horticulture, Cornell
     University

     Kimberly A. Stoner, associate agricultural scientist (entomology), The Connecticut
     Agricultural Experiment Station, New Haven, Connecticut

     Eric Toensmeier, program specialist, New England Small Farm Institute, Belchertown,
     Massachusetts; currently farm project director, Nuestras Raices, Holyoke, Massachusetts

     Harold van Es, professor and chair, Department of Crop and Soil Sciences, Cornell
     University




vi
                                                                1
                                       INTRODUCTION
                                           Charles L. Mohler




C         rop rotation is a critical feature of all organic
          cropping systems because it provides the princi-
          pal mechanism for building healthy soils, a major
way to control pests, and a variety of other benefits. Crop
rotation means changing the type of crop grown on a par-
                                                                        “The purpose of this book
                                                                        is to help growers and
ticular piece of land from year to year. As used in this man-
                                                                        farm advisors understand
ual, the term includes both cyclical rotations, in which                the management of crop
the same sequence of crops is repeated indefinitely on a                rotations; avoid crop rotation
field, and noncyclical rotations, in which the sequence of
crops varies irregularly to meet the evolving business and              problems; and use crop
management goals of the farmer. Each field has its own                  rotation to build better soil,
rotation, and, consequently, each farmer manages a set of               control pests, and develop
rotations.
    Good crop rotation requires long-term strategic plan-               profitable farms that support
ning. However, planning does not necessarily involve                    satisfied families.”
identifying which crop will be grown on a field years in
advance. Indeed, such specificity may prove futile as plans
become disrupted by weather, changes in the market, la-             to correct. The purpose of this book is to help growers and
bor supply, and other factors. Lack of planning, however,           farm advisors understand the management of crop rota-
can lead to serious problems—for example, the buildup               tions; avoid crop rotation problems; and use crop rotation
of a soilborne disease of a critical crop, or imbalances in         to build better soil, control pests, and develop profitable
soil nutrients. Such problems can result in an inability to         farms that support satisfied families.
meet the demands of a carefully cultivated market or in                 Although rotating among a diversity of cash and cov-
additional labor and expense. Problems caused by faulty             er crops has numerous advantages, it poses substantial
rotation often take several years to develop and can catch          management challenges. The number of crops (and crop
even experienced growers by surprise. In fact, rotation             families) grown can be large, particularly on diversified
problems usually do not develop until well after the transi-        vegetable farms and mixed vegetable-grain operations.
tion to organic cropping. Since the crops grown by organic          Mathematically, this creates a huge number of potential
farmers are often different and more diverse than those             crop sequences from which to choose. For example, if a
grown in the preceding conventional system, the organic             farm produces ten different crops, these can be arranged
transition itself often rotates away from the previous crops        in 90 two-year sequences, since each of the ten crops
and their associated problems. Most farmers are greatly             could be followed by any of the other nine. The same ten
tempted to plant excessive acreage of the most profitable           crops can be arranged in any of 5,040 unique four-year se-
crop or to overuse certain fields for one type of crop. Such        quences! Of course, some sequences can be easily elimi-
practices can lead to costly problems that take many years          nated from the list of possibilities, based on experience


                                                                                                  CHAPTER 1 | Introduction   1
or general rules of thumb, like avoiding successive veg-         physical aspects of organic cropping systems, including
etable crops in the same plant family, but the number of         management of soil health, crop nutrition, diseases, insects,
possibilities is still enormous. Further complications arise     and weeds. An important aspect of these contributions is
because, for market reasons, some crops are grown on a           that they clarify what crop rotation cannot accomplish, as
larger acreage than others. Large-acreage crops necessar-        well as what it can do to solve various production problems.
ily occur in multiple sequences with different small acre-           Chapter 5 (pages 58–90) outlines procedures for
age crops. Moreover, since certain crops grow well only          sorting through the diverse types of data to arrive at
on particular fields due to soil type, availability of irriga-   decisions about crop rotation. These procedures distill
tion, topography, etc., the problem of choosing effective        the wisdom derived from the panel of expert growers into
crop sequences and allotting them to particular fields be-       a method that can be applied to any farm. Step-by-step
comes even more complex.                                         examples are provided.
    This manual is intended to assist growers in plotting a          Although this manual is primarily intended for or-
course through the maze of decisions involved in planning        ganic farmers and the extension personnel who work with
crop rotations. The idea behind the manual is not to             them, we hope it will also be useful to other growers. To
provide a list of rigid dos and don’ts. Rather, the intent is    this end, chapter 6 (pages 91–94) provides a brief discus-
to provide perspectives on how to approach the challenge         sion about crop sequences that can be used for transition
of planning effective crop rotations and to provide current      from conventional to organic production.
information on which to base decisions.                              Intercropping is not a necessary part of crop rotation,
                                                                 but intercropping greatly affects crop rotation planning.
How This Manual Was                                              Consequently, chapter 7 (pages 95–100) discusses the
                                                                 basic principles of intercropping and how these interact
Constructed                                                      with other aspects of crop rotation.
                                                                     Finally, a series of appendices provide biological data
    To ensure that this rotation planning manual reflects        relevant to planning crop rotations. These data have been
the realities of crop production on actual farms, the New        assembled from a variety of sources, including scientific
England Small Farm Institute, on behalf of the Northeast         literature, extension publications, and farmer experience.
Organic Network (NEON), assembled a panel of 12 ex-                  This manual is most applicable for farms from Mary-
pert organic farmers. The panel met for three days and           land to Ohio and north through southern Canada. Most of
worked through a formal facilitated process that produced        the principles of crop rotation and methods for choosing
a detailed analysis of how experienced organic farmers           among potential crop sequences are widely applicable be-
plan their cropping sequences. This process is discussed         yond this region. Data tables on crops, weeds, insects, and
in chapter 2 (pages 3–20). Each expert farmer also de-           diseases, however, are likely to be inadequate in areas far
tailed a highly successful crop rotation that they use, along    from the northeastern US.
with problems that sometimes occur with that rotation
and how they meet such contingencies. These sample ro-
tations are presented in chapter 4 (pages 47–57) and are
                                                                 How to Use This Manual
supplemented with rotations from several farms that have             This manual can be used in several ways. First, it can
been intensively studied by NEON. These sample rota-             be used simply as a reference. For example, one can check
tions may not work well on farms that have different soil        for possible pest or soil problems that may occur in a
conditions, climates, financial resources, or types of crops,    cropping sequence, or determine how long to leave a field
but they are intended to provide inspiration and insight in      out of a particular crop to avoid pest problems. Second, the
planning crop sequences.                                         manual can be used to see how experienced growers think
    Chapters 2 (pages 3–20) and 4 (pages 47–47) convey           about crop rotations, and how they manage particular crop
the practical experience of expert growers. In contrast, chap-   sequences on their farms. Reading about what researchers
ter 3 (pages 21–46) emphasizes the theoretical underpin-         have discovered about how crop rotation affects soil and
nings of crop rotation. Five researchers who have extensive      pests will further increase one’s understanding of crop
experience with organic agriculture provide their views on       rotations. Finally, the manual provides a method for
what crop rotation contributes to particular biological and      systematically planning the crop rotations on a farm.


2     Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                                                2
                 HOW EXPERT ORGANIC FARMERS
                   MANAGE CROP ROTATIONS
                       Sue Ellen Johnson & Eric Toensmeier




C        rop rotation is central to the success of organic
         farms. So how do successful farmers plan and
         execute crop rotations?
    We asked twelve expert organic farmers this ques-
tion when they gathered at a farmhouse in upstate New
                                                                    ongoing annual process that incorporates information
                                                                    and objectives for multiple years. Many expert farmers do
                                                                    not have standardized, cyclical crop rotations for every
                                                                    field, yet our experts share an overall approach to design-
                                                                    ing, implementing, and adapting crop sequences on their
York for three snowy days in 2002. Between homemade                 farms. The tools in chapter 5 (pages 58–90) are designed
organic meals, they detailed how they plan and execute              to help readers develop their own expertise.
crop rotations on their farms. The expert farmers, who
together have over 200 years of experience, shared many
concepts and insights about crop rotation management.
Twenty other organic growers have since reviewed and
added to the panel farmers’ conclusions. Their cumula-
tive knowledge and common practice are summarized in                                      Sidebar 2.1
this chapter. Their specific actions and decisions related to                 The Concepts of Soil
crop rotation are outlined in the chart “Managing a Crop                     Quality, Soil Capital, Soil
Rotation System” on pages 12–13. The chart delineates the                      Health, and Soil Life
key “responsibilities” and the necessary “tasks” that need
to be executed to fulfill each key responsibility.                       The expert farmers used many terms inter-
                                                                         changeably as they discussed rotations and their
                                                                         farm goals. Organic agriculture revolves around
Why Rotate Crops?                                                        the concepts of soil life and soil biology. Organic
    Effective crop rotations are a foundation of organic                 practices, including crop rotation, are expected
cropping systems. Organic farmers recognize that crop                    to enhance soil life and soil health. A basic tenet
rotation is necessary to maintain field productivity. Expert             of organic agriculture is that biological diversity
farmers design their rotations to (1) earn income and (2)                and soil organic matter are drivers of productive
increase soil quality or build “soil capital” (sidebar 2.1).             organic farming systems. Farmers believe that
Crop rotation and a crop rotation plan and records are                   a soil high in organic matter leads to a healthy,
required for organic certification of a field or farm.                   biologically active soil that will have fewer crop
    Numerous books and articles outline the goals and                    fertility, pest, and disease problems. Farmers
benefits of crop rotations (see sidebar 2.2, page 4). The                also use the term soil capital to express how soil
contribution of our panel of expert farmers is interesting               building practices are an investment in long-
in (1) the emphasis they give to business management de-                 term soil productivity.
cisions in crop rotation planning; and (2) the flexibility
of their crop rotations, specifically the absence of fixed,
long-term crop rotations. Their rotation planning is an


                                                                CHAPTER 2 | How Expert Organic Farmers Manage Crop Rotations   3
                                                          Sidebar 2.2
                     What Some Good Books Say about Crop Rotation
    Numerous books and articles do an excellent job of outlining rotation theory, guidelines, and practice. Many
    present crop-by-crop rotations. These may or may not reflect the real complexity of modern organic farming
    operations and successful farm management, but a sampling of the advice is listed below.
    From Cyclopedia of American Agriculture (1907; L. H. Bailey, ed.), chapter 5, “Crop Management,” pp. 85–88:
    a. The rotation must adapt itself to the farmers business.
    b. It must adapt itself to the soil and fertility problem.
    c. The fertilizer question often modifies the rotation.
    d. The kind of soil and the climate may dictate the rotation.
    e. The labor supply has an important bearing on the character of the rotation course.
    f. The size of the farm and whether land can be used for pasturage are also determinants.
    g. The rotation must be planned with reference to the species of plants that will best serve one another, or produce the
        best interrelationship possible.
    h. The rotation must consider in what condition one crop will leave the soil for the succeeding crop, and how one crop can
        be seeded with another crop.
    From Organic Farming (1990; Nicolas Lampkin), chapter 5, “Rotation Design for Organic Systems,” pp. 131–32:
    “Usually a rotation contains at least one ‘money crop’ that finds a direct and ready market; one clean tilled crop; one hay or
    straw crop; one leguminous crop. . . .
    The starting point for the design of a rotation should be the capabilities of the farm and the land in terms of soil type, soil
    texture, climatic conditions.”
    Basic guidelines:
      Deep rooting crops should follow shallow rooting crops. . . .
      Alternate between crops with high and low root biomass. . . .
      Nitrogen fixing crops should alternate with nitrogen demanding crops. . . .
      Wherever possible, catch crops, green manures, and undersowing techniques should be used to keep the soil covered. . . .
      Crops which develop slowly and are therefore susceptible to weeds should follow weed suppressing crops. . . .
      Alternate between leaf and straw crops. . . .
      Where a risk of disease or soil borne pest problems exists, potential host crops should only occur in the rotation at
      appropriate time intervals. . . .
      Use variety and crop mixtures when possible. . . .
      Alternate between autumn and spring sown crops. . . .
    Also consider:
      suitability of individual crops with respect to climate and soil
      balance between cash and forage crops
      seasonal labour requirements and availability
      cultivation and tillage operations
    From Building Soils for Better Crops (2000; Fred Magdoff and Harold van Es), chapter 11, “Crop Rotation,” pp. 102–3:
    General Principles:
    1. Follow a legume crop . . . with a high nitrogen demanding crop.
    2. Grow less nitrogen demanding crops . . . in the second or third year after a legume sod.
    3. Grow the same annual crop for only one year . . . .
    4. Don’t follow one crop with another closely related species. . . .
    5. Use crop sequences that promote healthier crops.
    6. Use crop sequences that aid in controlling weeds.
    7. Use longer periods of perennial crops on sloping land.
    8. Try to grow a deep-rooted crop . . . as part of the rotation.
    9. Grow some crops that will leave a significant amount of residue.
    10. When growing a wide mix of crops . . . try grouping into blocks according to plant family, timing of crops, (all early
        season crops together, for example), type of crop (root vs. fruit vs. leaf), or crops with similar cultural practices. . . .



4   Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
Basics of Crop Rotation
     Rotations are one dimension of the art and science
of farm management. The biological principles of crop
rotation intersect with many other aspects of the farm                                  Sidebar 2.3
operation and farm business. Crop rotation is both a                      Expert Farmers’ Definitions
principle of production and a tool of management (see                         of Crop Rotation
sidebar 2.3). Expert farmers balance market options and
field biology. Labor, equipment, the layout of beds and                The NEON expert panel did not formally define
fields, along with other logistics of planting and harvest,            crop rotation, but individual farmers provided
all influence how rotations are designed and executed.                 their own working definitions:
     Expert farmers’ rotations include key cash crops,
“filler” or “break” crops, and cover crops. In every season,           • Don Kretschmann—“Rotation is the
farmers must manage production across multiple fields                    practice of using the natural biological and
and beds. Variation in the acreage of each crop, variation               physical properties of crops to benefit the
in field characteristics, and shifting business decisions                growth, health, and competitive advantage
result in multiple rotations or crop sequences on most                   of other crops. In this process the soil and
organic farms. Consequently, farmers manage numerous                     its life are also benefited. The desired result
crop rotations on the same farm.                                         is a farm which is more productive and to a
     “Model” rotations may suggest that every crop is                    greater extent self-reliant in resources.”
grown on a fixed schedule on every field, with each crop
rotating field to field around the entire farm. In reality, ex-        • Roy Brubaker—“[Rotation is] a planned
pert farmers in the northeast US rarely cycle every crop                 succession of crops (cash and cover)
they grow through every field on any regular schedule. In-               chosen to sustain a farm’s economic and
stead, each field tends to have its own distinct sequence                environmental health.”
of crops, tillage, and amendments. Thus, each field tends
to have a unique cropping history. On some farms, a few                • Will Stevens—“I’ve come to view crop
fields do follow an established, fixed rotation. Through                 rotation practices as a way to help me
trial and error the managers of these farms have settled                 use nature’s ecological principles in the
on a cyclical rotation that works well for a particular field            inherently non-natural world of agriculture.
(see chapter 4, pages 49–54 for real field examples).                    Striving to have as much ‘green’ on the
     The challenge of a good crop rotation system is to                  ground as possible throughout the year
grow the type and quantity of crops needed to ensure the                 is one step in that direction. I view crop
farm’s profitability while continually building soil quality             rotation as a series of ‘rapid succession’
for long-term productivity. Most vegetable farms grow                    cycles, (ideally) minimally managed.
many different crops and crop families. Every crop is not                Through this approach, the power and
equally profitable, and some crops are highly profitable                 sustainability of natural systems can be
but have limited markets. The rotation of botanical fami-                expressed through the health and prosperity
lies of crops prevents the buildup of pest populations, by               of the farm system.”
(1) interrupting pest life cycles, and (2) altering pest hab-
itats. Alternatively, fields (or beds) may be deliberately ro-         • Jean-Paul Courtens—“Rotations balance soil
tated through a fallow to manage a weed or pest problem.                 building crops (soil improvement crops)
Sometimes tillage, the use of mulch, or compost applica-                 and cash crops, and can allow for bare
tions are also integrated into a field’s rotation plan (see              fallow periods to break weed cycles and
chapter 4, pages 49–54 for examples). Cover crops are of-                incorporate plant matter into the soil.”
ten used for building soil fertility and health but make no
direct contribution to cash flow. Farms with limited acre-
age may rely on compost or other soil amendments rather


                                                              CHAPTER 2 | How Expert Organic Farmers Manage Crop Rotations   5
than cover crops (see sidebar 2.4).                             problems that may have built up during intensive crop-
   Farmers with large land bases often include longer-          ping. These cycles often run six to ten years or more.
term, soil-restoring perennial cover or hay crops in their          On many successful farms, long-term, fixed, cyclical
rotations. After a period of intensive cropping, fields cycle   rotations are far less common than simple two- or three-
out of annual production and into perennial hay or green        year crop sequences. Expert farmers frequently rely on
manure cover crops. During the intensive cropping pe-           numerous “trusted” short sequences or crop couplets to
riod, the season-to-season sequences vary with contin-          achieve their crop rotation objectives. Instead of planning
gencies, and biological principles may be neglected. The        long, detailed cyclical rotations, experts use a suite of in-
perennial hay or cover crop is then expected to correct         terchangeable short sequences to meet their farm’s goals
                                                                for cash flow and soil quality. Biological principles are the
                                                                main determinants of these short sequences. Samples of
                                                                short sequences are shown in the “Real Fields on Real
                                                                Farms” chart in chapter 4 (pages 49–54).
                      Sidebar 2.4
                                                                    During a field season, a bed or field may be planted
       Farm Size, Cover Crops, and                              with a series of different short-season crops. Sometimes,
             Crop Rotations                                     because of market demand or other farm practicalities,
                                                                growers make multiple plantings of a crop in the same bed
     Farm size affects cover cropping and the
                                                                within a given growing season, which is more problematic
     management of the crop rotation. Organic
                                                                biologically. The same crop or sequence is rarely replanted
     farmers plant cover crops to protect the soil,
                                                                in the same bed or field the following year, however, due to
     increase soil organic matter, improve soil
                                                                the likelihood of pest and disease outbreaks. Cover crops
     physical properties, and accumulate nutrients.
                                                                are often planted to follow or precede a cash crop and oc-
     Cover crops may also provide habitat for
                                                                cupy a field only for the winter or a portion of the growing
     beneficial insects or help crowd out weeds.
                                                                season. In all cases, experts are very conscious that such
     Most expert farmers integrate cover crops into             intensive cropping needs careful biological monitoring
     their fields at every opportunity. Sometimes               and management.
     these opportunities come before or after a short-
     season crop or during the months between full-
     season summer crops. Many expert farmers use
                                                                Crop Rotation and Farm
     a full year of cover crops to restore the soil after       Management
     intensive use. Large farms often have rotations                Crop rotations require multidimensional thinking.
     that include multiyear perennial cover crops or            Rotation management requires understanding both
     hay.                                                       the whole farm and each individual field and balancing
                                                                field- and farm-scale decisions (figure 2.1). On successful
     Farmers with limited acreage (<5 acres) find
                                                                farms, rotation planning is a rolling, responsive process.
     that including cover crops and providing
                                                                Expert farmers are continually balancing annual and
     adequate rotation of crop families on a given
                                                                multiyear (short- and long-term) decisions. Business
     field is challenging (see chapter 4, pages 47–57).
                                                                decisions must be optimized for annual returns and cash
     Many smaller farms rely on mulch, compost, and
                                                                flow. Expert growers indicate that in any given season,
     short-term winter cover crops in place of multi-
                                                                market opportunities and logistical needs may override
     season cover crops and hay rotations. Expert
                                                                biological concerns.
     Brett Grohsgal advises that “smaller and more
                                                                    Experts manage multiple, interacting factors as they
     intensively managed farms don’t have nearly
                                                                implement crop rotations. Organic farmers rely on rota-
     the cover crop dependence that [larger farms]
                                                                tions and long-term soil quality to deal with problems and
     do, yet these small systems can be extremely
                                                                ensure the productivity of fields more than they rely on
     efficient, vigorous, and profitable.”
                                                                fertilizers and pest control products. Their understanding
                                                                of biological principles sets the boundaries of their man-
                                                                agement practices. Many expert farmers push and test the


6     Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                                                        biological principles of crop rotation to the
                        ROTATION BALANCE                                limit to meet management and business de-
                                                              Y         mands.
                     Annual            Multiyear
                                                          LOG
                                                       IO                   Expert farmers plan and implement
                                                      B
                                                                        rotations on an annual, seasonal, and last-
                                                                        minute opportunistic basis. Their annual
          Field                                                         plans are based on clear priorities. Each
                                                                        year the paramount challenge is to grow
                                                                        adequate quantities of profitable crops
                                                                        to keep the farm viable. At the same time
                                                                        farmers are deciding the rotational sequence
          Farm                                                          on each field, they must consider how to
                                                                        rotate equipment and labor efficiently across
                                                                        the entire farm operation. Crop cultural
              SS                                                        and harvest characteristics—including
          INE
      BUS                                                               the logistics of labor-intensive weeding
                                                                        or multiple harvests; vehicle access; and
                                                                        keeping crops like pumpkins or flowers
Figure 2.1 Rotation planning balances the management of field-          secure from vandals, thieves, and wildlife—
and farm-level decisions on an annual and a multi-year basis.           have to be managed across farm and field.
Annual farm-level decisions tend to prioritize business concerns.       Meanwhile, meeting market demands and
Multi-year decisions tend to prioritize and accommodate                 maintaining cash flow are farm business
biological demands.                                                     issues that must be integrated with field
                                                                        decisions. Inevitably, expert farmers also
                                                                        adapt to the weather conditions of specific
                                                                        years, often by changing their crop mix and,
                                                                        consequently, their rotations.
                                                                            Most farms have a few key cash crops
                                                                        that generate significant income. Year by
                                                                        year, expert farmers focus on planting their
                                                                        key crops in the most suitable fields for those
                                                                        crops without compromising the soil health
                                                                        and long-term productivity of those fields.
                                                                        Generally, these crop-to-field matches are
                                                                        first made based on market and logistical
                                                                        considerations (see sidebar 2.5, page 8).
                                                                        Then expert farmers review whether there
                                                                        are biological reasons to go in a different
                                                                        direction. They cross-check “what not to
                                                                        do” (see appendix 2, pages 104–123)
                                                                        biologically with both their experience and
Figure 2.2 Expert organic vegetable farmer panel, convened              their knowledge. Farmers take special care
January 30 to February 1, 2002. From upper left: Jean-Paul              to manage the production and soil capital of
Courtens (NY), Eero Ruuttila (NH), Paul Arnold (NY), David Blyn         their best fields. Relying on their knowledge
(CT), Roy Brubaker (PA), Don Kretschmann (PA), Jack Gurley              of their fields and the crops they grow, and
(MD), Brett Grohsgal (MD), Polly Armour (NY), Drew Norman               some general principles (for example, avoid
(MD), Will Stevens (VT). Not pictured: Jim Gerritsen (ME).              planting related crops in the same field year
                                                                        after year), expert farmers determine the


                                                      CHAPTER 2 | How Expert Organic Farmers Manage Crop Rotations   7
crop for each field each year.                                   Biological guidelines come into decisions at every
    In any given year, field history, along with the weather,    convenient opportunity (for example, a field that was too
determine the suitability of a field for a particular crop. On   wet for a planned early spring crop is now open for a cover
many farms in the northeast US, any one field (or bed) is        crop). Biological guidelines also enter into decisions
usually not interchangeable with all the others on the farm.     when a problem becomes evident and must be addressed
Fields, even beds, have unique attributes because of soil        (for example, a soilborne disease such as Phytophthora).
parent material and landscape position. Even if soils are            Frequently, expert farmers design crop sequences
similar, microclimates, access to irrigation, and distance to    to set up for future key crops, in addition to meeting
roads or packing facilities cause some fields to be better       the current season’s production needs. For example, for
suited for certain crops. Some fields are simply more            a successful early seeding of a small-seeded crop like
productive; others have particular histories or problems         carrot the rotation sequence must be planned so that the
that preclude certain crops or rotations.                        residue of the previous crop will be fully broken down—
    Expert farmers understand that each field’s biological       providing the proper seedbed for the next season’s crop.
management is central to the long-term success of the            Other sequences may be designed so that substantial
overall farm business. They monitor and manage crop              spring growth of an overwintering cover crop precedes
rotation to limit negative impacts on any one field.             a heavy-feeding cash crop. For example, a field could be
                                                                 planted with a summer-harvested crop such as sweet
                                                                 corn in the current year, so that a hairy vetch cover crop
                                                                 has time to establish in the fall and supply nitrogen for
                      Sidebar 2.5
                                                                 a heavy-feeding cucurbit the following spring. High-
        Opportunistic Decisions:                                 value crops that are difficult to grow are often pivotal in
       Business Overrides Biology                                determining a rotation, because they are the most critical
                                                                 in terms of both the business and the biology of the farm.
     Unexpected opportunities and circumstances
                                                                     Of course, plans don’t always go as expected. Market
     often confront farmers. Expert farmers go
                                                                 opportunities or weather may dictate a change in a
     through the following steps as they manage
                                                                 rotation (sidebar 2.5). Seed may not be available or viable.
     these situations:
                                                                 A field may have weed problems or a pest outbreak that
     1. Recognition of a market opportunity or                   is best addressed by rotation. The experts build flexibility
        logistical contingency (such as a change in              and responsiveness into their annual plans.
        weather, equipment, or labor availability).                  Expert farmers often need to make decisions for
     2. Feasibility assessment to determine                      individual fields on the fly, based on their experience and
        whether the market can be met successfully.              knowledge of each field and the overall farm. They know
        Considering the available land, labor,                   what can go wrong. They know the limits of their systems.
        equipment, and irrigation, will the change               As business managers, they are continually reviewing
        increase the overall profitability of the farm           the farm and its operational capabilities. Many farmers
        operation? What is the cascade effect across             rely on their mental categorization of crops and fields
        the farm?                                                (described in sidebar 2.9, page 15 ) which makes the quick
                                                                 substitution of crops easier. A tool for crop categorization
     3. Biological cross-check to determine the
                                                                 and allocation of crops to fields is introduced in chapter 5
        field or variety. For example, a more disease-
                                                                 (pages 58–90).
        resistant variety may be selected if taking
                                                                     Expert farmers balance the farm business, farm
        advantage of the economic opportunity
                                                                 management, and field biology. Since they manage their
        means that the rotation time between
                                                                 systems intuitively, they do not always distinguish farm
        susceptible crops would be decreased.
                                                                 planning from crop rotation planning. For example,
        Biological “rules” may be stretched to meet the
                                                                 choosing the crop mix is a market-driven business
        market, but they are not repeatedly ignored on
                                                                 decision, which is coupled with the allocation of crops to
        the same fields.
                                                                 fields, which is a biological and logistical decision.



8     Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
The NEON “Managing a Crop                                          (pages 58–90) presents tools based on the experts’ rec-
                                                                   ommendations that will help in executing several priority
Rotation System” Chart                                             tasks on the chart.
    Our panel of expert organic farmers participated in a
structured, facilitated process that was designed to elicit        How to Read the Chart
an outline of step-by-step decisions and actions related to
their own management of crop rotation (sidebar 2.6). This              The left hand column of the “Managing a Crop
is summarized in the chart “Managing a Crop Rotation               Rotation System” (pages 12–13) chart represents
System” (pages 12–13) The content and word-                        eight broad “key responsibilities” necessary for managing
ing of the chart are those of the expert farmers. The chart        crop rotations. Each key responsibility is associated with
reflects both their common practices and how they think            a set of necessary “tasks” described in the boxes that run
about those practices.                                             across the page. These tasks must be completed to fulfill
    The primary purpose of the chart is to provide insight         the responsibility. (Note that the tasks associated with a
into the decisions and actions followed by experienced or-         key responsibility sometimes take up more than one row.)
ganic growers as they manage crop rotations. The respon-               Bear in mind the following when consulting the chart:
sibilities and tasks outlined in the chart demonstrate how         • The word crop refers to both cash and cover crops
expert farmers integrate crop rotation decisions into the              unless otherwise specified.
overall planning and operation of their farms. The chart           • The responsibilities are listed more or less in the
provides a general, overall guide to all of the steps needed           order in which they are performed. Managing a crop
to manage crop rotations on an organic farm. Chapter 5                 rotation, however, is neither a linear nor a cyclical




                                                     Sidebar 2.6
                        The NEON Expert Farmer Rotation Workshop

    The New England Small Farm Institute adapted a                                  The Expert Growers
    process called Develop a Curriculum, or DACUM
    (78a), to understand and present the decision                  Twelve expert organic vegetable growers (figure 2.2,
    process followed by expert farmers in planning                 page 7) who farm from Maryland to Maine were nom-
    and implementing organic vegetable rotations. The              inated by sixteen organic farming organizations and
    DACUM process was first created at Ohio State                  organic certifiers in the northeastern US to partici-
    University to develop training materials based on              pate in the three-day NEON Expert Farmer Rotation
    the knowledge of experienced workers in business               Workshop in 2002. Each of them had been farming
    and industry. It was built around the idea that skilled        for eight or more years, and vegetables are the primary
    individuals currently performing a job are better able         crops on all twelve farms. Their operations range in
    than anyone else to describe the job and how they              size from 5 acres to 200 acres. They employ an array of
    do it. The approach provided a structured forum                marketing strategies, from wholesale to community-
    for farmers to successfully communicate about                  supported agriculture (CSA). Twenty other growers
    management of their farms. The expert farmers                  with similar qualifications reviewed the chart and
    created the chart “Managing a Crop Rotation System,”           other materials produced by the workshop (e.g. lists
    which details the key responsibilities for management          in sidebars 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, and 2.12, page 11 to page 18).
    of successful rotations and the tasks associated               Together, the expert farmers and the reviewers are
    with each responsibility. It gave scientists a unique          representative of the best farms in the northeast US.
    perspective on how farmers manage their systems and            (Farmer profiles are presented in sidebar 4.2, page 48)
    how research is used by farmers.



                                                               CHAPTER 2 | How Expert Organic Farmers Manage Crop Rotations    9
                                                                            Expert farmers agree that frequent, careful
                                                                            field observations are critical.
                          Life and farm goals                           •  The   chart illustrates the central role of rota-
                                                                            tion in the overall farming operation. The
                                                                            chart does not cover all aspects of farm
                Income goals and income requirements                        management—only those that the farm-
                                                                            ers thought were most important in deter-
                                                                            mining the rotation and that are linked to
                          Market opportunities                              rotation management. Some tasks and key
                                                                            responsibilities relate to the entire farm and
                                                                            others to the rotation on a particular field.
                           Production options
                                                                            Some tasks are mental “desk tasks” (for ex-
                                                                            ample, B-13, “Review regulations”), and
                               BALANCE                                      some are physical (F-10, “Plant crops”).
                                                                            Some relate to information processing (G-
                                                                            6, “Assess disease control”); others center
                                                                            on decision making (E-7, “Determine crop
         Labor           Field, Crop, Climate     Equipment
         Limits             Characteristics          Limits                 quantities”).
                                                                            Every responsibility listed on the chart
                                                                        needs consideration each year. They do not
                                                                        necessarily have to be addressed in the order
                              CROP MIX                                  listed, but responsibilities A through E primarily
                                                                        occur during the relatively quiet winter
                                                                        months, when production and marketing
                     MATCH FIELDS and CROPS                             pressures are less intense and time is available
                                                                        to take stock and look to the growing seasons
                                                                        ahead; responsibility F (the actual execution
               Weather or other uncontrollable events                   and implementation of the rotation) begins
                                                                        in early spring and continues throughout the
                                                                        growing season; and responsibilities G and H
  Figure 2.3 Schematic summary of crop rotation planning.               intensify in fall and winter, following the most
  When the weather or other uncontrollable event requires               hectic portions of the field season.
  the rotation plan to be changed, expert farmers reevaluate                Some tasks require great attention every
  options and revise the plan.                                          year, while others require little effort unless the
                                                                        farm is undergoing major changes. Some tasks
                                                                        are executed only once each season (C-3, “Test
   process. Although the chart is organized in a quasi-     soils”); some are repeatedly revisited (F-8, “Prepare work
   chronological order, farmers’ decisions and actions      schedule”), and some carry over from one year to the next
   move back and forth among many of the tasks and          (C-9, “Categorize crops”).
   responsibilities listed. This back-and-forth process is
   schematically presented in figure 2.3.
• Many expert farmers do extensive planning and record
                                                            Key Responsibilities and
   keeping on paper. Most have some form of field maps.     Related Tasks in the Chart
   Some use computers. A few keep all details in their          This section discusses each of the key responsibilities
   heads. Most of the panel farmers agreed that farmers     in the “Managing a Crop Rotation System” chart (pages
   should write down their field records and plans.         12–13) and illustrates some of the important, difficult, or
• Many of the key responsibilities and tasks require        less obvious tasks, with examples from the operations of
   reflection and observation as well as information.       expert farmers (see sidebar 2.7).


10 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
Responsibility A: Identify Rotation Goals                                 Under responsibility A, the most important and most
                                                                     difficult task is reviewing the overall farm operation. This
    Rotations are a means to meet overall farm goals.                includes reviewing the production plan: the crops, cover
Expert farmers manage their field rotations in the con-              crops, fallows, and livestock that need to be allocated to
text of their whole farm systems. Although they may not              particular field areas in the coming year. Certain factors—
consciously review them, each farmer has a set of farm-              including cropland available, equipment, cash flow, crop
ing goals that guide rotation planning for each field and            mix, and marketing strategies—define the parameters
for the whole farm. Some goals are common to all farms               within which the rotation must be designed. Another
(sidebar 2.8, page 14); others are unique to a particular            important task is to identify which problems can be
farmer. Examples of experts’ rotation goals include:                 addressed by rotation.
• Jack Gurley’s goal is to maximize production on 100
    percent of his small acreage without sacrificing soil            Responsibility B: Identify Resources and
    health and tilth.                                                Constraints
• One of Will Stevens’s goals is to design rotations to                 Identifying the possibilities and limits of the overall
    keep brassicas out of fields with a history of clubroot.         farm production plan and the rotation for each field is
• Since Jim Gerritsen produces certified seed potatoes               central to planning. At the farm scale, parameters such as
    that must be disease free, the goal of his entire rotation       market demand, available land, equipment, projected la-
    is to control potato diseases and increase organic matter.       bor availability, and regulatory issues have to be reviewed
                                                                                                           (continued on page 14)




                                                       Sidebar 2.7
                            Most Important and Most Difficult Tasks
    Expert farmers built the chart “Managing a Crop Rotation System” (pages 12–13) by reaching consensus on the
    key responsibilities and tasks involved in managing a crop rotation system. Other expert farmers reviewed the
    chart and indicated the ten most important tasks and the ten tasks they considered most difficult to perform. Tasks
    are listed in order of most to least. Codes in parentheses correspond to the number of the task on the chart.

    Ten Most Important Tasks                                         Ten Most Difficult Tasks
    1.  Maintain crops. (F-12)                                       1. Assess profitability on a whole-farm and crop-by-
    2.  Implement production plan. (F-4)                                 crop basis. (G-5)
    3.  Prepare soils as soon as weather permits. (F-9)              2. Maintain crops. (F-12)
    4.  Plant crops. (F-10)                                          3. Assess whether pest, disease, and weed pressures
    5.  Walk fields regularly to observe crops and fields.               must be addressed. (D-4)
        (C-1)                                                        4. Investigate new market opportunities. (H-3)
    6. Review overall farm operation. (A-2)                          5. Review overall farm operation. (A-2)
    7. Draft annual [rotation] plans. (E-15)                         6. Review regulations. (B-13)
    8. Monitor soil and crop conditions. (F-6)                       7. Analyze weather probabilities. (D-1)
    9. Adjust actions according to field and crop                    8. Determine if successes or failures were due to on-
        conditions. (F-13)                                               farm or regional factors. (G-11)
    10. Identify problems that can be addressed through              9. Develop collaborations to verify successes and
        rotation. (A-3)                                                  solve problems. (H-2)
                                                                     10. Tweak the crop mix. (H-4)



                                                                 CHAPTER 2 | How Expert Organic Farmers Manage Crop Rotations   11
                         The NEON “Managing a Crop Rotation System” Chart

                             A-1 Review overall              A-2 Review overall farm operation (e.g., marketing
                                                                                                                                     A-3 Identify problems
       Identify
 A     Rotation Goals
                             farm & personal goals
                             (e.g., long & short term,
                                                             strategies, profitability, farm family/team, production system
                                                             [crop & livestock mix], length of season, equipment, raised
                                                                                                                                     that can be addressed
                                                                                                                                     through rotation
                             mission statement)              beds or row crops, on-farm compost production)

                             B-1 Identify personal         B-2 Determine              B-3 Determine irrigation potential
                                                                                                                                   B-4 Identify markets for
                             strengths, weaknesses,        available land (e.g.,      for each field (e.g., equipment,
                                                                                                                                   cash crops
       Identify              likes & dislikes              quantity, suitability)     water availability)

  B    Resources &
                             B-10             B-11 Assess                 B-12 Identify input suppliers (e.g.,            B-13 Review regulations (e.g.,
       Constraints           Inventory        labor strengths,            plants & seeds, amendments, manure/             organic certification, phosphorus
                             labor            weaknesses, likes &         compost, cropping materials, post-              regulations, other applicable
                             availability     dislikes                    harvest packaging)                              relevant regulations)
                             C-1 Walk fields               C-2 Create field maps including acreage, land, soils               C-3 Test soils (e.g., N, P, K,
                             regularly to observe          (including NRCS soil map data), physical characteristics,          secondary- & micronutrients,
                             crop growth & field           frost pockets, air drainage, microclimates; plot areas             pH, cation exchange capacity,
                             conditions                    with known problems on map                                         organic matter)
  C Gather Data                                           C- 9 Categorize crops        C-10 Categorize                 C-11 Maintain records (e.g., up-to-
                             C-8 Consult sales data
                                                          (see sidebar 2.9, page       fields (see sidebar 2.9,        date maps, information on crops &
                             & market trends
                                                          15)                          page 15)                        fields, etc.)


                             D-1 Assess             D-2 Assess soil conditions on a bed or field basis           D-3 Compare crop cultural needs to field
 D Analyze Data              weather
                             probabilities
                                                    (e.g., residue, moisture, temperature, compac-
                                                    tion, last year’s mulch; see sidebar 2.12, page 18)
                                                                                                                 characteristics (e.g., soil test results, crop
                                                                                                                 residues)

                             E-1 Review recent cropping history (e.g., 3
                                                                                    E-2 Consider field              E-3 Group crops according to maturity
                             or more years; field or bed basis; by crop &
                                                                                    needs & conditions              dates (e.g., for simultaneous or
                             sequence of botanical families, performance,
                                                                                    (e.g., disease, fertility)      sequential harvesting)
       Plan Crop             production, logistical issues)
  E Rotation                 E-10 Schedule     E-11 Determine         E-12 Integrate cash & cover crops          E-13                E-14 Plan crop/rotation
                             succession        cover crop types,      (e.g., simultaneous [overseed,             Determine           experiments (e.g., new
                             plantings of      field locations, &     interseed, undersow] or                    managed fallow      trials, new-to-this-farm
                             cash crops        quantities             sequential [one follows another])          field locations     rotations)
                             F-1 Organize rotation planning &         F-2 Review       F-3 Confirm markets for           F-4 Implement production plan
                             management tools (e.g., planting         rotation &       cash crops (change crops          (e.g., secure labor & train labor,
                             charts, equipment booklets,              production       or quantities if price or         prepare equipment [including
       Execute               maps, reference materials)               plans            demand requires)                  irrigation], order seeds & supplies)
  F Rotation                 F-9 Prepare soils as soon as weather permits (using               F-10 Plant crops (follow plan & planting calendar as
                             appropriate tillage, prepare fields when field conditions         conditions permit; capture planting windows, “seize the
                             are right, avoiding compaction & allowing time for any            moment”; adjust plan as needed based on contingency
                             cover crops or residue to adequately break down)                  guidelines [see E-16])

                             G-1 Assess soil             G-2 Assess yields (e.g.,           G-3 Assess timing &                 G-4 Assess costs of
                             quality (e.g.,              varieties, cover crops; expected   sequencing (e.g., expected          production (e.g., by crop,
       Evaluate              expected vs. actual)        vs. actual)                        vs. actual)                         expected vs. actual)

 G     Rotation
                             G-11 Determine if successes or failures         G-12 Analyze success & failure of                 G-13 Maintain records
       Execution             were due to internal/on-farm or macro/          rotation plan (e.g., review goals, identify       (e.g., production records,
                             regional issues (e.g., consult other            factors, consult external information             experiment results, successes
                             farmers, extension agents, others)              sources, draw conclusions)                        & failures, speculations)

                             H-1 Identify successful combinations            H-2 Develop collaborations with researchers              H-3 Investigate new
       Adjust Rotation
 H     Plan
                             & repeat (set successful rotations on
                             “automatic pilot”)
                                                                             & farmers to create solutions to problems or
                                                                             verify successes (e.g., trials & experiments)
                                                                                                                                      market opportunities
                                                                                                                                      (“smell the niche”)




12 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                      The NEON “Managing a Crop Rotation System” Chart (continued)

A-4 Set rotation goals (e.g.,             A-5 Review annual                  A-6 Balance acreage, at whole farm level, between cash          A-7 Update records
manage insects, disease, weeds,           production plan (e.g., crop        crops, cover crops, livestock, and “fallow” (e.g., bare soil,   (e.g., whole farm plan
soil, field logistics; see sidebar 2.8,   & cover crop species &             stale seed-bed, sod/hay, permanent pasture, or woodlot;         & farm mission, record
page 14, set custom goals)                varieties, desired quantities)     consider role of livestock in fertility and weed control)       annual production plan)
                        B-6 Identify neighbor issues (e.g.,      B-7 Inventory farm                  B-8 Assess crop cultural         B-9 Identify cultural
B-5 Review
                        compost pile location, spraying,         equipment & facilities (e.g.,       needs (e.g., spacing,            constraints based on
projected annual
                        chemical drift, pollination, genetic     greenhouses, tractors, post-        trellising, crop height,         equipment (e.g., row width,
cash flow
                        pollution)                               harvest handling areas)             microclimates, irrigation)       irrigation)
                           B-15 Establish and maintain
B-14 Determine
                           relationships with off-farm experts
available rotation
                           (e.g., extension, scouts, land
management time
                           grants, others; talk to laborers)

C-4 Network with farmers & others          C-5 Study existing research              C-6 Consult field records (e.g., what was         C-7 Consult meteorological
(e.g., helpers, extension, others;         data (e.g., cover crops, insects,        planted where in previous years, successes        data (e.g., frost free dates,
site-specific & practice-related)          diseases, fertility, weeds)              & failures                                        rainfall)




D-4 Assess whether pest, disease, or          D-5 Determine applicability of          D-6 Assess crop mix for
                                                                                                                       D-7 Maintain records (e.g., record data
weed pressures from previous season           research data, advice, & other          whole farm (e.g., market
                                                                                                                       analysis results & decisions made)
must be addressed                             farmers’ experience                     data, soil tests)

E-4 Consider harvest logistics (e.g., access to        E-5 Consider        E-6 Group         E-7 Determine crop             E-8 Determine field       E-9 Determine
crops; field & row length, minimum walking             companion           crops according   quantities & area (e.g., 500   locations of most         field locations
& box-carrying distance, use of harvest                planting            to botanical      row feet or 2 acres; add       profitable, beneficial,   of lower-
equipment, plan for ease of loading onto trucks)       options             families          10% for contingencies)         and “at-risk” crops       priority crops

E-15 Draft annual plans        E-16 Develop guidelines for contingencies in case               E-17 Use senses & imagination to
                                                                                                                                             E-18 Maintain records
(e.g., rotation plan,          rotation does not go as planned (e.g., written or               review plan (e.g., field plans and
                                                                                                                                             (e.g., write down plan,
production plan, soil          mental guidelines for improvisation: principles,                logistics; walk fields and visualize
                                                                                                                                             draw maps)
fertility plan)                priorities to use to make on-the-spot decisions)                rotation, “farm it in your head”)
                                               F-6 Monitor soil & crop conditions         F-7 Monitor greenhouse conditions (e.g., observe
F-5 Monitor weather (e.g., short term                                                                                                                   F-8 Prepare
                                               (e.g., field readiness for planting;       condition of transplants relative to soil conditions;
[best day for planting]; long term [need                                                                                                                work
                                               cover crop maturity; residue               slow or accelerate growth if necessary to produce
to change plan due to drought])                                                                                                                         schedule
                                               incorporation)                             appropriate-sized transplants on-time)

F-11 Keep unused        F-12 Maintain crops     F-13 Adjust actions according to field & crop conditions (e.g.,          F-14 Maintain records (e.g., what was ac-
soil covered (e.g.,     (e.g., cultivate,       weather, soils, weed pressure; assign crops to different fields or       tually planted where, successes & failures,
cover crop, mulch,      spray, trellis,         beds to adjust for wetness or other problems; replant if neces-          planting & harvest dates, compliance
trap crops)             irrigate, harvest)      sary, abandon crop or replace with a cover crop to cut losses)           with regulations & organic certification)

G-5 Assess profitability                                G-7 Assess           G-8 Assess insect                                      G-10 Measure performance
                                G-6 Assess disease                                                  G-9 Interview work
on a whole farm &                                       weed control         & pest control                                         against rotation goals
                                control (e.g.,                                                      crew for suggestions;
crop-by-crop basis (e.g.,                               (e.g., expected      (e.g., expected vs.                                    (positive or negative
                                expected vs. actual)                                                determine likes, dislikes
expected vs. actual)                                    vs. actual)          actual)                                                outcomes)




H-4 Tweak crop mix (e.g., based on            H-5 Tweak field management (e.g., change               H-6 Upgrade        H-7 Start process     H-8 Maintain records
market data & field performance;              planting or plowdown dates, crop locations;            or improve         over (return to A:    (e.g., keep notes
consider adding or abandoning crops           shift crop families to different fields; put poorly    equipment as       Identify Rotation     of actual changes
or elements of rotation as necessary)         performing fields into hay ahead of schedule )         necessary          Goals)                implemented)




                                                                                 CHAPTER 2 | How Expert Organic Farmers Manage Crop Rotations                          13
                                                          annually. Farmers consider complying and keeping up
                                                          with regulations to be among their most difficult tasks.
                                                          This responsibility also includes numerous “communi-
                     Sidebar 2.8
                                                          cation” tasks, such as establishing market relationships,
        Expert Farmers’ Common                            making labor arrangements, accessing information, and
        Goals for Crop Rotation                           contacting suppliers.
                                                                Constraints may include field-specific limits like
     1. Maintain healthy soil (including chemical
                                                          whether a field is ready for planting and harvest early or
         balance, drainage, humus, vitality, biological
                                                          late in the season and how that relates to market timing,
         health, fertility, nutrient cycling, tilth,
                                                          cash flow, and profitability. Problems of specific fields in
         organic matter, and soil cover to prevent
                                                          a particular year must be identified. For example, heavy
         erosion); for example: “Conserve and build
                                                          weed pressure the previous season may preclude small-
         organic matter in my light sandy soil.”
                                                          seeded crops. Crop cultural needs, such as spacing and
     2. Produce nutritious food.                          trellising, also have to be accommodated. Constraints
     3. Control diseases, especially soilborne            imposed by equipment, such as row width, must be fig-
         diseases; for example, “Break the wilt cycle     ured into the rotation plan. Crops with similar irrigation,
         among crops in the tomato family.”               fertility, labor, and cultivation regimes or planting times
     4. Reduce weed pressure; for example,                are often managed as a block to simplify field operations.
         “Manage the rotation to confuse the weeds.”
     5. Increase profitability.                           Responsibility C: Gather Data
     6. Have a holistic approach and a good rotation          Rotation decisions, for each field and for the whole
         that leads to healthy crops.                     farm, are based on an impressive array of information.
     7. Manage the farm as a whole system.                Some information is collected on the farm, and some is
                                                          gathered from off-farm sources. Observing crops and
     8. Have a diverse line of products to market.
                                                          fields is on the expert farmers’ list of the ten most impor-
     9. Provide economic stability.                       tant tasks (sidebar 2.7, page 11). All the expert farm-
     10. Control insects.                                 ers agreed that regularly walking the fields is a crucial way
     11. Add nitrogen and other nutrients in a way        to gather data and monitor ongoing conditions for the
         that is environmentally safe and conforms        current and coming seasons. Will Stevens interviews his
         with regulations.                                workers throughout the season, because they are able to
     12. Maintain biotic diversity.                       observe many field situations he does not have the oppor-
     13. Unlock the living potential of the soil.         tunity to see. Even in winter, expert farmers are observ-
                                                          ing their fields, sometimes while cross-country skiing or
     14. Reduce labor costs.
                                                          walking the dog. This helps them review field conditions
     15. Balance economic viability and soil fertility.   and logistics of previous seasons and organize their think-
     16. Diversify tasks to keep labor happy and          ing for the season ahead.
         productive all season.                               Production and marketing information usually needs
     17. Balance the needs of the farm with the needs     to be updated and cross-checked annually. A new crop,
         of the farmer.                                   research recommendations, or market arrangements may
     18. Minimize off-farm inputs.                        require that new data be considered. For example, seed
     19. Capture solar energy wherever possible.          potato grower Jim Gerritsen uses his rotation to interrupt
     20. Refine the aesthetic quality of fields and       potato disease life cycles and pest vectors. He reviews the
         farm.                                            scientific research annually, staying current to take advan-
                                                          tage of any advances in the understanding of the ecology
     21. Bring the farmer to life; develop a spiritual
                                                          of his system.
         relationship with the land.
                                                              Tasks C-9 and C-10, “Categorize crops” and “Catego-
                                                          rize fields,” are among the most critical steps in data gath-
                                                          ering. Categorization of crops and fields helps guide the


14 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
optimal allocation of particular crops to individual fields          their fields, on the basis of the field’s permanent character-
or beds each year. These tasks rely on the cumulative pro-           istics (such as slope and exposure) and shorter-term con-
cess of integrating information and experience over many             ditions (such as weed pressure). Categorizations provide a
growing seasons. Information about both crops and fields             reference of “interchangeable crops” if a plan needs modi-
is necessary to effectively match them in a given year. The          fication. For example, it is useful to know what late crops
first task is to characterize every cash and cover crop in the       or varieties can go into a field in a wet year. The variety of
farm’s crop mix according to a range of important charac-            characteristics considered indicates the complexity of the
teristics, from the number and timing of harvests to soil            issues farmers balance in crop rotation decisions.
requirements (see sidebar 2.9). Farmers also characterize


                                                        Sidebar 2.9
                                 Categorization of Crops and Fields

                     Crop Characteristics                                             Field Characteristics
    The table below lists crop characteristics from most to          These relatively permanent characteristics of a field are
    least important, as ranked by expert farmers.                    difficult to change; many affect the type of equipment
                                                                     that can be used and the timing of operations.
    •   Botanical family
    •   Market demand                                                •   Recent planting history (1–5 years)
    •   Season of planting, harvest, labor, and land use             •   Within-field variability
    •   Susceptibility to pests and diseases                         •   Proximity to water source
    •   Cash vs. cover crop                                          •   Erosion potential
    •   Ability to compete with weeds                                •   Drainage
    •   Annual, biennial, perennial, or overwintering annual         •   Sunny or shady
    •   Direct-seeded vs. transplanted                               •   Known problems with
    •   “Givers” vs. “takers”                                             ▷ weeds
    •   Heavy vs. light feeders                                           ▷ insects
    •   Cultural practices (for example, spraying, cultivation,           ▷ poor tilth or hardpan
        irrigation)                                                       ▷ wildlife
    •   Preferred seedbed conditions                                 •   Slope
    •   Spacing requirements                                         •   Moisture-holding capacity
    •   Income per acre                                              •   pH
    •   Effect on cash flow                                          •   Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS)
    •   Harvest timing                                                   soil type
    •   Costs per acre                                               •   Aspect (north, south, east, west)
    •   Tolerance of mechanical cultivation                          •   Air drainage—frost pockets
    •   Ability to trap nutrients                                    •   Size
    •   Root vs. leaf and fruit                                      •   Cation-exchange capacity
    •   Drought tolerance                                            •   Proximity to barn or access roads
    •   Row vs. block planted                                        •   Stoniness
    •   Large vs. small seeded                                       •   Shape (corners, row lengths)
    •   Deep vs. shallow rooted                                      •   Proximity to similar fields
    •   Tolerance of poor drainage
    •   Shade tolerant vs. intolerant
    •   Pollination requirements



                                                                 CHAPTER 2 | How Expert Organic Farmers Manage Crop Rotations    15
Responsibility D: Analyze Data                                  other legacies from earlier years and must provide future
    All of the decisions and information generated through      crops with favorable conditions.
previous tasks and responsibilities are pulled together for          Expert farmers first assign their highest-priority crops
analysis at this key phase of the planning process. The data    to fields (or beds). High-priority crops include the most
on market options, equipment, labor and seed availability,      profitable crops, cover crops with the greatest benefits,
and financial constraints, along with the overall farm          and crops particularly vulnerable to pests, diseases, or
and rotation goals are reviewed. Information is cross-          weather. Decisions are also based on high-priority fields—
referenced and, when necessary, weighted. Possible trade-       for example, those that have the highest fertility, are prime
offs are considered. For example, the field crew may be         locations for u-pick crops, or have current problems that
able to plant two fields to high-value crops but not also       need to be addressed. Remaining fields (or parts of fields)
harvest an early crop the same week. Crop cultural needs        are then assigned to the remaining crops, cover crops, fal-
are compared to each field’s characteristics and conditions.    low areas, and sometimes pasturage for livestock. All these
The experts assess soil conditions and determine how            decisions are based on both business and biology. An ex-
pest (animal, insect, weed) and disease pressures from          ample is provided in sidebar 2.10.
the previous season should be addressed. This is among              The crops and fields are tentatively matched, creating
the most difficult tasks. Even weather projections are          a cropping plan for the entire farm for the year. Many ex-
considered. Every possible crop mix is analyzed. Various        perts plot this information on farm maps and notebooks.
possible pairings of crop to field are outlined, and options    They take this initial plan and, in the words of one, “Farm
for each field are compared.                                    it in my head.” That is, they work through the sequence
                                                                of field operations from tillage to harvest over the entire
Responsibility E: Plan Crop Rotation                            season for each crop and field. Several expert farmers take
    This responsibility is the ultimate synthesis of infor-     their plans into the field and walk the farm for this task.
mation and results in a production plan and a rotation          They think through why any sequence might not work, re-
plan. Expert farmers distinguish between these two types        viewing any possible logistical or biological conflicts like
of plans. The production plan specifies what needs to be
grown (the crop mix) and how it will be grown, where-
as the rotation plan determines where each crop will be
planted. Final decisions about the crop mix and the al-
location of crops to fields and fields to crops are pivotal                          Sidebar 2.10
to this responsibility. Information such as what crops to
                                                                         Grouping Crops by Their
grow, in what quantities, labor availability at various times
in the season, required equipment, and desired harvest                    Need for Accessibility
dates are integrated into the rotation plan for each field           The logistics of harvesting affect rotations. For
and for the entire farm.                                             example, crops with frequent harvests or need
    Two questions bounce back and forth. One is what                 for frequent care must be easily accessible.
will be grown in each field? The other is where will each            Expert farmer Jean-Paul Courtens considers
crop grow? These questions are answered based on obser-              road access and produce characteristics. He
vation and experience. Several steps are involved. First,            prefers to allocate some crops to fields with
the cropping history of each field or bed for the past three         close proximity to packing sheds. Long rides on
or more years is reviewed. This includes what crops and              bumpy roads can bruise delicate produce like
crop families were grown; how well they performed; any               tomatoes. He locates salad greens and braising
particular successes or failures; and any logistical issues          greens in the same field due to the time of day
relating to equipment use, irrigation, harvesting, or labor.         they are harvested. Crops are also grouped
Obviously, the size of the field and market needs (how               based on the time of the season when they are
much of each crop is required) are also considered. The al-          harvested.
location of crops to fields includes consideration of future
cropping plans as well as the cropping history of a field.
The rotation plan must be responsive to weed pressures or


16 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
timing of operations or spread of pests between adjacent
crops. They then adjust the plan as necessary.

Responsibility F: Execute Rotation                                                         Sidebar 2.11
    Farmers indicated that executing the rotation involves
                                                                                  Considering Options
many of the most important and difficult tasks (see side-
bar 2.7, page 11). They identified maintaining crops                       After harvesting late snap beans, wet weather
(including activities such as weeding, thinning, and irri-                 prevented expert farmer Roy Brubaker from
gation) as the most important task and the second most                     fall-seeding a rye cover crop in a particular field.
difficult task in crop rotation. Scheduling tillage and                    One option for the field might have been to plant
planting for all the fields across an entire farm every sea-               oats and field peas in early spring, which would
son is also a challenge for most farmers. Although they                    have had to be plowed down prior to planting
generally want to till the soil as early as possible to ac-                fall brassicas. Another option would have been
celerate soil warming and residue breakdown, they must                     to plant the field to a spring crop of brassicas
wait for workable soil moisture conditions. Other criti-                   and then put in buckwheat or an early rye cover
cal steps in crop production and central to executing the                  crop. Either decision had repercussions for the
crop rotation are soil preparation and planting. Delays in                 rotations on other fields because the farm’s CSA
soil preparation or planting may cause crop failures due to                needed both spring and fall brassicas.
poor emergence, runaway weeds, or inadequately broken                      Nonuniform cover crop growth does not
down cover crops and require shifts in the crop rotation                   change Brett Grohsgal’s overall rotation, but it
(see sidebar 2.11).                                                        can change his crop mix or the selected varieties
    Expert farmers attempt to plant priority fields or beds                on a particular field. He may subdivide the field
and their most important crops as scheduled in their plan.                 and plant heavy feeders where the legume
If they have to alter the plan, they still prioritize high-val-            cover crop was most successful. For example,
ue or sensitive crops and fields. Many decisions and ad-                   beefsteak tomatoes, which are heavy feeders,
justments have to be made on the fly.                                      would get that part of the tomato acreage that
    In early spring, farmers monitor the weather—some-                     had good cover crop growth; whereas thrifty
times hourly—as they implement and alter their rotation                    cherry tomatoes would get the remainder.
plan. Problems related to weather, cover crop maturity,                    Alternatively, he might plant heavy-feeding and
crop emergence, and weeds may cause farmers to alter                       high-value watermelons on the most fertile,
their original plan. Soil moisture conditions affect the                   weed-free areas, whereas lower-value and
timing of tillage and subsequent field operations (see                     resilient winter squash would be assigned to the
sidebar 2.12, page 18). Cover crops are monitored to de-                   less fertile areas.
termine maturity, thickness of stands, and optimal time
for incorporation. Farmers also monitor the breakdown                      At both farms, all the options are considered
and incorporation of crop and cover crop residues. Soil                    before finalizing a decision.
and air temperatures influence planting and transplanting
decisions, as well. Any of these factors can cause crops to
be reassigned to different fields or beds.
    While a change necessitated by weather or the condi-
tions in one field can cause reassignment of crops around             is an important factor in the success of his farm. In the
the farm, general and farm-specific rotation goals and                event of crop failure, crops may be abandoned, replanted,
guidelines remain the basis of every decision; for example,           or replaced with a cover crop or even a different cash crop.
cucurbit crops will never be planted in the same field two            Drew Norman, another expert farmer, described this pro-
years in a row. Most expert farmers anticipate problems               cess as finding “a profitable punt.”
that might occur and have contingency plans ready (see                    As the season progresses, short-season crops like salad
sidebar 2.13, page 19). Expert farmer Paul Arnold suggested           greens are harvested, subsequent crops are planted, and
that this ability to make effective on-the-fly adjustments            cover crops are seeded or plowed under. Even as the rota-


                                                                  CHAPTER 2 | How Expert Organic Farmers Manage Crop Rotations    17
tion plan is implemented, the process of crop-to-field al-   it happens (particularly deviations from the plan) for later
location and prioritization continues. The expert farmers    comparison with their initial rotation plan for the year.
emphasize the importance of recording actual cropping as
                                                             Responsibility G: Evaluate Rotation
                                                             Execution
                                                                 Throughout the season, expert growers monitor the
                    Sidebar 2.12                             performance of their fields, each crop, and the farm as
                                                             a whole. They record how their plans have worked and
      Field and Crop Conditions                              evolved. This is not just to solve problems in the current
     That Expert Farmers Monitor                             season, but also to observe, learn, and collect ideas and
     Fields and crops need continual monitoring              data for future seasons. Expert farmers do this directly
     during the season. Biological and physical              and through communicating with their crews. Several
     conditions can change relatively quickly                said they interview their field crews at the end of the sea-
     due to management, weather, and mistakes.               son. Workers often have suggestions, such as improving
     Experts often have contingency plans in mind            the farm layout, that enhance the efficiency of operations.
     to accommodate such situations, especially for              At the end of the season, growers carefully assess what
     their priority fields and key crops. In-season          actually happened relative to what they expected based
     observations also inform experts’ decisions             on the original rotation plan. The factors they consider
     for the next year’s rotation. Although most             include yields; soil conditions; timing of events and op-
     farmers do not measure all these parameters             erations; costs of crop production; disease, weed, and pest
     directly, they are aware of, observe, and monitor       levels and their control; crop losses; labor satisfaction and
     conditions in their own ways. Conditions they           efficiency; and profitability of each crop and of the whole
     monitor regularly include:                              farm. By walking around the farm and by analyzing data
                                                             at their desk, they review the success of the production
                                                             year. They compare the results with those of previous
    Pests                      • Nutrient cycles             years to detect any trends or patterns. When attempting
    • Weed pressure            • “Biological health”         to analyze the causes of success or failure of various ele-
    • Insect emergence           and vitality—               ments of the rotation, growers talk to other growers and
        and pressure             earthworms, etc.            extension agents to determine whether problems were the
    • Diseases                 • Soil organic matter         result of actions on their farm rather than, for example,
                                                             a bad disease year for all farms in the region, regardless
    Cover crop performance     Soil tilth                    of rotation. Assessing whether regional conditions or on-
    • Success of previous      • Crop residues and           farm mistakes were the source of problems is among the
       cover crops (e.g.,          residue breakdown         most difficult tasks, even for experts.
       production of           • Composted                       Rotation goals and rotation plans serve as benchmarks
       organic matter,             organic matter or         to measure the success of the cropping season and the ro-
       weed suppression)           “humus” in the soil       tation. Expert farmers consider how closely they followed
    • Ground cover             • Soil aggregation            biological principles in their rotation, whether they met
    • Cover crop               • Soil moisture               their production and market objectives, and how their ro-
       nodulation and          • Soil and air                tation execution supported their biological and business
       nitrogen fixation           temperature               goals. Successes and failures are assessed, analyzed, and
                               • Soil compaction             evaluated. The results are recorded to assist in planning
    Soil fertility                 and porosity              and management for future seasons. Farmers note that as-
    • Soil test results                                      sessing the profitability of crops, especially on a field-by-
    • Chemical balance                                       field basis, is another difficult task.
        (N, P, K, Ca, Mg,
        and micronutrients)



18 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                                    Sidebar 2.13
                                         Contingency Planning
  Expert farmers have enough experience to know that their best plans can sometimes be derailed. Knowing
  how to adapt or when to start over with a particular field or crop is essential to the success of the farm business.
  Expert farmers have developed many techniques to help them adapt to changing circumstances that typically
  influence their rotations.

• Delayed planting due to wet fields                              crop stand that has a lot of weeds is worth keeping for
   A common reason to diverge from the rotation                   the fertility benefits or should be plowed under early.
   plan is wet fields in spring. This can delay the plow-         They weigh the potential benefits and investment in
   down of cover crops and, consequently, of residue              the cover crop against potential increases in the weed
   decomposition, field preparation, and transplanting.           seed bank.
   Many expert farmers switch key crops to other fields           One expert farmer uses intensively cultivated crops
   when this happens, causing a cascading (somewhat               to control bad weed infestations. For example, infes-
   preplanned) shift in the allocation of many crops.             tations of bindweed and Canada thistle are followed
   The growth of transplants in greenhouses is                    by a triple crop of lettuce, which is high value enough
   monitored to determine whether transplants are on              to justify the costs of frequent cultivation. This is fol-
   schedule for planting out, relative to soil and weather        lowed by a weed-suppressing cover crop of rye.
   conditions. Greenhouse environments are managed             • Weather problems
   to speed or slow growth so that transplants are at
   the right developmental stage when field conditions            Drought can affect the germination of direct-
   are right for transplanting. Transplants will also be          seeded crops and shallow-rooted crops like garlic.
   “hardened off ” to prepare them for the shock of the           Contingency strategies include mulching instead of
   particular season’s outside environment.                       cultivation for weed control, and substituting larger-
                                                                  seeded or transplanted crops.
• Poor germination
                                                                  In the event of drought and limited water for irrigation,
   David Blyn replants crop failures with fast-growing,           Don Kretschmann irrigates only the portion of
   short-season crops like radishes. He stocks extra              the crop destined for retail markets, allowing the
   seed for crops like sweet corn and carrots that can            wholesale portion of his crops to perish.
   be planted on multiple occasions and replants when
   necessary. He often finds that the reason for failed           When an oat and pea cover crop does not winterkill,
   germination was a poor seedbed, and on the second              it delays planting of strawberries because of the time
   try the seedbed is usually better.                             needed for the cover crop to break down. In that
                                                                  situation, Roy Brubaker plants the strawberries close
   Blyn also uses cover crops to “paint in” gaps caused by
                                                                  together so their runners will fill in the rows more
   failed crops or early harvests.
                                                                  quickly for good weed control.
• Weed challenges
                                                               • Severe pest and fertility problems
   Brett Grohsgal responds to heavy weed pressure by
   sowing cover crops at higher rates.                            Brett Grohsgal occasionally finds that a whole field
                                                                  needs to be temporarily removed from production
   Crops with bad weed problems are often plowed                  to rebuild fertility or manage weed infestations. He
   down and planted to cover crops. Eero Ruuttila uses            chooses sequences of cover crops based on ability to
   a cover crop of oats and field peas for this purpose,          add organic matter, fix nitrogen, survive drought, and
   which also produces a marketable crop of pea shoots.           compete with weeds. He often pastures livestock on
   Growers sometimes have to decide whether a cover               these fields to disrupt weeds and add fertility.



                                                             CHAPTER 2 | How Expert Organic Farmers Manage Crop Rotations      19
Responsibility H: Adjust Rotation Plan                            of schedule. They record notes for the next year’s rotation
     As the cropping season closes in late fall, expert farm-     plan, new guidelines for contingencies, and results of ex-
ers begin the final phase of the annual rotation cycle in         periments. The next year’s plan begins to take shape.
which they modify their rotations and plan for the coming             Adjusting the rotation plan presents three particularly
year. This occurs concurrently with the evaluation of the         challenging tasks: (1) developing collaborations to solve
past season. They revisit the tasks associated with “Iden-        problems, (2) investigating markets, and (3) tweaking
tify rotation goals” (Responsibility A). They then focus          the crop mix. Tweaking the crop mix requires balancing
on the productivity and problems of each field and of the         market opportunities with biological needs. Growers in-
overall farm. They first consider altering the crop mix by        dicated that this is a core task in managing crop rotations.
adding or removing crops or changing the area planted to              Expert growers stress the importance of experimenta-
a crop. Such decisions are affected by the market, as well        tion, play, and a sense of adventure in managing their ro-
as by field and crop performance and rotation imperatives.        tations. The art of adjusting every aspect of the rotation
For example, Paul and Sandy Arnold found that high-               was discussed as the core of successfully managing rota-
quality, disease-free beets were very important for sales at      tions. While the NEON chart makes rotation planning
farmers’ markets, so they decided to open up new acreage          seem linear and quantifiable, all of our farmer panelists
to break up the life cycle of soilborne beet diseases. This       felt that managing rotations is a continuous, integrated,
resulted in adjustment of their entire rotation so that their     intuitive, and cyclical process developed through inten-
fields spend a longer time in cover crops.                        sive information gathering and extensive experience.
     Growers may also decide to change their field manage-        They glean and incorporate new ideas into their rota-
ment by changing the order or dates of planting or plow-          tions, which continue to evolve. These expert growers
down of cover crops. They may decide to shift crops to            agreed on the importance of making new and interesting
alternative fields, try new crop sequences, or improve fer-       mistakes each season.
tility of a field by planting it into a cover crop or hay ahead




20 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                                              3
                   PHYSICAL AND BIOLOGICAL
                  PROCESSES IN CROP ROTATION



What This Chapter Is About                                            All of the researchers who contributed to this chapter
Charles L. Mohler                                                     are knowledgeable about the organic production pro-



T         his chapter is about the ways biologists and soil           cess and actively work to support organic agriculture.
          scientists view crop rotation (see inset). Unlike           To ensure accuracy, other researchers in their respective
                                                                      fields who support organic agriculture reviewed their
          the farmer experts of the previous chapter, who
                                                                      comments. To ensure relevance and a writing style that
approach rotation as a holistic process, the scientists               speaks to farmers rather than other researchers, organic
are specialists who delve deeply into particular aspects              farmers also reviewed the researchers’ comments.
of organic production. They study in detail how crop
rotation affects a particular aspect of the farm system.
Through extensive reading and discussion with others,             of soil quality and management of pests. Certain broad
expert farmers come to understand and practice most               patterns appear in each of these.
of the principles presented here. Understanding the                   Soil quality tends to improve with the percentage of
concepts presented in this chapter can help resolve newly         time the land is in grass and legume sod and cover crops
encountered problems and aid development of a rotation            (figure 3.1, page 22). Legumes used as green manures
plan.                                                             supply nitrogen for succeeding crops. Many legumes
     Researchers have studied crop rotation since the             also have deep taproots that loosen the subsoil and
beginnings of agricultural science, in the early nineteenth       recycle leached nutrients back into the plowed horizon.
century. More recently, scientists have taken a renewed           Grasses produce dense systems of fine roots that secrete
interest in crop rotation due to increasing problems              substances that foster aggregation of the soil into stable
associated with continuous cropping of single species.            crumbs. Moreover, their roots decay slowly through
In the past ten years, researchers have begun to look at          various forms of soil organic matter that further tend
crop rotation on organic farms (125). Studying multiyear          to stabilize soil aggregates and supply a slow release of
crop sequences, however, requires extraordinary patience          nutrients for crop growth. Conversely, row crops tend
and a source of funding that lasts longer than typical            to have opposite effects on soil, due to (1) the relatively
government grants. Consequently, most studies have                low average density of roots per square foot and (2) the
compared a two- or three-year rotation with continuous            presence of bare soil between the rows that is exposed
cropping. Since the organic farming community is                  to the impact of traffic and raindrops. Many factors can
already aware of the problems of continuous cropping,             modify these contrasting trends, including the type and
such studies often provide few data with any relevance to         frequency of tillage and the degree to which the farmer
organic farmers. Nevertheless, some relevant studies do           uses soil amendments like compost, organic mulches, and
exist, and much can be inferred from work that did not            rock powders. Nevertheless, the contrast between grass
explicitly compare different crop rotations.                      and legume sod and cover crops versus row crops makes
     The biological and physical benefits of crop rotation        a good starting point for understanding the relationship
fall into two general, interrelated categories: improvement       between crop rotation and soil quality.


                                                              CHAPTER 3 | Physical and Biological Processes in Crop Rotation 21
                                                                        Although crop rotation is a key component in the
                                                                    management of diseases, weeds, and many types of
                    Soil quality improves                           animal pests, it is not a panacea. Many pest problems
                                                                    cannot be managed by crop rotation alone, and some
                                                                    problems cannot be addressed by crop rotation at all.
                                                                    A key factor that governs the ability of crop rotation to
                                      Percentage of time            manage pests is the host specificity of the pest (figure
       Percentage of time
                                     in grass and legume            3.2). Host-specific pests specialize on a particular species
          in row crops
                                     sod and cover crops            or family of crops, whereas generalist pests damage a wide
                                                                    range of crops. Additional key factors are the mobility of
                                                                    the pest and the persistence of dormant pest life stages
                                                                    (eggs, seeds, spores). Highly generalist pests can persist
                     Soil quality declines                          in the field through a variety of crops, and a grower must
                                                                    use management techniques in addition to rotation to
                                                                    keep them from reducing crop quality and productivity.
                                                                    Highly mobile pests can disperse into a field and cause
   Figure 3.1 Relation of soil quality to the types of
                                                                    problems even if the preceding crops have provided
   crops that predominate in the rotation.
                                                                    unsuitable habitats that caused the pest to die out. Other
                                                                    pests, particularly weeds and some fungi, have seeds or



                                                            Host specific
                            - corn rootworm                                        - crucifer flea beetle
                            - Pseudomona syringae                                  - fusarium wilts
                            - corn cockle                                          - cocklebur




                              Non-mobile                    increasing                        Mobile
                               (or short                    efficacy of                      (or long
                              persistence)                 crop rotation                   persistence)




                            - slugs                                               - tarnished plant bug
                            - Sclerotinia                                         - Botrytis
                            - annual bluegrass                                    - horsenettle
                                                             Generalist


                     Note that persistence and mobility often vary in opposite ways, with non-persistent species
                     having high mobility and vice versa. Mobility and persistence appear together in this
                     diagram because they have similar effects on management choices.



       Figure 3.2 The effect of host specificity, dispersal ability, and survival of dormant states (eggs, spores,
       seeds) on how well crop rotation controls pest organisms. Generalist pests are pest organisms that
       attack crops in diverse plant families or, in the case of weeds, thrive in a wide range of cropping
       systems. Source: Modified from reference 125.


22 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
spores that can remain dormant in the soil for many years.      less important than the spaces (or pores) between them,
Such species are less likely to be eliminated by a short        and a soil that is well aggregated also has a range of pore
period without a suitable host crop (or for weeds, suitable     sizes. Each pore size plays a critical role in the physical
cropping conditions) than are species that do not persist       functioning of the soil. Large pores drain rapidly and are
well in the soil. At the other extreme, nonpersistent,          needed for good air exchange during wet periods. This
poorly dispersing pests that are dependent on a narrow          prevents oxygen deficiency in the soil, which stresses
range of crops are relatively easy to control through           most crop types, sometimes to the point of death. Oxy-
rotation to other types of crops. Other sections in this        gen deficiency also increases pest problems. Denitrifica-
chapter discuss many examples of pests that are and are         tion (conversion of nitrogen to gaseous forms) is another
not effectively managed by crop rotation.                       concern with oxygen-deficient waterlogged soil. Denitri-
    Soil management and pest management interact in             fication results in rapid and significant loss of soil nitro-
many ways. For example, crop nutrition affects plant            gen and generates nitrous oxide, a potent greenhouse gas.
disease resistance, some cover crops can reduce certain         When soil becomes degraded, either through long-term
types of soilborne diseases but promote others, and             intensive cultivation and erosion or through compaction
high soil physical quality improves the effectiveness of        from traffic, it loses its aggregation, and the large pores
mechanical weed management. All of these interactions,          are compressed into small ones. Coarse-textured sands
and many others, are influenced by crop rotation. Some          and gravels naturally have large pores, and therefore are
notable interactions between soil and pest management           less dependent on aggregation to provide good tilth and
that can be managed by crop rotation are addressed in the       aeration. Finer-textured soils, however, depend heavily
following sections.                                             on aggregates for good physical structure and tilth and,
                                                                once degraded, become structureless, dense, and hard.
                                                                    A mix of large and small pores is desirable. Small pores
Crop Rotation and Soil Tilth                                    are critical for water retention and help a crop go through
                                                                dry periods with minimal yield loss. Sandy and gravelly
H arold van Es



T        ilth generally refers to the physical condition of
         the soil as it relates to plant growth. Favorable
         tilth implies good conditions for seed germina-
tion and root proliferation, allowing crops to thrive. Also,
a soil with good tilth facilitates other processes, such as
                                                                         small pore
                                                                                         large pore

                                                                                                      intermediate pore

water infiltration and aeration, which benefit both crop
and environment. Good soil tilth is usually equated with
aggregation (presence of soil crumbs), because stable ag-
gregates promote these favorable processes. Crop rota-
tions can have a positive impact on soil tilth, depending
on the crops that are being alternated. Additional ways to
improve soil tilth include reducing tillage and using cover
crops. There are thus a number of approaches to improv-
ing the physical quality of the soil, and often a combined
approach produces the greatest improvement.

Soil Tilth and Aggregation
    Figure 3.3 shows a soil aggregate, or crumb, found
in a soil of good tilth. With finer-textured soils, such ag-        Figure 3.3 A soil aggregate or “crumb” with good
                                                                    tilth. Source: From reference 68. Used with per-
gregates may in turn be made up of smaller ones that are
                                                                    mission.
clumped together. The aggregates themselves are perhaps


                                                               CHAPTER 3 | Physical and Biological Processes in Crop Rotation 23
soils are naturally deficient in small pores and are therefore     logical degradation, so there needs to be a continual effort
drought prone, whereas loams and clays can retain and              to “feed the soil” with organic material, and to minimize
thus supply crops with more water.                                 organic matter breakdown from intensive tillage.
    Good soil management and rotations can increase
crop water availability if they increase the soil’s organic        Aggregation in the Subsoil
matter content, which is an important contributor to wa-
ter retention. Coarse-textured soils can thus also benefit             People tend to focus on soil tilth in the plow layer, but
from good management, even though they are less depen-             good aggregation is also important in the subsoil, the layer
dent on aggregation.                                               below the regular depth of tillage. Such aggregates are
    Good soil tilth can be obtained through mechanical             generally not crumb-like but involve larger (2- to 6-inch)
and biological manipulation of the soil. Mechanical soil           blocks of soil that are more angular and not as distinctive.
cultivation practices, including primary tillage (mold-            These aggregates are less impacted by biological activity
board or chisel plowing) followed by secondary tillage             of microbes, earthworms, and roots than the crumbs in
(disking, harrowing, etc.), have the aim of producing a            the surface layer. Subsurface aggregates are important for
good seedbed. When soils become degraded and com-                  root growth deep into the profile. Deep roots allow a plant
pacted, such tillage practices are often deemed necessary          greater access to soil moisture, which helps it through
to establish a good crop, because the soil would otherwise         drought periods. Aggregates below the surface layer
be too dense, hard, or cloddy. The tilth created by tillage,       can also be compacted. The main cause for this is heavy
however, tends to be unstable, because the aggregation is          equipment loads on wet soil (figure 3.4), where the force
obtained through the physical manipulation of the soil,            of compaction is transferred deep into the soil, beyond
which is short lived, especially after many years of inten-        the plow layer. Another significant source of subsoil
sive tillage. Aggregates in such soils will readily fall apart     compaction is the practice of plowing with a set of wheels
during subsequent rains, causing the soil to settle and be-        in the open furrow. This way the subsoil is directly loaded
come dense and hard. This then generates a vicious cycle           by the tractor tires.
in which the soil needs to be intensively tilled each year
to provide good seedbed condi-
tions, which in turn makes the
problem worse. Such a soil may
be considered “addicted to till-
age.”
    The preferred scenario is for
the aggregates and good tilth
to be the result of natural soil
building processes, such as the
activity of plant roots, earth-
worms, and other beneficial or-
ganisms. Such stable aggregates
will break apart during tillage or
planting and therefore readily
provide good tilth, as opposed                                                                                depth of tillage
to unstable, weakly aggregated
soil, which tills up cloddy. Also,
stable aggregates are held to-
gether by organic bonding ma-                                    dry soil                 wet soil
terials that resist breakdown
during soil saturation and heavy               Figure 3.4 Compactive forces are transferred deeper in wet soils than in
rainfall. These organic materials              dry soils. Source: From reference 68. Used with permission.
are themselves subject to bio-


24 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
Soil Hardness
    Soils generally become harder when they dry. There
is a difference, however, between well-aggregated and                         “Rotation with cover crops that
compacted soil, in that the latter becomes hard more                          grow aggressively in the early
readily upon drying (figure 3.5). This causes problems
with crop emergence, root restriction, and reduced                            and late growing season are...
plant growth. A scenario that is often observed is the                        able to penetrate plow pans and
hardsetting of poorly aggregated (low organic matter)                         hard subsoil, because the soil is
soil when tillage is followed by large amounts of rainfall.
The aggregates forming the loose tilth after tillage are not                  then moist and sufficiently soft
stable and fall apart when the soil becomes saturated.                        for root penetration. “
The soil then settles and becomes hard. If the aggregates
are stable as a result of good management and adequate
organic matter, they will hold up against the rain, and
good tilth will be preserved.
    Similarly, compacted subsoils become hard and                        thereby stabilize them. Also, the living roots and symbiotic
impenetrable to roots when they dry. Rotation with                       microorganisms (for example, mycorrhizal fungi) can
cover crops that grow aggressively in the early and late                 exude organic materials that nourish soil organisms
growing season are thus better able to penetrate plow                    and help with aggregation. Grass and legume sod crops
pans and hard subsoil, because the soil is then moist                    therefore return more organic matter to the soil than most
and sufficiently soft for root penetration. In contrast, a               other crops.
summer annual, like corn, does not see significant root                     Sod crops appear to be the most effective in building
growth until the late spring, when compacted soils may                   good soil tilth in the surface layer. The dense, fibrous,
already have become dry and hard.                                        rooting system of perennial grasses and shallow-rooted
                                                                         legumes creates a very active biological zone near the
Effects of Rotation Crops                                                surface. If a short rotation is used, and tillage is minimized,

    Rotation crops can help build soils, as
illustrated in figure 3.6 (page 26). Studies
have shown that organic matter losses from
intensively tilled row crops can be regained                                         Compacted soil
when the field is rotated into a perennial sod
crop. There are two processes that contribute


                                                        Soil hardness
to this gain. First, the rapid rate of organic
matter decomposition from tillage is stopped
under the sod crop. This benefit, of course,                                                                300 psi critical level
is also gained when a no-tillage cropping
system is employed. Second, grass and                                         Well-structured soil
legume sods develop extensive root systems
that continually grow and die off. The dead
roots supply a source of fresh, active organic                                            Soil water content
matter to the soil, which feeds soil organisms
that are involved in building soil aggregation.        Figure 3.5 The effect of soil water content on soil hardness of a
Earthworms and many other beneficial                   well-structured and a compacted soil. Compacted soils harden
organisms need continual supplies of organic           more rapidly than well-structured soils when drying. Hardness
matter to sustain themselves, and they deposit         above 300 psi restricts root growth.
the digested materials on soil aggregates and


                                                                        CHAPTER 3 | Physical and Biological Processes in Crop Rotation 25
                                                                                       percent (14). This provides longer
                                                                                       periods of soil cover, thereby reduc-
           4                                                                           ing erosion potential and loss of good
                                                                                       topsoil. Also, it provides longer pe-




     Soil organic matter content (%)
                                                                                       riods in which active roots feed the
                                                                                       soil. Some crops such as rye, wheat,
                                                                                       oat, barley, pea, and cool-season
                                                                                       grasses grow actively in the late fall
           2                                                                           and early spring and thereby can
                   Corn,                       Grass sod                               help build stable soil tilth. They are
                  plowing
                                                                                       beneficial both as rotation and cover
                                                                                       crops, but the positive effects may be
                                                                                       negated if intensive tillage is used to
                                                                                       establish them.
                                                                                           In summary, rotations provide op-
               0           25           50            75            100                portunities for improving soil physi-
                                      Years                                            cal quality, especially if the active
                                                                                       growth period is expanded and the
    Figure 3.6 Loss and gain of soil organic matter under tilled corn followed         amount of tillage in the rotation is
    by grass sod. Source: From reference 68. Used with permission.                     reduced. With careful selection, rota-
                                                                                       tion crops can be targeted to help al-
                                                                                       leviate certain soil quality problems.
                                                                                       A densely rooted sod crop helps build
the benefits of the sod crop are enhanced. Hay or pasture        tilth in the plow layer, while a deep-rooted crop helps ad-
fields can be established with minimal tillage if a good         dress problems with subsoil compaction. In many cases,
no-till drill is used and weed pressure is low. Some annual      the rotation should include a mixture of crop types to in-
rotation crops such as buckwheat also have dense, fibrous,       crease the diversity of organic matter that supports soil-
root systems and can improve soil tilth. Sometimes,              building organisms, and to address multiple soil quality
compatible mixtures of crops are beneficial because they         objectives.
have different rooting systems. For example, red clover              A grower should consider a field assessment to iden-
seeded into winter wheat provides additional roots and a         tify problems and better tailor the rotation to the needs
more protein-rich source of organic matter.                      of the soil. This may include an assessment of soil tilth in
    Other rotation crops are less effective in building tilth    the surface layer, rooting depth, and soil hardness in the
in the surface layer but are more valuable for improving         subsoil. A soil penetrometer is a useful tool for this, but
dense subsoils. Some perennial crops, such as alfalfa, have      digging with a shovel is perhaps the most instructive. The
strong, deep, penetrating tap roots that can push through        Cornell Soil Health Test has recently been developed to
hard layers, especially during wet periods when the soil is      provide an integrated assessment of soil quality through
soft. These deep roots make pathways for water and future        chemical, biological, and physical indicators. This in-
plant roots, and bring organic matter into the subsoil.          cludes aggregate stability, an indicator of soil tilth. For
    Crops can be beneficial in a rotation if they extend         further information on the test and management practices
the period of active growth compared to conventional             that promote soil health, visit http://soilhealth.cals.
row crops. For example, in a corn-soybean rotation, ac-          cornell.edu.
tive growth occurs only 32 percent of the time, while in
a dry bean–winter wheat–corn rotation, this period is 72         For further reading, see references 14, 68, and 107.




26 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
Crop Rotation Effects on                                           make the most efficient use of the available soil nutrients
                                                                   in a rotation. Finally, other types of organic amendments,
Soil Fertility and Plant Nutrition                                 such as compost and manures or approved mineral fertil-
Anusuya Rangarajan                                                 izers, can supplement nutrients at targeted times during a
                                                                   rotation. Each of these topics is discussed in the sections


S       oil organic matter and clay particles hold large
        stores of plant nutrients. These reservoirs, however,
        are not all available to the crop. In an organic crop
rotation, the grower manages soil organic matter and nu-
trient availability by incorporating different crop residues,
                                                                   below.

                                                                   The Basics: How Nutrients Are
                                                                   Released from Soil Organic Matter
cycling among crops with different nutrient needs, using               Levels of soil organic matter range from about 0.4
cover crops, and adding organic soil amendments. Most              percent to 10 percent in mineral soils in temperate regions.
crops deplete soil nutrients during their growth cycle.            While organic matter is a relatively small fraction of the
Some of these nutrients leave the farm as harvested prod-          soil, it has large effects on soil structure and soil fertility.
ucts, and the rest return to the soil as crop residues. The        Soil organic matter contains an estimated 95 percent of
nutrients in residues may or may not be available to the           soil nitrogen (N) and 40 percent of soil phosphorus (P),
next crop. Crop roots and residues improve soil fertility          and with the right levels and conditions it may provide all
by stimulating soil microbial communities and improving            of the N and P needs of a crop. Estimates of total nitrogen
soil aggregation. This improved soil physical environment          in a soil with 3 percent organic matter range from 2,000
facilitates water infiltration, water holding, aeration, and,      to 4,000 pounds per acre; estimates of phosphorus range
ultimately, root growth and plant nutrient foraging. This          from 100 to 300 pounds per acre. Soil microorganisms
section will review different ways that crop rotations af-         release these nutrients when they consume organic matter
fect soil fertility.                                               and subsequently die. The rate of this nutrient release is
    Understanding the basics of how nutrients are added to         affected by the availability of carbon sources (energy for
and released from soil organic matter will help the farmer         the soil microbes), soil temperature, soil moisture, tillage,
in choosing crop sequences and amendments to optimize              types and numbers of soil organisms, and quality of the
organic crop fertility. Certain fractions of soil organic mat-     soil organic matter.
ter contribute to plant nutrition more than other fractions.           A portion (10–20 percent) of the total soil organic
To effectively plan organic crop rotations to meet crop nu-        matter has been termed the “active” fraction and is most
trient needs, several factors should be considered. Legume         easily decomposed by soil organisms. This active fraction
crops, which capture atmospheric nitrogen and “fix” it             is replenished primarily by additions of organic matter
into forms available to plants, can be used strategically in       (cover crops, crop residues, manures, compost). Soil
rotations to meet the needs of nitrogen-demanding crops.           organisms, which make up another 10–20 percent of soil
Cover crops used after a cash crop capture surplus plant-          organic matter, decompose this active organic matter.
available nutrients and conserve these for following crops.        Upon death, these organisms release their nutrients to
Cash crops themselves vary in their nutrient demands (see          plants. The remaining soil organic matter is humus. The
appendix 1, pages 101–103); considering their needs helps          humus is more slowly digested by soil organisms and



                                                                       “Understanding the basics of
                                                                       how nutrients are added to and
                                                                       released from soil organic matter
                                                                       will help the farmer in choosing
                                                                       crop sequences and amendments
                                                                       to optimize organic crop fertility.”

                                                                 CHAPTER 3 | Physical and Biological Processes in Crop Rotation 27
therefore is not a large source of available nutrients.        legumes provide N to the subsequent crop. The amount
Humus is very important, however, because it provides          of N that a legume crop contributes to following crops
cation exchange sites, which hold nutrients in the soil and    depends on the amount of N fixed, the maturity of the
thus maintain their availability to plants.                    legume when it is killed or incorporated into the soil,
    Organic matter amendments to soil decompose at             whether the entire plant or only the root system remains
different rates, and this affects how quickly nutrients        in the field, and the environmental conditions that gov-
become available to crops. Several factors affect the rate     ern the rate of decomposition. As a result, estimates of
of decomposition of organic amendments, including the          the amount of N contributions by legumes to subsequent
carbon-to-nitrogen ratio of the amendment, soil type,          crops range from 50 to over 200 pounds per acre (see ap-
temperature and moisture conditions, and the crop being        pendix 1, pages 101–103).
grown. Green manures, which are part of the more active
organic matter fraction, decompose readily, liberating         Nitrogen Scavenging and
nutrients relatively quickly. Composts have more stable,       Conservation by Nonlegume
humic organic matter, and decompose more slowly. As
a result, most composts release nutrients to crops more
                                                               Winter Cover Crops
slowly than green manures.                                          Winter-hardy grains and grasses have extensive root
    Organic matter decomposition is enhanced in the            systems that are more efficient than legumes at scaveng-
area immediately around roots (the rhizosphere). Roots         ing soil nitrates in the fall, thereby reducing late fall and
release organic compounds, such as carbohydrates, amino        winter leaching of nitrogen (75). In the northeastern
acids, and vitamins, into the soil, stimulating growth of      US, small grains (rye and wheat) are the most common
microorganisms in this zone. Many of these organisms           winter-hardy cover crops used by vegetable growers, since
decompose organic matter, resulting in nutrient release to     harvests of cash crops often extend into late summer and
the crop. Very little research has been done to determine      fall. Once incorporated in the following spring, these
which plant varieties or species best support these            cover crops will release captured N and other nutrients to
nutrient-releasing microorganisms. In the future, such         subsequent crops, but at a slower rate than from legume
information may help identify crop varieties well adapted      cover crops because of the slower decomposition of grain
to organic systems.                                            residues.
    When cover crops are regularly part of a rotation,              In some cases, such as when heavy crop or cover crop
their residues increase soil organic matter. The organic       residues with high carbon-to-nitrogen ratios (30:1 or
matter feeds the growth of microbes, which increases the       higher) are tilled into the soil, soil N may become un-
release of N as they die and decompose. Thus, integrating      available to plants (immobilized) in the short run because
cover crops into a crop rotation at specific points can help   it is taken up by soil microorganisms as they feed on the
enhance nutrient cycling and conservation.                     carbon-rich residues. Seeding a legume cover crop with
                                                               small grains (for example, hairy vetch with cereal rye) can
Nitrogen Contributions from Legume                             reduce N immobilization by providing additional N to
Cover and Cash Crops                                           microorganisms during decomposition of residues. Alter-
                                                               natively, delaying the planting of a cash crop for about two
    Legumes may be present in a rotation as a harvested        weeks after incorporation of residues generally allows suf-
crop (for example, alfalfa) or as a green manure (for ex-      ficient time for the cycling of N through microorganisms
ample, vetch or clover). Legumes are of special interest       and then back into the soil. Incorporating nonlegume
in organic crop rotations because of their ability to add      cover crops while they are still young and leafy also re-
nitrogen to the system. Specialized bacteria (Rhizobium        duces problems with N immobilization.
spp.) associated with the roots of legumes convert atmo-            One important consideration when using overwin-
spheric nitrogen (N2 gas) into plant-available nitrogen.       tering cover crops is their potential to deplete soil water.
The amount of N fixed by this association between bac-         Although cover crops can improve water infiltration and
teria and legumes varies with plant species and variety,       soil water-holding capacity, the short-term depletion of
soil type, climate, crop management, and length of time        soil water in the early spring can reduce yields of subse-
the crop is grown. When used strategically in a rotation,      quent cash crops in dry springs. In this situation, cover


28 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
crops may need to be incorporated early to conserve soil          Differences in Crop Nutrient Uptake
water, or irrigation may be required. The opposite is also
true—cover crops can help dry up wet fields in the spring.            Crop nutrient uptake varies due to many factors, in-
    Winter-killed cover crops (species vary by climate)           cluding rooting depth and breadth; variety; and environ-
also capture significant amounts of soil nitrogen (up to          mental factors, including soil tilth. Generally, crops may
50–90 lbs/acre) in the fall (102) prior to being killed by        be characterized as having low, medium, or high nutrient
low temperatures. The amount of soil N captured is relat-         demands based on their nutrient uptake efficiency (table
ed to the N that is available, the time of planting, and the      3.1). Different varieties within any crop may be more or
total growth of the cover crop prior to being killed. Re-         less efficient at taking up nutrients. Those crops with a
searchers observed that Brassica cover crops grew more in         high nutrient demand (predominately N) require higher
the fall and, as a result, captured more N than an oat cover      levels of those nutrients to be present in the soil solution.
crop (102). Across species, however, the fall-planted, win-       This high demand could be related to large vegetative
ter-killed cover crops reduced soil nitrate levels in the fall    plant growth prior to fruit set (in the case of corn and to-
and increased levels in the spring, compared to soil left         matoes) or due to poor foraging ability of the crop’s roots
bare over the winter. Thus, excess soil nitrogen from the         (in the case of lettuce). Green manures and soil fertility
end of one season was captured and conserved for the fol-         amendments have the most benefit when they target the
lowing season’s crop. Note that while Brassica cover crops        crops with high nutrient demands. On inherently fertile
are good at capturing nutrients, they may host diseases           soils, crops with low nutrient requirements often achieve
(clubroot) and insects (flea beetle) that attack other Bras-      good yields from residual soil fertility alone.
sica species in the rotation.



  Table 3.1 Ranking of annual vegetables based on                     Table 3.2 Rooting depth and lateral spread of roots
  relative nutrient requirements                                      for several crops


                                                                                             Estimated         Lateral root
                                                                                           rooting depth          spread
   Low              Medium                 High                        Crop                   (inches)           (inches)

   Beans, all       Brassica greens        Broccoli                    Oat                       60                 10

   Beet             Cucumber               Cabbage                     Turnip                    60                 30

   Carrot           Eggplant               Cauliflower                 Soybean                   80                 20

   Herbs            Pepper                 Corn                        Barley                    55                 10

   Peas             Pumpkin                Lettuce                     Alfalfa                  120                  5

   Radish           Spinach, chard         Potato                      Pea                       35                 25

                    Squash                 Tomato                      Rye                       60                 10

                    Sweet potato                                       Potato                    35                 15

                    Watermelon                                         Sorghum                   70                 25

                    Winter squash                                      Wheat                     60                  5

 Note: Vegetables are classified as having low, medium, or             Field corn                70                 40
 high nutrient requirements. These categories do not account
 for differences among varieties.                                    Source: Adapted from reference 42: A. A. Hanson, Practical
                                                                     Handbook of Agricultural Science (Boca Raton, FL: Taylor &
                                                                     Francis Group, LLC 1990).


                                                                 CHAPTER 3 | Physical and Biological Processes in Crop Rotation 29
    Crop rooting depth can have important implications                      Compost, Micronutrient, and Rock
for nutrient availability as well as soil physical characteris-             Powder Applications for Crop
tics. Crop rotations that integrate deep-rooting crops with                 Nutrition
less nutrient-efficient crops can help cycle nutrients in the
soil profile. The deep-rooted crops listed in table 3.2 (page                  Soil tests may suggest the need for additional inputs
29) absorb nutrients from deep in the soil and move them                    of particular nutrients. In some cases, soils are naturally
to the plant’s top growth. As crop residues are returned                    low in nutrients; in other cases, export of nutrients in
to the surface soil, these newly “mined” nutrients are po-                  crops has led to soil depletion. Organic soil amendments
tentially available to future crops. Deep-rooted crops also                 such as composts, trace element mixes, plant and animal
create channels into the soil that later can improve water                  meals, and rock powders can be used to meet some of
infiltration. Although most of the listed crops are typical                 these needs. Many organic soil amendments become
of grain rotations, the data are also relevant to vegetable                 available only slowly; in some cases application to the
producers, since grain and forage crops are integrated into                 previous cover crop improves availability to the cash crop.
vegetable rotations as cover crops.                                         Since some of these amendments can be expensive, they
                                                                            should be applied strategically within a rotation. Prior to



          Table 3.3 A sample nutrient budget for nitrogen and phosphorus from a dairy farm rotation


                                                     Nitrogen Budget                                  Phosphorus Budget
                                                        (lbs N/acre)                                     (lbs P/acre)

                                        N          N input            N        Cumulative     P       P input        P     Cumulative
      Year     Crop      Yield1       export       source           input       N balance   export    source       input    P balance

      1        Alfalfa   4 t/ac         224        Alfalfa,         234            10         21      Manure        18         -3
                                                   manure

      2        Alfalfa   5 t/ac         280         Alfalfa         269            -1         26                    0         -29

      3        Alfalfa   6 t/ac         336        Alfalfa,         414            77         31      Manure        18        -42
                                                   manure

      4        Corn      110 bu/ac      92          Alfalfa,         45            30         24       Starter      15        -51
                                               starter fertilizer                                     fertilizer

      5       Barley     50 bu/ac       38         Manure           100            92         9       Manure        18        -42

      6       Alfalfa    4 t/ac         224         Alfalfa         224            92         21                    0         -63

      7       Alfalfa    5 t/ac         280        Alfalfa,         369           181         26      Manure        18        -71
                                                   manure

      8       Alfalfa    5 t/ac         280         Alfalfa         269           170         26                    0         -97

      9       Corn       90 bu/ac       84          Alfalfa,        145           231         22      Manure,       33        -86
                                                   manure,                                             starter
                                               starter fertilizer                                     fertilizer

      10      Barley     60 bu/ac       46                           0            185         12                    0         -98

  Note: Ten tons of manure were applied every other year. The cumulative balances are based on the difference between the export
  and the input of nutrients. Not all of the nutrient inputs are available in the first year.
  1
      t= tons, bu = bushels, and ac = acres


30 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
the application of any of these materials, adjust soil pH           materials list for organically acceptable formulations,
to the desired range for the majority of crops within the           http://www.omri.org/OMRI_products_list.php).
rotation (generally 6.2 to 6.8). High or low pH will reduce         These can provide low levels of nitrogen, calcium, magne-
the availability of phosphorus and many micronutrients.             sium, boron, zinc, and iron. Foliar fertilizing must be man-
    Most composts contain relatively stable forms of                aged carefully, since effectiveness depends on uptake of
organic matter and low levels of readily available nutrients.       the micronutrients through the plant cuticle. Depending
Some types, such as poultry compost, may contain high               on application rates, environmental conditions, and plant
levels of nutrients compared to other organic fertility             maturity, foliar feeding can sometimes result in burning
amendments, but not compared to commercial fertilizers.             of leaves.
Good composts applied at specific points in a rotation                  Rock powders (ground limestone, gypsum, granite
can improve soil fertility in the long term by enhancing            dust, rock phosphate) and trace element mixes slowly
soil structure and tilth, improving soil water movement,            release nutrients to plants. The more finely ground the
and providing a slow-release fertility source. Usually,             powder, the sooner the minerals will be available to the
meeting the complete nitrogen needs of a crop by using              crop due to a greater surface area of the powder available
only compost is difficult without also adding excessive             for microbial digestion and physical weathering. Like
phosphorus. Build-up of excessively high phosphorus                 composts, rock powders cannot be used to provide
levels can occur when composts based on animal manures              immediate crop needs. They should be used as long-term
are used at high rates (greater than 10 tons/acre) once             sources of crop nutrients.
or twice per year. Accumulation of excess P can damage
neighboring bodies of water and stimulate weed growth               Putting It All Together: Nutrient
(see “The Role of Crop Rotation in Weed Management,”                Budgets During Crop Rotation
page 44).
    Micronutrients can be supplemented using foliar-type                One strategy for reviewing the effects of a crop rotation
fertilizers, including seaweed extracts and borax (con-             on soil nutrients is to construct a nutrient budget. A nu-
sult the Organic Materials Research Institute’s approved            trient budget can be complex or fairly simple, depending



          Table 3.4 A sample nutrient budget for nitrogen and phosphorus from an organic vegetable rotation


                                                 Nitrogen Budget                               Phosphorus Budget
                                                    (lbs N/acre)                                  (lbs P/acre)

                           Yield1       N      N input     N       Cumulative N      P        P input       P      Cumulative
      Year     Crop        (lb/ac)    export   source    input       balance       export     source      input     P balance

      1        Tomato      45,000       49     Compost   300            251          17      Compost       80           63

      2        Lettuce,     8,000,      28     Compost   150            373           4      Compost       40           99
               spinach      5,000

      3        Winter      20,000       37     Compost   300            636          16      Compost       80          163
               squash

      4        Lettuce,     8,000,      60     Compost   150            726           8      Compost       40          195
               pepper      30,000

      5        Cabbage     40,000       69     Compost   300            957          12      Compost       80          263

  Note: The grower applied 20 or 10 tons of mushroom compost each year. The cumulative balances are based on the difference
  between the export and the input of nutrients. Nutrients from the compost are not all available in the first year.
  1
      t= tons, bu = bushels, and ac = acres



                                                                   CHAPTER 3 | Physical and Biological Processes in Crop Rotation 31
                                                                detected. Although nutrient exports by crops or nutrient
                                                                inputs via cover crops and other amendments can only be
                  “Generally, the technique of                   estimated (appendix 1, pages 101–103), these values and
                using crop rotation for disease                 budgets will still point to potential problems in nutrient
                                                                management within a crop rotation. This approach will
                 management is to grow non-                     not account for losses through leaching or soil erosion.
             host plants until the pathogen in                  It also does not include an estimate of the “starting” re-
               the soil dies or its population is               serves of soil nutrients. History of management, inputs,
                                                                and native soil organic matter levels in each field will all
             reduced to a level that will result                contribute to the starting reserve. With this information
                   in negligible crop damage.”                  on the general trends of nutrient accumulation within a
                                                                field, alternative rotations or different crops (including
                                                                cover crops and green manures) may be considered to
                                                                strategically capture, export, or contribute essential plant
on its purpose. For simplicity, consider just soil N and P.     nutrients.
Think of them as deposits in a soil fertility bank account.
Most of these nutrients are tied up in long-term invest-        For further reading, see references 24, 42, 75, 92, 102, and
ments, in the form of organic matter. But a portion of the      107.
account is available for withdrawal. Assuming a soil is rela-
tively fertile, the long-term goal is to maintain an approxi-
mately constant balance in the account, rather than to in-      Managing Plant Diseases with
crease or decrease nutrient storage. As crops are removed,
nutrients are withdrawn or exported from the system. As         Crop Rotation
legumes, manures, composts, or other amendments are             Margaret Tuttle McGrath
added to the soil, the nutrient bank balance increases.
By examining rotations through time, a farmer can make
general estimates of the increase or decrease in potentially
available nutrients and change his or her management ac-
cordingly.
    Consider the examples in tables 3.3 and 3.4 (pages 30
                                                                R       otating land out of susceptible crops can be an
                                                                        effective and relatively inexpensive means for
                                                                        managing some diseases. To successfully use crop
                                                                rotation for disease management, however, requires un-
                                                                derstanding the life cycle of the disease-causing organism
and 31). In the first example (table 3.3), periodic applica-    (pathogen). Generally, the technique of using crop rota-
tions of manure to a long-term rotation resulted in mod-        tion for disease management is to grow non-host plants
erate increases in soil nitrogen but did not help maintain      until the pathogen in the soil dies or its population is re-
soil phosphorous levels. Through each cycle of the five-        duced to a level that will result in negligible crop damage.
year rotation, about 50 pounds of P was exported off the        To manage a disease successfully with rotation, one needs
farm. Future crops may require an additional source of P.       to know (1) how long the pathogen can survive in the soil,
In the vegetable rotation (table 3.4), yearly compost ad-       (2) which additional plant species (including weeds and
ditions led to a rapid buildup of soil nitrogen and phos-       cover crops) it can infect or survive on, (3) other ways it
phorous. Such high levels are not environmentally sound         can survive between susceptible crops, (4) how it can be
and may be prohibited in some states, depending on nu-          spread or reintroduced into a field, and (5) methods for
trient management regulations. Also notable in the veg-         managing other pathogen sources. For example, a patho-
etable rotation is the low level of nutrient export via these   gen that can survive in the soil but can also disperse by
crops, compared with the agronomic crops (table 3.3).           wind may not be successfully managed by rotation if an
Excess nutrients in the vegetable rotation may leach out of     infected planting occurs nearby or the spores can disperse
or run off from the system eventually, even if cover crops      long distances.
or other cultural practices are used to minimize losses.            Appendix 3 (pages 124–137) lists sources of pathogen
    By reviewing the inputs and outputs of a rotation, gen-     inoculum and recommended rotation periods for diseases
eral trends of nutrient accumulation or depletion can be        of vegetable and field crops in the greater northeastern US


32 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
(including the mid-Atlantic region). The number of years       more organic matter, such as an incorporated cover crop,
needed to suppress a disease cannot be stated precisely        is present in an organic system, those pathogens that can
for many diseases because of the impact of other factors       survive on decomposing organic matter may be more dif-
and lack of extensive research, but general guidelines have    ficult to manage. Knowing which weeds can host a disease
been developed from research and farm observations, as         is important, as these weeds will need to be controlled
well as knowledge of pathogen biology. While these peri-       during the rotation (see appendices 3 and 5, pages 124–137
ods are based on research and observations from conven-        and pages 142–147). Avoiding reintroduction of the patho-
tional production systems, they are generally applicable       gen when the crop is planted again is also critical. For ex-
to organic systems because pathogen biology doesn’t            ample, infested seed, transplants, or soil on farm machin-
change. However, if the activity of beneficial soil micro-     ery can reintroduce a pathogen to a clean field.
organisms that suppress a pathogen is much higher in an            The sections below describe the biological basis for
organic field than in a conventional field, the required       managing plant diseases with crop rotation. First, several
rotation period might be shorter. On the other hand, if        critical aspects of pathogen biology are discussed. These
                                                               dictate whether rotation is a potentially viable option for
                                                               managing a particular pathogen and the disease it causes.
                                                               Second, how the characteristics of certain rotation crops
                                                               affect pathogens is considered: Good rotations do more
                     Sidebar 3.1                               than simply provide an unsuitable host. Third, the impact
       Importance of Scientific                                of cover crops and incorporated green manures on diseas-
     Names in Disease Management                               es is considered. Fourth, various environmental and man-
                                                               agement factors that affect the success of crop rotation for
     When designing a rotational sequence for                  disease suppression are discussed. Finally, some selected
     managing a particular disease, focus should               diseases that can be managed successfully with rotation
     be on the pathogen’s scientific name, because             are discussed, followed by some examples of diseases that
     common names can be misleading. For example,              cannot be controlled by rotation. These examples help ex-
     powdery mildew, downy mildew, bacterial                   plain the factors that affect rotation success. Although the
     blight, and fusarium wilt are usually caused by           focus here is on diseases of vegetable and field crops in the
     different pathogens in different crops. On the            northeastern US, the principles are broadly applicable,
     other hand, white mold, which occurs in several           and many of the specific diseases discussed occur in other
     crops, is caused by the same fungus that causes           regions as well. Because the same disease name is often
     lettuce drop.                                             applied to diseases caused by several different pathogens,
     Knowing whether the pathogen exists as                    scientific names are used frequently in the following sec-
     specialized strains that limit the host range             tions to avoid ambiguity (see sidebar 3.1).
     is critical for designing disease-controlling
     rotations. For example, all grasses get                   Pathogen Characteristics that
     anthracnose; however, host specialization was             Determine the Success of Rotation
     recently found to occur in the fungal pathogen            and Length of the Rotation Period
     causing this disease. Consequently, grass weeds
     do not play as important a role as alternate                  Rotation can effectively suppress a crop disease when
     hosts for anthracnose in corn as was originally           the target pathogen is capable of surviving in the soil or
     thought. Strains of some fungi are called formae          on crop debris for no more than a few years. Some fungal
     speciales (f. sp.); others are called pathovar            and bacterial pathogens can survive in soil only in crop
     (pv.). These abbreviations occur in some of the           debris, and these are the most suitable pathogens to target
     pathogen scientific names listed in appendix 3            for management with crop rotation because they cannot
     (pages 124–137).                                          survive once the debris has decomposed. Pathogens that
                                                               survive on soil organic matter but for only a few years can
                                                               also be managed with crop rotation. These short-term
                                                               residents of the soil are called soil invaders or soil transients.


                                                              CHAPTER 3 | Physical and Biological Processes in Crop Rotation 33
                                                                  in subsequent crops. Since these saprophytes can also
                                                                  use fresh plant residues, incorporating large amounts of
                   “Wind, irrigation water,                       organic matter will stimulate their growth. Thus, crops
                                                                  planted too soon after incorporating a cover crop could
                  or insects can spread the                       be severely affected by these fungi. Other types of organic
              pathogen from infected crops                        matter, such as leaves or incompletely decomposed
                and re-infest the field after                     compost, could have a similar effect. Some fungi that cause
                                                                  fusarium wilts can survive in or on roots of plants that do
                                   rotation.”                     not develop symptoms (“symptomless carriers”), and they
                                                                  can also grow as saprophytes on plant debris and other
                                                                  partly decomposed organic matter.
Pathogens in this group vary in the length of time they can            Some fungal pathogens produce specialized structures
survive, and thus in the length of rotation needed.               that, like seeds, enable them to persist in a state of dormancy.
    Survival time partly reflects the type of plant host tissue   These structures help the pathogen survive periods when
infected. For example, the barley scald pathogen primarily        host plants are absent, as well as cold winter temperatures
infects leaves and leaf sheaths, which decompose fairly           and other adverse conditions. The maximum survival time
rapidly. In contrast, the net blotch pathogen also infects        varies among types of structures and species of pathogen.
barley stems, including the nodes, which are more resistant       Fungal structures capable of dormancy include oospores,
to decay. Consequently, a longer rotation is needed to            sclerotia, chlamydospores, and cleistothecia. Similarly,
manage net blotch than to manage scald. Infected seed, and        some pathogenic nematodes produce cysts. Recognizing
also wind-dispersed spores for the net blotch pathogen,           that these terms refer to resting structures is helpful when
are additional sources of these pathogens that need to be         reading about plant diseases because they indicate that a
managed to ensure successful control through rotation.            pathogen can potentially persist in soil.
    Similarly, managing the bacterial canker disease that              Some pathogens are heterothallic, which means they
affects tomatoes requires a longer rotation than is needed        produce the dormant structure only when individuals
to manage bacterial speck and bacterial spot. The canker-         of opposite mating types (the fungal equivalent of
causing bacteria get inside tomato stems, whereas speck           male and female) interact. This is important because
and spot are restricted to rapidly decomposing leaves and         presence or absence of the different mating types can
fruit. All three pathogens can be seed-borne. Rotation            determine whether the pathogen persists in the soil. For
is only one aspect of a good control program. Managing            example, although the cucurbit downy mildew fungus,
other sources of bacterial pathogens is critical for success.     Pseudoperonospora cubensis, is potentially capable of
This is covered in detail in the section on specific diseases     producing oospores, only one mating type occurs in the
below.                                                            US; thus, it cannot produce oospores, and that prevents
    A few fungal and bacterial pathogens are true soil            it from surviving winter in the northeast US. In contrast,
inhabitants, able to grow on organic matter in the soil.          the onion downy mildew fungus, Peronospora destructor,
Such organisms are referred to as saprophytes. These are          does produce oospores in the northeast US, and they can
hard to manage with rotation. Examples of soil inhabitants        survive four to five years in soil. The situation can change,
are the fungi Pythium, Rhizoctonia, and Fusarium and the          however: Until recently only one mating type of the late
bacteria Erwinia, Rhizomonas, and Streptomyces.                   blight fungus, Phytophthora infestans, existed in the US.
    Several species of Pythium and Rhizoctonia are                Now two mating types are present, and the pathogen can
commonly found in most soils as part of the normal soil           persist in soil as oospores. Phytophthora erythroseptica,
flora. These fungi attack seeds and the roots and stems           which causes pink rot in potato, is homothallic. Thus, it can
of tender seedlings, causing seed decay and damping-              produce oospores when just one mating type is present.
off. Pythium species also cause fruit rot in cucurbits,                Sclerotia and chlamydospores are structures that can be
and Rhizoctonia solani causes wirestem, bottom rot, and           produced without interaction between fungi of opposite
head rot in crucifers. Although crop rotations will not           mating types. Sclerotia produced by Colletotrichum
completely control these fungi, reducing the pathogen             coccodes, which causes anthracnose and black dot in tomato,
population by rotating with small grains can reduce losses        survive at least eight years. Those formed by Sclerotinia


34 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
sclerotiorum, the white mold fungus, can survive up to ten      grown as extensively. Several other fungal pathogens that
years. Rhizoctonia spp. also produce sclerotia. Verticillium    attack leaves, including Alternaria, Cercospora, Septoria,
dahliae, which causes verticillium wilt, produces tiny          and Stemphylium, are more effectively controlled by
sclerotia (microsclerotia) that can survive up to 13 years.     rotation because they produce large spores. They disperse
Fungi causing fusarium wilts can persist for many years as      only short distances by wind, although they can leave
chlamydospores.                                                 the field on equipment. Other fungal pathogens, such as
    The target pathogen should have a narrow host range         Colletotrichum, produce spores on leaves and fruit that
for rotation to be successful. Peronospora farinose f. sp.      disperse by splashing water. Bacteria are also dispersed by
spinacia causes downy mildew only in spinach. Another           splashing water and in windblown water droplets.
spinach pathogen, Albugo occidentalis, causes white rust            New findings or changes in the pathogen can affect
in spinach and in some species of lambsquarters and             rotation guidelines. For example, a short rotation was
goosefoot. However, the strains of fungi that attack the        initially thought to be adequate for Phytophthora capsici,
different species are specialists, and this host specificity    which causes blight in cucurbits, pepper, tomato, and
can prevent cross infection. Thus, white rust may occur         eggplant. Recently this pathogen was found on new hosts
only on spinach or only on weeds in a field. In contrast,       (lima bean, snap bean, purslane, and a few other weeds),
the fungus Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, which causes white         which may explain why short rotations have not been
mold, can infect more than 360 plant species. Corn and          effective. Additionally, it may be able to move between
cereals are among the few non-host crops that can be used       fields more easily than anticipated, possibly accounting
in rotation to decrease abundance of this pathogen. Weeds       for its occurrence in fields where susceptible crops had
must be managed carefully, however, for this rotation to        not been grown. Recently, most cases of early blight in
be successful. In addition, rotation out of susceptible         tomatoes have been shown to be caused by a different
crops for at least five years is needed because this fungus     species of Alternaria than the species causing early blight in
produces long-lived sclerotia. Effectiveness of a rotation      potato. Consequently, early blight may not be more severe
can be compromised when nearby plantings have white             in tomatoes that follow early blight–affected potatoes than
mold. Wind, irrigation water, or insects can spread the         in tomatoes that follow other crops.
pathogen from infected crops and re-infest the field after          As a group, plant-pathogenic nematodes are more
rotation.                                                       difficult to manage with rotation than fungi and bacteria
    When considering rotation to manage a fungal                because almost all exist for part of their lives in the soil.
pathogen that produces wind-dispersed spores, it is             Only a few nematodes attack just leaves, rarely entering
critical to know how far the spores can travel. Powdery         soil, and none of these infect vegetable or grain crops.
mildew and downy mildew fungi produce spores that                   None of the few soilborne viruses that affect vegetable
can disperse great distances. These cucurbit pathogens          or grain crops occur in the northeastern US. Most viruses
can move up the entire eastern coast of the US each year,       cannot persist in soil between crops because they survive
helped by the sequential planting of these crops from           only in living host tissue or vectors, and few viruses are
south Florida to Maine as conditions become favorable.          vectored by nematodes or soilborne fungi. However, some
Clearly, pathogens like these would be difficult to control     viruses can persist between crops in weeds—for example,
with rotation. In contrast, downy mildew of onion can be        cucumber mosaic in chickweed and potato virus Y in
controlled with rotation, partly because the crop is not        dandelion (appendix 5, pages 142–147).



                                                                     “Corn, small grains, and other
                                                                     grasses are usually good crops
                                                                     to rotate with vegetable
                                                                     crops.”


                                                               CHAPTER 3 | Physical and Biological Processes in Crop Rotation 35
Beneficial Plants to Include in                                fusarium wilt in watermelon and enhances crop growth.
Rotations                                                      On the other hand, hairy vetch is a good host for root-knot
                                                               nematodes.
    The typical focus in designing a rotation for disease          Members of the mustard plant family (crucifers) re-
management is to alternate among crops that are suscep-        lease substances while decomposing that are toxic to some
tible to different pathogens. Alternating crops in different   fungi, nematodes, and even weeds; and they also stimulate
families is a good starting point, but some pathogens at-      beneficial microorganisms. One group of chemical break-
tack crops in two or more families. For example, Phytoph-      down by-products from these plants is the volatile isothio-
thora capsici causes blight in cucurbits, peppers, and lima    cyanates. These originate from glucosinolates, which are
beans. Corn, small grains, and other grasses are usually       themselves harmless. Glucosinolate content varies among
good crops to rotate with vegetable crops. Fusarium fruit      plants of the mustard family. White mustard, brown mus-
rot, however, has been more common in pumpkin follow-          tard, and rapeseed have especially high concentrations.
ing corn.                                                      IdaGold is a yellow mustard variety bred for high gluco-
    Some plants suppress pathogens in addition to being        sinolate content. Glucoraphanin is a glucosinolate found
unsuitable hosts. These include some cover and green           at much higher levels in broccoli than in other cruciferous
manure crops, as well as cash crops. Including disease-        plants. Using these plants to manage pests is called biofumi-
suppressive species in a rotation sometimes reduces the        gation. Research has been done in California with mustard
time needed before a particular cash crop can again be         seeded in fall and incorporated in spring. In the northeast
produced successfully. Examples include some legumes           US, mustard would be seeded in early spring, then incor-
and crucifers. These plants suppress pathogens by stimu-       porated several weeks later when it is in full flower and or-
lating beneficial organisms in the soil and by producing       ganic matter is at a maximum. Soil temperature should be
toxic chemicals. The specific mechanisms involved appear       59° to 77°F. Amending the soil with crucifer seed meal can
to vary with the crop and the pathogen. Depending on the       similarly suppress disease. Isothiocyanates are thought to
mechanism, the beneficial effect can disappear shortly af-     be less damaging to beneficial soil organisms than conven-
ter incorporation or last for years. Suppression can vary      tional chemical fumigants. These compounds can also be
with how well the pathogen is established in a field. Also,    toxic to crops; thus, planting should be delayed about a
to achieve success, beneficial crops may need to be grown      month after incorporation. Quantity of isothiocyanates
more than once before a susceptible cash crop is replant-      produced can vary with soil type, as well as variety of cru-
ed. It is important to remember that incorporating large       cifer. The degree of disease control has been related to the
quantities of biomass in the form of green manure stimu-       quantity of isothiocyanates in some systems, but in other
lates general microbial activity, which can include patho-     systems disease suppression evidently is due to another
gens like Pythium, as described earlier.                       mechanism. Beneficial microorganisms stimulated in-
    Including legumes such as clover, pea, bean, vetch, and    clude myxobacteria and Streptomyces.
lupine in crop rotations has been recognized as beneficial         Note that although a mustard or legume crop can
for disease management since ancient times. Legumes            suppress some pathogens, such crops may also promote
stimulate the growth and activity of soil microbes, in         pathogens that attack plants in those families.
addition to increasing soil nitrogen and organic matter.
Hairy vetch residue incorporated into soil reduces




            “The degree of control was better
            than that achieved by fumigating
             with chloropicrin, a product used
                    by conventional farmers.”


36 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
Examples of Specific Diseases
Influenced by Crop Rotation
• Carrot root dieback.                                                   “Rotation that includes a
    The soilborne fungi Pythium spp. and Rhizoctonia                     fallow period can be the
solani can infect and kill the tip of carrot tap roots, causing          key for controlling some
them to become forked or stubby. In severe cases, they kill
the plants. A study in California showed that when carrots               pathogens that have a wide
were grown after alfalfa, populations of Pythium and                     host range.”
Rhizoctonia were larger, and fewer marketable carrots were
produced. The study also revealed more misshapen carrots
and a higher population of Pythium when barley preceded
carrots, but the barley residue may not have decomposed             alfalfa was grown the previous year rather than potato.
sufficiently before the carrots were planted. Carrots and           Verticillium wilt severity also was lower when a buckwheat
pathogen populations were normal when onions or a                   green manure preceded potato than when canola or a
fallow period preceded the carrot crop. Another reason              fallow preceded potato.
not to grow alfalfa before carrots is that alfalfa is a host for
the fungus causing cavity spot of carrot, Pythium violae.           • Lettuce drop and white mold.
                                                                        Broccoli is also a good crop to grow in rotation
• Clubroot.                                                         with lettuce and crops susceptible to white mold. The
    The roots of mustard family crops that are attacked             number of sclerotia of the lettuce drop fungus, Sclerotinia
by the slime mold fungus Plasmodiophora brassicae                   sclerotiorum, decreased after residue from a spring broccoli
become greatly swollen. This pathogen can survive in soil           crop was incorporated during the summer. This resulted
for seven years in the absence of mustard family crops              in reduced incidence of lettuce drop in a fall lettuce crop.
or weeds. Clubroot has declined more quickly when                   Similar results were obtained in California when two
tomato, cucumber, snap bean, and buckwheat were grown.              consecutive crops of broccoli in one year were followed by
Clubroot was effectively controlled by growing summer               two consecutive crops of lettuce the next year.
savory, peppermint, garden thyme, or other aromatic                     Density of sclerotia of Sclerotinia minor was lower
perennial herb crops for two or three consecutive years.            following broccoli than where broccoli was not grown,
                                                                    and broccoli was associated with lower incidence of white
• Verticillium wilt.                                                mold in subsequent crops. In contrast, cover crops of
    Rotating among crop families is generally recommend-            Lana woollypod vetch, phacelia, and Austrian winter pea
ed, because crops within a family are typically susceptible         in California hosted S. minor, and incidence of drop was
to the same diseases; however, growing broccoli imme-               higher where lettuce was grown after these cover crops
diately before cauliflower resulted in a reduction in ver-          were incorporated than in plots that had been left fallow.
ticillium wilt, even though these plants are closely related.       This pathogen also caused disease on purple vetch but
Broccoli produces more of a specific glucosinolate and              not on oilseed radish, barley, or fava bean. Oilseed radish,
stimulates myxobacteria that reduce survival of Verticil-           however, is a host of the clubroot pathogen and root-knot
lium microsclerotia. The degree of control was better than          nematodes. Phacelia and purple vetch are also hosts of
that achieved by fumigating with chloropicrin, a product            root-knot nematodes.
used by conventional farmers. Fresh broccoli residue is
more effective than dry residue. The greatest reductions in         Other Factors Affecting Success of
pathogen microsclerotia occurred when soil temperatures             Rotation in Managing Disease
were above 68°F. Verticillium wilt diseases of other crops
in California were also suppressed by broccoli.                         Rotation is more likely to be effective if the entire field
                                                                    is rotated out of susceptible crops rather than just the sec-
• Verticillium wilt and scab of potato.                             tion previously planted to the crop. When farm equipment
  Both these diseases were reduced when corn or                     is used throughout the field, infested soil or crop debris


                                                                   CHAPTER 3 | Physical and Biological Processes in Crop Rotation 37
                                                                 corn diseases, in particular gray leaf spot, that are more
                                                                 common and more severe under no-till production.
              “Rotations of at least five or                     Breaking up infested crop debris immediately after har-
             seven years often prevent the                       vest—for example, with flail chopping or repeated dis-
                                                                 king—can hasten decomposition of the debris, thereby
                pathogen population from                         reducing survival time for those pathogens that cannot
             building up to a level that can                     survive in soil without debris.
                                                                      While several pathogens are more likely to cause
                  cause economic damage.”                        disease in subsequent crops when infested crop debris
                                                                 is left on the soil surface, there are exceptions. An in-
                                                                 depth study on survival of Colletotrichum coccodes, which
can be moved from the contaminated section to other              causes anthracnose and black dot in tomato, revealed
parts of the field. If a field is divided into management        that its sclerotia survive longer when buried shallowly in
units, rotation can be effective within a unit if cultivators    the soil than when on the soil surface, probably because
and other farm equipment are cleaned before working in           temperature and moisture vary more on the surface. The
another unit and water does not flow between units during        sclerotia of this species also appear to survive longer when
heavy rainstorms.                                                not associated with plant tissue, likely because the skin
     Time required for rotation to be effective can vary with    tissue of tomato fruits becomes colonized by beneficial
disease severity and environmental conditions. When a            fungi that can parasitize the sclerotia. Roots are an
disease has been severe, a longer rotation may be needed to      important, overlooked source of this pathogen. Tomato
reduce the pathogen’s inoculum level sufficiently to avoid       roots in several fields were found to be infected and to have
economic loss. A two-year period between wheat crops is          sclerotia when there were no symptoms on aboveground
generally needed to reduce Septoria leaf spot; however,          parts of the plants. Additionally, this fungus is pathogenic
just one year without wheat resulted in a similar reduction      on roots of other plants in the nightshade and cucurbit
in disease severity when environmental conditions were           families, including several weeds (see appendix 3, pages
less favorable for this disease. Sclerotia can be sensitive to   124 –137). It can also survive on the roots of numerous other
drying. Some pathogens, such as Sclerotium rolfsii, which        non-host plants (symptomless carriers), including
causes southern blight, are adapted to warm conditions           chrysanthemum, white mustard, cress, cabbage, and
and do not survive low soil temperatures. That is why            lettuce. This could account for C. coccodes occurring on
southern blight does not occur in most of the northeastern       tomato roots in fields with no previous history of tomato
US.                                                              or other crops in the nightshade family.
     Using other cultural practices with rotation can be              Rotation that includes a fallow period can be the key for
the key to successfully controlling some pathogens. For          controlling some pathogens that have a wide host range.
example, after rotating land out of tomatoes to reduce           Bacteria causing soft rot are generally not considered
pathogen populations, staking and mulching the subse-            amenable to management by rotation because they are
quent tomato crop minimizes the potential for pathogen           common soil inhabitants with a wide host range. However,
propagules remaining in the soil to disperse up onto the         one of the common bacteria causing soft rot, Erwinia, does
tomato plants. For a similar reason, deeply burying in-          not survive well in a field that is fallow and repeatedly
fested crop debris and pathogen survival structures by           tilled.
moldboard plowing reduces disease incidence. For this                 Some cultural practices can also negate the benefit of
to work, the residue must be buried deeply enough that           rotation. Incidence of scurf (Monilochaetes infuscans) in
it is not pulled back up during seedbed preparation and          sweet potato can be increased when animal manure is ap-
cultivation. Burying diseased material is especially useful      plied. Diseases caused by the fungus Rhizoctonia solani can
against pathogens that produce sclerotia and those that          be enhanced when undecomposed crop residue is present
infect only aboveground plant tissue. However, deep, full        at planting. Potato and onion cull piles can be sources of
inversion plowing decreases soil health by burying ben-          pathogen inoculum and thus need to be destroyed before
eficial organisms that live in the top few inches of the soil    planting the next crop. Tillage can spread disease through-
profile. The value of incorporating debris is illustrated by     out a field from an initial few infested areas.


38 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
Some Diseases That Can Be                                           • Root-knot nematodes.
Managed with Crop Rotation                                              Northern root-knot nematode (Meloidogyne hapla) is
                                                                    the most common species of root-knot nematode in the
    Understanding the mechanisms that allow or prevent              northeastern US and the only one found during a recent
management of specific diseases by rotation can improve             study of vegetable soils in New York. The predominant
success and avoid wasted effort. This section discusses             species in the mid-Atlantic region is southern root-knot
some diseases that can be successfully managed by crop              nematode (M. incognita), although northern root-knot
rotation; the next section discusses some diseases that             nematode also occurs there. These nematodes have a large
cannot. Other diseases for which rotation is or is not              range of hosts that includes most vegetables. Growing
effective are listed in appendix 3 (pages 124–137).                 sorghum, small grains, or grasses or leaving a clean
                                                                    summer fallow between crops can reduce the nematode
• Bacterial spot of pepper and tomato.                              population to a tolerable level. The effect of these crops
    The bacterium causing spot (Xanthomonas campestris              on root-knot nematodes is short lived, so they should be
pv. vesicatoria) can be effectively controlled with rotation        routinely incorporated into the cropping sequence. Weeds
because this pathogen cannot survive in the soil once               need to be controlled during the rotation to grasses,
diseased plant debris decomposes. A minimum of two                  because some, notably nutsedges, are good hosts for these
years without a host crop is recommended.                           nematodes. Varieties of alfalfa, common bean, soybean,
                                                                    cowpea, peppers, and tomato are available with resistance
• Bacterial speck of tomato.                                        to certain root-knot nematode species.
     This disease is more difficult to control with rotation            Some commonly used cover crops, notably hairy vetch,
than bacterial spot because the pathogen (Pseudomonas               are good hosts of root-knot nematodes.
syringae pv. tomato) can survive on roots and leaves of
taxonomically diverse weeds. Therefore, success requires            Some Diseases That Cannot Be
good control of weeds and volunteer tomatoes during                 Easily Managed with Crop Rotation
the rotation period. A study on survival of this bacterium
showed that it lived up to 30 weeks on crop debris but less         • Fusarium wilts of crucifers, cucurbits, pea, spinach,
than 30 days just in soil.                                              and tomato.
     Bacteria causing spot and speck, as well as Clavibacter            These diseases are difficult to manage with rotation
michiganensis subs. michiganensis, which causes bacterial           because the pathogens can persist for many years in soil
canker in tomato, can occur on seeds. Thus, subsequent              in the absence of their crop host. They persist as dormant
crops should be planted with seed lots that have been               chlamydospores and on roots of some non-host plants
tested and shown to have no detectable pathogen to avoid            (symptomless carriers). Rotations of at least five or seven
reintroducing the pathogen into the field. The seed should          years often prevent the pathogen population from building
also be hot water treated, because bacteria could be present        up to a level that can cause economic damage. However,
at a low, undetectable level. A description of how to treat seed    if the disease has been severe in a field, even seven years
with hot water is at http://vegetablemdonline.ppath.                may not be enough. Selecting resistant varieties is a more
cornell.edu/NewsArticles/PepperLeafSpot.htm.                        effective and practical means of controlling fusarium
These tomato diseases also affect peppers, but resistant            wilt. Multiple races have been identified for many of its
pepper varieties are available.                                     host-specific forms. Therefore, knowing what races have
     Volunteer tomato and pepper plants could grow from             occurred in an area is important when selecting resistant
infested seed left in the field from a previous crop. Thus,         varieties. Fusarium wilt fungi also can be seed-borne and
volunteers need to be destroyed during rotation to ensure           are easily moved on infected transplants. They can also be
successful suppression of bacterial diseases. Destroying            easily moved between fields in soil on equipment. These
volunteer crop plants is also important for other seed-             are the major ways they are brought onto a farm. Drought,
borne bacterial diseases, in particular, bacterial fruit blotch     mechanical damage, low soil pH, soil compaction, and
of watermelon. Bacterial pathogens of tomato can also               other stress factors can predispose plants to infection by
survive on tomato stakes and planting supplies, so these            fusarium wilt fungi. Fortunately, the fusarium wilts in
materials need to be replaced or disinfected before reuse.          various crops are caused by different strains of the fungus


                                                                   CHAPTER 3 | Physical and Biological Processes in Crop Rotation 39
     Table 3.5 Insect pests managed by crop rotation


                                                  Overwintering
 Insect Pest          Practice to be avoided      stage and location         Notes on biology and cultural management

 Corn rootworms       Corn following corn         Eggs in soil in the        In the northeast US, a single-year rotation with a non-
 (Diabrotica spp.)                                field                      host should be adequate, but rootworms in the Midwest
                                                                             are adapting to defeat repeated corn-soybean rotations.
                                                                             Western corn rootworm strains have adapted by laying
                                                                             more eggs in soybean fields, and a small percentage of
                                                                             northern corn rootworms have adapted by extending
                                                                             egg diapause to two years.


 Wireworms            Highly wireworm-            Larvae in soil in the      Wireworms can continue to be damaging in a particular
 (Melanotus           susceptible crops (e.g.,    field                      field for many years, since some species remain in the
 communis, Limonius   root crops, corn, melons)                              larval stage for 3–6 years. Plowing in late summer or fall
 spp.)                following grassy sod or                                exposes the larvae to predation. Baiting can be used to
                      small grain crops                                      detect wireworm infestations before planting.

 White grubs          Highly grub-susceptible     Larvae in soil in the      Phyllophaga grubs remain in soil as larvae for 3–4 years.
 (Phyllophaga spp.)   crops (e.g., corn,          field                      Late summer or early fall plowing kills grubs through
                      potatoes, strawberries)                                physical damage and by exposing them to predation.
                      following grassy sod                                   Annual white grub species, such as European chafer,
                                                                             oriental beetles, Japanese beetles, and Asiatic garden
                                                                             beetles, all of which are pests of turf, also spend the
                                                                             winter as larvae and may be confused with Phyllophaga.
                                                                             Because the annual species are short lived and highly
                                                                             mobile as adults, crop rotation is not an effective control
                                                                             for them.
 Colorado potato      Potatoes, tomatoes,         Adult beetles in soil      Planting as little as 200 meters (~650 feet) from previous
 beetle               or eggplant following       or on the edges of         solanaceous host crops delays infestation by 1–2 weeks,
 (Leptinotarsa        potatoes, tomatoes,         the field                  reduces initial population density, and causes emergence
 decemlineata)        eggplant, or high                                      of most summer adults to be too late to produce a 2nd
                      densities of horse nettle                              generation in Massachusetts. However, a distance of
                                                                             0.8 km (½ mile) or major barriers to movement may be
                                                                             needed for adequate control. Barriers include plastic-lined
                                                                             trenches; reusable plastic troughs; or dense plantings
                                                                             of wheat, rye, or other cover crops. Straw mulch can
                                                                             also delay host finding by the beetles and reduce their
                                                                             survival.




Fusarium oxysporum (see sidebar 3.1, page 33). Thus, for                crops. This fungus is subdivided into several strains, which
example, healthy muskmelons can be grown in a field                     further complicates management. It has a wide host range.
where fusarium wilt previously affected watermelon.                     Potatoes, beans, lettuce, and cabbage are among the most
                                                                        important hosts. Other hosts include broccoli, kale, radish,
• Rhizoctonia diseases.                                                 turnip, carrot, cress, cucumber, eggplant, pepper, tomato,
   When environmental conditions are favorable (warm                    and sweet potato. Symptoms produced on a host can vary
and wet), Rhizoctonia solani, a common fungus in most soils             with the time of infection. For example, in crucifers it
worldwide, can become a serious pathogen on susceptible                 causes damping-off of seedlings, wirestem in young plants,



40 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
bottom rot in midseason, and head rot as heads mature.               during the adult stage when they can travel easily across at
Although difficult to manage, rotating away from the most            least a single farm. Often this highly mobile stage comes
susceptible crops for at least three years can be helpful;           when insects are emerging from their overwintering stage
cereals are an especially good choice for rotation crops.            in the spring, so crop rotation from one year to the next
Incorporating residue of host plants can help.                       will not affect them. Many pests, including corn earworms,
                                                                     cabbage loopers, and potato leafhoppers, do not even over-
Summary                                                              winter in the northeast US. Rather, they travel hundreds of
                                                                     miles to re-infest host crops each year.
    Crop rotation can be an effective and relatively                     However, some key pests can be managed through crop
inexpensive means to manage some diseases, but achieving             rotation (table 3.5). Western corn rootworm and northern
success can be challenging, and some diseases cannot                 corn rootworm are important examples. The adult beetles
be managed with rotation. The challenge can be met by                feed on corn silks (and on many flowers, including cucurbit
knowing which diseases can be managed with rotation                  flowers) in August and September and lay their eggs in soil
and understanding the aspects of a pathogen’s biology                at the base of corn plants. The eggs overwinter, and then
that make it amenable to such control. Effectiveness can             newly hatched larvae feed on corn roots in the spring.
be improved by designing a rotation with crops that, in              They do not survive on small grains, sorghum, or broadleaf
addition to not being a host, decrease pathogen survival             crops or weeds, and survive only at a very low level on
by producing chemicals toxic to pathogens or stimulating             grassy weeds. Thus, these two beetle species have relied on
beneficial organisms in the soil. Length of time needed in           widespread planting of continuous corn for their survival
rotation to decrease disease occurrence may be shorter               and became major pests only when continuous planting of
where beneficial organisms that affect the pathogen                  corn became a common practice in the Midwest.
are more active. Understanding the reasons that some                     In the same way, Colorado potato beetle became a
pathogens are not affected by rotation can allow a farmer            major pest of potatoes because of the practice of continu-
to focus on more appropriate measures for managing these             ous potato planting, particularly in the northeast US. The
diseases, including use of resistant varieties and preventing        beetles emerge in late summer (August in Massachusetts)
introduction of the pathogen to a farm.                              and spend the winter as adults, mainly along the field
                                                                     edges but also in the soil, in the same field where they de-
For further general reading on this topic, see references 20, 98,    veloped. When they emerge from overwintering the fol-
and 114; for further reading on field crops, see 3 and 118; for      lowing spring, they prefer to walk to hosts, if any are in
further reading on vegetables, see 4, 18, 21, 23, 43, 53, 66,        the area, and there is a delay before they can regenerate
72, 94, 97, 105, 115, and 124.                                       their flight muscles. Spring infestations can be delayed or
                                                                     reduced by moving potatoes to a new field distant from
                                                                     the previous year’s potatoes, and by using various kinds of
Management of Insect                                                 barriers (plastic-lined trenches, dense plantings of grain
                                                                     crops, etc.) to interfere with their ability to walk to the
Pests with Crop Rotation                                             new field. The life cycle includes a long-distance flying
and Field Layout                                                     stage—in first-generation adults, which emerge in mid-
                                                                     summer—that can hit fields far from the previous year’s
Kimberly A. Stoner                                                   potatoes, but rotation is an effective way to avoid early-


T        he effectiveness of crop rotation as a tool for insect
         management depends on the life cycle of the tar-
         get insect. For crop rotation to control an insect
pest well, the insect must spend the period from the end
of one crop to the beginning of the next in a stage with low
                                                                     season damage.
                                                                         Wireworms (larvae of click beetles, Elateridae) and
                                                                     Phyllophaga grubs tend to be localized pests that can build
                                                                     up in a field following sod or small grains and then remain
                                                                     for multiple years, because the larvae are long lived. When
mobility and must have a restricted range of host plants.            monitoring indicates a problem, root crops and corn
Not many insect pests fit this pattern. Most have a period           should not be planted in the field.




                                                                    CHAPTER 3 | Physical and Biological Processes in Crop Rotation 41
                                                                 timely plowing across a region could reduce the size of the
                                                                 local population.
                                                                     Plowing also destroys winter annual or biennial weeds
    “For many specialist pests with                              that can have a role in drawing insect pests to a field at
    multiple generations per year                                the beginning of the season. Black cutworm moths lay
    (such as crucifer flea beetles),                             their eggs early in the spring and prefer low-lying, poorly
                                                                 drained, weedy fields. The caterpillars begin development
    successive plantings of the same                             on the weeds or on a cover crop. When those host plants
    crop within a field increase the                             are plowed and replaced with a cash crop, the caterpillars at-
    opportunity for building up high                             tack the stems of the new crop, unless enough time (10–14
                                                                 days) has been allowed to starve them out before planting.
    populations. “                                                   Cruciferous weeds, especially yellow rocket, also
                                                                 attract crucifer flea beetles (Phyllotreta cruciferae) into
                                                                 the field early in the season, before other host plants are
                                                                 present. The flea beetles overwinter as adults and are active
No-Till Farming, Early-Season                                    and feeding from the first warm days in early spring.
Weeds, and Crop Residue Effects on                                   Freshly plowed residues, still breaking down at the
Insect Pests                                                     time of planting, attract seedcorn maggot flies to lay eggs.
                                                                 The larvae hatch out and feed on germinating corn, bean,
     As explained in chapter 2 (pages 3–20), crop rota-          or cucurbit seeds or tunnel into stems of new transplants.
tion planning must account for the whole range of field
requirements and operations. Field management prac-              Planting Time and Insect Pests
tices can influence insect pest problems, and the overall
rotation plan should take this into account. The scien-              Some pests, including corn flea beetles, crucifer flea
tific literature, mostly written about corn and other field      beetles, striped flea beetles, and cabbage maggots, do most
crops, indicates that no-till farming has a mixed effect on      of their damage early in the season on small seedlings.
various species of insect pests within a single field. Some      Damage can be avoided by delaying planting or protect-
pests with low mobility, notably black cutworms, army-           ing early plantings with row covers. A rule developed from
worms, slugs, white grubs, and wireworms, are favored by         research in New York State to avoid cabbage maggot dam-
the presence of crop residue, cooler and wetter soil condi-      age is to wait to transplant seedlings of cole crops until af-
tions, and the lack of soil disturbance in no-till farming.      ter the peak bloom of yellow rocket. Timing to avoid flea
However, many predators of soil pests, including ground          beetle damage in cole crops may push the planting even
beetles, spiders, and predatory mites, are also favored by       later—until mid-June in Connecticut.
the same conditions within a field. In landscapes consist-           Other pests, such as Mexican bean beetle, come out of
ing of large fields tilled at least annually, strips of undis-   their overwintering sites later (late June in Connecticut)
turbed vegetation around field edges are critical refuges        but prefer to lay eggs on the largest and most vigorous
for these predators, and also for the overwintering stages       plantings, which are often the earliest plantings. Biological
of parasitoids of insect pests such as European corn borer,      control programs using the parasite Pediobius foveolatus,
true armyworm, and cereal leaf beetle.                           a small beneficial wasp, have taken advantage of this
     Mobile insect pests may overwinter in crop residue          preference by planting early trap crops of attractive host
in the field, and thus plowing and breaking down this            plants (snap beans) and releasing the wasps in these
residue will reduce their survival. European corn borer,         heavily infested early plantings.
squash vine borer, onion maggot, and spinach leaf miner
are examples of insects whose overwintering stages, and          Movement between Crops during
the crop residues in which they reside, can be destroyed
by plowing. Because these species are all mobile adults
                                                                 the Growing Season
when they emerge in the spring, the effect of increased              A good crop rotation plan includes not only the crop-
mortality may not be apparent in a single field or farm, but     to-crop sequences but also how the crops will be laid out


42 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
on the farm over the entire season. For many specialist
pests with multiple generations per year (such as crucifer              Table 3.6 Organic weed management practices
flea beetles), successive plantings of the same crop within
a field increase the opportunity for building up high
populations. While adult insects generally have a dispersal
                                                                     Practice                     Effect
stage that easily travels long distances, having multiple
plantings adjacent to each other helps the insects to find           Tillage                      Kills growing weeds; damages
new food plants even in life stages that normally travel only                                     perennial roots and rhizomes;
                                                                                                  buries seeds too deeply to
a few yards.                                                                                      emerge; brings weed seeds to
    Other pest insects feed on many different host plants                                         surface.
and may build up in large numbers on one host, then move
to another. An awareness of these possibilities can help a           Post-planting cultivation    Removes weeds from the crop.
grower avoid a potential problem. For example, tarnished             Stale seedbed                Flushes weeds from the soil
plant bugs feed on hundreds of different species of broadleaf                                     before planting.
host plants, preferring to feed on flowers and developing
seeds. The nymphs may develop on cover crops such as                 Organic fertility sources    Favor crops over faster-growing
                                                                                                  weeds due to slow release of
hairy vetch, weeds such as pigweed or lambsquarters, or
                                                                                                  nutrients.
roadside vegetation. The new adults then move out when
the plants are mowed or when the seeds become more                   Drip irrigation              Directs water to the crop rather
mature and less suitable. Strawberry growers trying to                                            than to weeds.
reduce damage can substitute straight rye (a poor host for
                                                                     Mulch (plastic, straw)       Smothers weeds: delays those
tarnished plant bug) for a mixture of rye with hairy vetch                                        that do emerge.
(a favorable host) adjacent to and upwind from strawberry
fields. Strawberry growers who include alfalfa or clovers            Transplanting small-         Increases the competitive
in their crop rotations can also avoid mowing these                  seeded crops                 ability of the crop; allows earlier
                                                                                                  cultivation.
legumes during the time the strawberries are flowering
and developing fruit to avoid mass movement of tarnished             Planting competitive         Improves competitive ability of
plant bug adults.                                                    cultivars                    the crop against weeds.

                                                                     Increased density            Tend to suppress weeds by early
Summary                                                              and more uniform             shading.
                                                                     arrangement of crop
    A few major insect pests can be managed directly by              plants
crop rotation on a single farm, but many more are influ-
                                                                     Rapid cleanup after          Prevents seed set by residual
enced by farm management choices of whether and when                 harvest                      weeds.
to till, when to plant, how to manage spring weeds, and
whether to put successive plantings of a crop in the same            Planting cover crops         Suppresses weeds by
field. Because insects are so diverse in their overwintering,                                     competition when cash crops
                                                                                                  are not present; improves
dispersal, and host-finding strategies, it is hard to identi-                                     soil tilth, which increases
fy cultural practices that will prevent problems across a                                         effectiveness of cultivation.
range of crops and pests. The best approach is to identify
the most important pests that have historically damaged            Note: Stale seedbed is the practice of preparing a seedbed,
major crops on a particular farm, and find cultural meth-          allowing the weeds to germinate and killing them without further
ods that interrupt the life cycle, interfere with movement,        soil disturbance. In organic systems killing the weeds is usually
                                                                   accomplished with a flame weeder. The crop is then planted into
or otherwise limit the numbers of pests or damage from             the weed free bed with as little disturbance as possible.
those pests.

For further reading, see references 33, 34, 47, 50, 55, 57, 71,
86, 93, 101, 103, 104, 122, and 127.


                                                                  CHAPTER 3 | Physical and Biological Processes in Crop Rotation 43
                  “Experimenting on small
            areas to find the right balance
               between seed cost of cover
           crops and weed control is often
                               worthwhile.”


The Role of Crop Rotation                                      The usefulness of the principles outlined below has been
                                                               documented by practicing farmers in many cases.
in Weed Management
Charles L. Mohler                                              • Include clean fallow periods in the rotation to deplete
                                                                   perennial roots and rhizomes and to flush out and


I    deally, weed management in an organic cropping
     system involves the integration of a broad range of
     cultural practices. Although cultivation after planting
is usually a key component, a variety of other factors make
important contributions to weed control on organic farms
                                                                   destroy annual weeds.
                                                                   Most perennial weed species will resprout after their
                                                               roots and rhizomes have been cut into small pieces by till-
                                                               age implements (40). Thus, many new shoots are produced,
                                                               but each shoot is weakened due to less belowground food
(table 3.6, page 43). All of these practices occur within      storage. If these plants are again cultivated into the soil,
the context of a sequence of crops that are planted on a       they are further weakened. A few such cycles once every
field—the crop rotation. The identities of the crops are       two to three years can greatly suppress or eliminate most
critical for disease and insect management, but for weed       perennial weeds whose roots are within the plow layer and
management the identity of the crop species is less critical   help keep deeper-rooted perennials in check.
than the type of soil preparation and cultural weed control        Similarly, tillage tends to stimulate the germination of
practices used with each crop. In general, crop sequences      seeds of most weed species (73), and subsequent cultiva-
that take advantage of multiple opportunities to suppress      tion will kill the seedlings so they will not compete with
and remove weeds from the field will improve weed              future crops. This is an important approach to reducing
management on the farm (61).                                   the density of weed seeds stored in the soil. In northern
    Few studies have examined the role of crop rotation in     Pennsylvania, Eric and Anne Nordell have nearly elimi-
weed suppression, and most have looked at crop rotation        nated weeds from their vegetable farm by alternating
in conventional agricultural systems with herbicides. Such     between a year with a cash crop and a year with weed-
studies primarily indicate the impact of varying the type      suppressing cover crops and a cultivated summer fallow
of herbicide used rather than other factors associated with    (39). Over the years, they have greatly shortened the fal-
crop rotation. The few rotation studies without herbicides     low periods as weeds have become less problematic.
have generally found that more diverse systems had a lower
density of problem weeds but a greater diversity of weed       • Follow weed-prone crops with crops in which weeds
species (60, 62). This is reasonable, since the variation in       can easily be prevented from going to seed.
cultural practices during the rotation will tend to disrupt        Weed control is inherently more difficult in some crops
the life cycle of each particular weed species but create      than others. For example, unless mulches are used, winter
niches for a greater variety of species.                       squash and pumpkins tend to become weedy because
    Although the sparse literature offers only general         cultivation and hand weeding are essentially impossible
insights into the design of weed suppressive crop rotations,   after the vines have run out of the row. Moreover, weeds
the ecology of weeds offers clues to the sort of crop          have usually set seed by the time these full-season
sequences that are most likely to minimize weed problems.      crops have matured. Following such crops with a rapid


44 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
succession of short-season crops like spinach and lettuce          of noncompetitive crops, growing poor competitors
that are harvested before weeds can set seed will kill off         in a special crop rotation in which they alternate only
many of the seeds produced in the vine crop. This reduces          with cleaning crops may prove worthwhile. When weed
weed problems in subsequent crops. Similarly, small grains         populations have declined substantially, the rotation can
cannot be effectively harrowed after the stems begin to            be broadened to include occasional crops in which seed
elongate, and, especially in spring-sown grain, weeds often        production is more difficult to prevent.
go to seed before harvest. The long-term consequences
of this seed production can be reduced by following the            • Rotate between crops that are planted in different
small grain with an easily cultivated, highly competitive               seasons.
crop like soybean or potato.                                            Weed species have characteristic times of the year
    Weed control is often more difficult in direct-seeded          during which they emerge. Common ragweed emerges
vegetables than transplanted vegetables because the direct-        most readily in early spring and is often a problem in
seeded crops have a prolonged early period when the crop           spring-sown organic small grains like barley and oat. In
competes poorly and cultivation is difficult. Direct-seeded        contrast, henbit and shepherd’s purse are typically fall-
species like carrot and spinach that have small seeds are          germinating species and are likely to be found in winter
more of a problem in this regard than are large-seeded             wheat and spelt. Rotations that include both spring-
crops like snap beans and sweet corn. If weeds proliferate         planted and fall-planted crops tend to suppress both
in the direct-seeded crop, it is usually advisable to follow it    sorts of species. The spring-germinating weeds tend to be
with an easily cultivated species that is transplanted or has      competitively suppressed by fall-sown grain because it is
a large seed.                                                      already well established and growing vigorously by the
                                                                   time they germinate. Conversely, fall-germinating species
• Plant crops in which weed seed production can be                 tend to be destroyed before they can set seed when soil is
     prevented before crops that are poor competitors.             tilled for a spring crop.
     Weed control is often difficult in crops like onion and            Similarly, competitive spring-planted crops tend to
carrot because they are slow growing and cast relatively           suppress midsummer germinating species like purslane,
little shade. Although some weeds establish from the long-         whereas summer tillage for midseason planted vegetables
term seed bank in the soil, many of the weeds encountered          will kill most spring-germinating weed species before they
in a given year establish from seeds shed in the previous          can set seeds.
year or two. Consequently, growing a crop in which
weed seed production can be prevented before planting              • Work cover crops into the rotation between cash crops
a poor competitor can reduce the amount of precision                   at times when the soil would otherwise be bare.
cultivation and hand weeding required for successful                   Weeds establish most easily when the ground is bare.
production of the poor competitor. Cropping strategies             Plant canopies suppress seed germination of many weed
in which management prevents weed seed production                  species by reducing the amount of light and the relative
include successive plantings of short-season crops, short-         amount of red-wavelength light reaching the soil surface
cycle cover crops alternating with clean fallow periods,           (5). In addition, cover crops compete with any weeds
crops grown with weed-suppressing mulch, and highly                that do emerge. Thus, for example, planting winter rye
competitive crops that are intensively cultivated (for             or mustard cover crops following plow-down of pasture
example, potato).                                                  reduced spring weed cover from 52 percent to 9 percent
     The crop types that prevent seed production will vary         with rye and to 4 percent with mustard (70).
depending on the practices of the farmer. For example,                 Many studies have shown that grain and legume crops
mulched vine crops may be used as a weed “cleaning” crop           are more competitive against weeds when planted at high
because the combination of mulch and a dense canopy                density and uniformity (74, 121), and the same prin-
effectively suppresses weeds, whereas without mulch,               ciple applies when these species are used as cover crops.
vine crops often contribute to the weed seed bank because          Increasing seeding rates by 50 to 100 percent relative to
they become difficult to cultivate or hand weed late in the        recommended rates for grain or forage production usually
season.                                                            produces noticeably improved weed control, particularly
     If weeds become a serious barrier to the production           if the cover crop is broadcast. Very high-density sowings


                                                                  CHAPTER 3 | Physical and Biological Processes in Crop Rotation 45
of competitive cover crops like buckwheat, soybean, and       first sign of capsule formation on the weeds.
grain rye can completely smother even many perennial
weeds. Experimenting on small areas to find the right bal-    • Rotate between annual crops and perennial sod crops.
ance between seed cost of cover crops and weed control is         Although weed seed populations decline more rapidly
often worthwhile.                                             when the soil is tilled, substantial decreases in populations
    Cover crops interseeded into standing cash crops dur-     of most annual weeds occur when sod crops are left in the
ing the last cultivation can help suppress late-emerging      ground for a few years (79). This occurs by natural die-
weeds but may also compete with the crop (9). Interseed-      off of seeds in the soil and because annuals that germinate
ing of cover crops is discussed more fully in chapter 7       in a perennial sod are competitively suppressed by the al-
(pages 95–100).                                               ready well-established perennial legumes and grasses. The
                                                              few annuals that do establish are usually prevented from
• Avoid cover crop species and cover crop management          setting seeds by repeated mowing or grazing. One study
    that promote weeds.                                       found that 83 percent of farmers surveyed in Saskatch-
    Many cover crops can behave as weeds if allowed to        ewan and Manitoba noticed decreased weed problems
go to seed due to a delay in mowing or incorporation.         following sod crops, and most indicated that the effect
Buckwheat and winter grains are particularly prone to         lasted more than one year (27). In addition to reducing
cause problems if allowed to seed, because they are fast-     annual weeds, many of these farmers indicated a reduction
growing, competitive species.                                 in Canada thistle, probably because mowing several times
    Hairy vetch should be avoided on any farm that grows      each year depleted food storage in the thistle’s roots.
winter grain. Some portion of any hairy vetch seed lot            Precautions are required, however, when alternating
will be “hard” seeds (seeds that are dormant due to a seed    sod crops with annual crops. Perennial grass weeds like
coat that does not allow absorption of water). Even if the    quackgrass should be well controlled prior to planting
hairy vetch cover crop is not allowed to go to seed, some     the sod, or they will likely increase during the sod phase
of the hard seeds from the original sowing will germinate     of the rotation. Also, annual weeds may set many seeds
in subsequent winter grain crops and can severely reduce      during establishment of the sod crop, thereby negating
both yield and grain quality.                                 the expected decline in the weed seed bank. Weed seed
    Long-season cover crops like red clover and sweet         production can be minimized by using a grain nurse
clover are useful for supplying nitrogen and improving        crop that competes with the annual weeds, early harvest
soil structure, but they are relatively uncompetitive early   of the nurse crop for forage or straw before annuals go
in their development and can become weed infested.            to seed, and subsequent mowing of the sod during the
Because they remain in the ground most of a year or more,     establishment year. Another strategy to reduce weed seed
annual weeds have time to set seeds, and perennials have      production during sod establishment is to plant the sod
plenty of time to increase by growth of roots and rhizomes    crop in late summer or early fall.
(underground stems). Such cover crops thus work best
when sown with or interseeded into a grain “nurse” crop           Although the impact of crop rotation on weeds will not
that can suppress weeds while the legume cover crop           be seen as quickly as the impact of tillage or cultivation, the
develops. Even with a nurse crop, however, weeds can be a     cumulative affect of a well-planned rotation strategy can,
problem in the following crop, and many growers choose        over several years, greatly decrease weed density. Rotation
to avoid red clover and sweet clover before most vegetable    planning is a key way organic growers can substitute brain
crops.                                                        power for labor and purchased inputs. This principle
    Even hairy vetch or a winter grain like rye may allow     applies not just to weeds, but also to diseases, insects, soil
seed production by winter annuals like chickweed and          nutrients, and soil health, as discussed in previous sections
shepherd’s purse if the cover crop is not incorporated        of this chapter.
promptly in the spring. The problem is greatest when the
cover crop stand is light or spotty. The problem can be       For further reading, see references 5, 9, 27, 39, 40, 60, 61, 62,
avoided, however, by incorporating the cover crop at the      70, 73, 74, 79, 96, and 121.




46 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                                               4
                 CROP SEQUENCES FROM EXPERT
                       FARMERS’ FIELDS
                                          Sue Ellen Johnson




M            ost experienced organic farmers have a good
             grasp of the biological principles of crop
             rotation (see sidebar 4.1). Considering an
organic farm field with a healthy, high-yielding crop,
the natural question is, what cropping history (or crop
                                                               needs of each particular field. Another major element in-
                                                               fluencing each rotation is the total land area that the farm
                                                               has available for cropping (see sidebar 2.4, page 6). Al-
                                                               though a few sequences may occur on multiple farms, the
                                                               market goals and farm logistics guiding them may be dif-
rotation) contributed to its vigor and productivity?           ferent in each case. Several farms achieve similar biologi-
    Chapter 2 (pages 3–20) reviewed the multiple inter-        cal goals with different sequences of crop families.
acting factors that experts balance as they manage crop
rotations. This chapter presents crop sequences for ac-
tual fields, as implemented by expert organic farmers on
their own farms. Twelve expert farmers each recounted
                                                               Reading the “Real Fields
the four- or five-year cropping history of one real field on   on Real Farms” Tables
their own farms at a 2002 workshop (see chapter 2, pages           On the next several pages of tables, the year and season
3–20). Cropping sequences used by four additional expert       are noted in the left-hand columns, and the sequence of
farmers are also included to better represent the range of     crops is presented in one column for each farm’s sample
crops and farm types in the northeastern US. All of the        field. These tables are color coded to show each crop’s
farms whose field sequences are presented in this chapter                                            (continued on page 55)
were nominated as exemplary by organic certifiers or other
organizations that work with organic farmers. (The farm-
ers are described in sidebar 4.2, page 48.)
    The examples in this chapter are illustrations, not                              Sidebar 4.1
recommendations. The farmers emphasized that these                     Examples of Conventional
sample sequences may not be (and probably are not)                         Rotation Wisdom
directly transferable to other farms.
    These cropping histories illustrate the use of rules-of-        • Avoid planting the same crop family in
thumb (sidebar 4.3, page 55) and the prevalence of crop               the same field too often.
couplets and short sequences. The farmers developed                 • Alternate cover crops with cash crops.
these couplets and short sequences using observation,               • Alternate deep-rooted crops with shallow,
cumulative knowledge, judgment, and trial and error under             fine-rooted crops.
real farm, field, and seasonal conditions. Many sequences           • Precede heavy feeders with nitrogen-
continue to evolve as the farms themselves do.                        fixing cover crops.
    Although whole-farm requirements of cash flow, mar-             • Avoid following a root crop with another
ket demands, equipment, and labor availability set the                root crop.
priorities that guided the development of these sequenc-
es, the rationale underlying each sequence is based on the


                                                                   CHAPTER 4 | Crop Sequences from Expert Farmers’ Fields   47
                                                          Sidebar 4.2
                                               Expert Farmer Profiles
     These profiles reflect the status of the farms and farmers in 2002, when the information on the sample sequences
     was collected. Of course, farms (and faces) have evolved since the 2002 workshop, but the general character of
     the sequences and the farmers remains unchanged:
   • On Four Winds Farm in Gardiner, New York, Polly                  growers through a cooperative.
     Armour has been growing vegetables with her husband,           • Kretschmann Farm is a 650-member CSA in Rochester,
     Jay, on three acres for 15 years. They use the rest of their     Pennsylvania. Don Kretschmann has been farming
     land for grazing poultry and cattle. They run a small            for 28 years and sells his produce wholesale, as well as
     CSA and also market to restaurants, wholesalers, and at          running the CSA.
     farmers’ markets.
                                                                    • On One Straw Farm in Maryland, Drew Norman has
   • In Argyle, New York, Paul Arnold owns Pleasant                   been growing vegetables for 18 years. One hundred
     Valley Farm. For 14 years, he and his wife, Sandy, have          acres are in vegetables and another hundred in hay at
     raised vegetable crops on five acres. They market almost         any given time. One Straw Farm supplies vegetables for
     exclusively through local farmers’ markets. The Arnolds          a CSA, farmers’ markets, and wholesale outlets.
     have graciously hosted many organic farming events,
     including the NEON rotation workshop.                          • Eero Ruuttila of Nesenkeag Farm in Litchfield, New
                                                                      Hampshire, has been growing vegetables on 40 acres
   • David Blyn farms on 12 acres in Roxbury, Connecticut.            for 16 years. He markets to restaurants, restaurant
     For 13 years, his operation has sold vegetables at farmers’      wholesalers, food banks, and a newly formed multi-
     markets, wholesale outlets, and through a CSA.                   farm CSA.
   • Village Acres Farm in Miflintown, Pennsylvania, is a 30-       • Golden Russet Farm in Shoreham, Vermont, spans 82
     acre farm owned by Roy Brubaker. Farming with his                acres and has 10 acres in vegetables in any given year.
     family, he has marketed vegetables, berries, and flowers         Will Stevens has been farming for 21 years and sells his
     for 20 years through farmers’ markets, the Tuscarora             crops through a CSA, on-farm sales, farmers’ markets,
     Organic Growers Cooperative, and, more recently,                 food cooperatives, and local restaurants.
     through a CSA.
                                                                    • Anne and Eric Nordell grow vegetables on seven acres
   • Jean-Paul Courtens farmed 150 acres with 30 acres in             of Beech Grove Farm in northern Pennsylvania. For
     cash crops in Kinderhook, New York, for 13 years. He             over 22 years, they have relied on horses and their own
     runs a 650-member CSA.                                           labor to supply several farmers’ markets.
   • In Bridgewater, Maine, Jim Gerritsen has been raising          • In Penn-Yan, New York, Klaas and Mary-Howell
     seed potatoes that are available by mail order and               Martens farm approximately 1,200 acres, raising grain,
     through wholesale markets. Wood Prairie Farm spans               soybeans, and processing vegetables. In addition, they
     45 acres and has been in business for 26 years. Jim              operate an organic feed mill and seed processing facility
     understands the challenges of rotation on a farm with            for local producers. They began farming organically in
     only one important cash crop.                                    1992.
   • Even Star Organic Farm in Lexington, Maryland, is              • John Myer is one of the pioneers of certified organic
     farmed by Brett Grohsgal. He cultivates 10 acres                 grain production in New York. He has been farming
     and manages 100. A former chef, Brett sells to ten               organically since 1982 and raises soybeans, wheat, spelt,
     restaurants, four grocery stores, a university, and at two       corn, alfalfa, dry beans, and clover seed, along with beef
     farmers’ markets.                                                cattle, on 880 acres in Ovid, New York.
   • Jack Gurley has been farming on five acres in Spark,           • Ed Fry operates Fair Hills Farm in Chestertown, New
     Maryland, for nine years. His farm, Calvert’s Gift Farm,         Jersey, on 550 rented acres. A dairy farmer for 42 years, he
     sells vegetables through its CSA to restaurants, at              began organic grain and hay production in 1997. He sells
     farmers’ markets, on the farm, and with other organic            organic feed in addition to operating a 150-cow dairy.


48 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                         Real Fields on Real Farms:
                            Sample Four- and Five-Year Vegetable Crop Rotations

                            Calvert’s Gift Farm                  Even Star Organic Farm                            Four Winds Farm
                             Jack Gurley, Md.                      Brett Grohsgal, Md.                           Polly & Jay Armour, N.Y.
         Winter                       Garlic                                Crimson Clover                                       Oats

         Spring
Y1                                                                    Tomatoes OR Peppers                           Potatoes OR Tomatoesa
                                 Winter Squash
        Summer

          Fall                                                 Red Clover       Winter         Lettuce
                                                                               Brassicas     (strip crop)
                                                                                                                Straw mulch                 Garlic
         Winter                     Spinach                                   Red Clover                                                (in alternate
                                                                                                                                            beds)b
         Spring
Y2                                                                    Okra – Flowers – Basil                    Winter Squash
        Summer
                                    Soybeans                                                                     (in alternate
                                                                                                                     beds)              Straw mulch
          Fall                                                   Winter         Vetch          Lettuce
                                                                Brassicas                    (strip crop)
         Winter                       Oats                                      Vetch                                     Straw mulch

         Spring
Y3                                 Fava Beans
                                                                              Cucurbits                                         Beans
        Summer
                                    Brassicas
          Fall                                                  Crimson         Lettuce        Winter
                                                                 Clover       (strip crop)    Brassicas                    Compost
         Winter                       Vetch

         Spring                                                                                                  Direct-Seeded Quick Crops /
                                                                              Red Clover                        Small-Seeded Greens / Radishes
Y4
        Summer                      Tomatoes
                                                                                                                 Cucumbers
                                                                                                                (mulched with             Lettuce
          Fall                                                 Red Clover      Winter          Lettuce             straw)
                                      Garlic                                  Brassicas      (strip crop)

         Winter

         Spring
Y5                              Return to Year One                      Return to Year One                             Return to Year One
        Summer

          Fall

KEY • “Fallow” indicates a deliberate period of bare soil, often with frequent cultivation to kill weeds.          a
                                                                                                                     This rotation switches be-
     • Split boxes indicate strip crops or split beds.                                                            tween potatoes and tomatoes
     • Intercrops with crops from more than one family are represented by a dark gray background.                       in alternate cycles.
                                                                                                                    b
     • Cash crops are indicated by black text, cover crops and fallows by white text.                                 This rotation is designed
The boxes below show the color codes for plant families in the rotation diagrams.                                     around alternate beds.

  Grasses–         Legumes –         Brassicas –     Nightshades–       Cucurbits –          Beets, spinach –
                                                                                                                     Mulch               Cash Crop
  Poaceae           Fabaceae        Brassicaceae      Solanaceae       Cucurbitaceae         Chenopodiaceae
  Lettuce –         Alliums –          Carrot–                                                Grass-legume
                                                     Miscellaneous           Fallow                                 Intercrop            Cover Crop
 Asteraceae         Liliaceae         Apiaceae                                                     mix

                                                                              CHAPTER 4 | Crop Sequences from Expert Farmers’ Fields                    49
                                      Real Fields on Real Farms:
                    Sample Four- and Five-Year Vegetable Crop Rotations (continued)

                            Golden Russet Farm                       Kretschmann Farm                               Nesenkeag Farm
                              Will Stevens, Vt.                     Don Kretschmann, Pa.                            Eero Ruuttila, N.H.
          Winter                   Wheat OR Oats                                Alfalfa                                     Rye – Vetch

          Spring
  Y1                                                                           Tomatoes                                  Winter Squash
         Summer                      Brassicas

           Fall
                                                                            Rye – Vetch                                     Rye – Vetch
          Winter                       Oats

          Spring
                                                                        Lettuce (triple crop)
  Y2                                                                                                                           Potatoes
                                     Potatoes
         Summer
                                                                     Spinach              Turnips
           Fall

          Winter                                                            Rye – Vetch                                     Rye – Vetch
                                 Wheat (overseed)

          Spring                                                                Beets
  Y3                                                                                                                        Sudangrass
         Summer                    Winter Squash
                                   Summer Vetch
                                                                          Late Brassicas
           Fall
                                                                  with Underseeded Rye OR Oats
                                                                                                                        Oats – Field Peas
          Winter
                                       Wheat

          Spring                                                                                                  Lettuce           Spinach / Chard
                                                                                                                                     / Beet Greens
  Y4
         Summer                                                                                               Arugula / Mustard
                          Sweet Corn / Summer “Smalls”c                                                          / Brassicas               Lettuce

           Fall
                                                                                                                            Rye – Vetch
                                 Oats (and compost)
          Winter                                                                Alfalfa

          Spring                  Spring “Smalls”c
  Y5                                                                                                                    Return to Year One
         Summer                   Summer Fallow


           Fall                    Wheat OR Oats

 KEY • “Fallow” indicates a deliberate period of bare soil, often with frequent cultivation to kill weeds.
                                                                                                                   c
      • Split boxes indicate strip crops or split beds.                                                              “Smalls” indicates any crop
      • Intercrops with crops from more than one family are represented by a dark gray background.                grown in small quantities, such
      • Cash crops are indicated by black text, cover crops and fallows by white text.                             as scallions, green beans, and
 The boxes below show the color codes for plant families in the rotation diagrams.                                         other “oddballs.”

   Grasses –        Legumes –          Brassicas –    Nightshades–       Cucurbits –       Beets, spinach –
                                                                                                                       Mulch              Cash Crop
   Poaceae           Fabaceae         Brassicaceae     Solanaceae       Cucurbitaceae      Chenopodiaceae
    Lettuce –        Alliums –          Carrot–                                             Grass-legume
                                                      Miscellaneous         Fallow                                 Intercrop              Cover Crop
   Asteraceae        Liliaceae         Apiaceae                                                  mix

50 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                     Real Fields on Real Farms:
                   Sample Four- and Five-Year Vegetable Crop Rotations (continued)

                              One Straw Farm                        Pleasant Valley Farm                                 Riverbank Farm
                             Drew Norman, Md.                      Paul & Sandy Arnold, N.Y.                            Davida Blyn, Conn.

         Winter                                                                  Mulch
                           Orchardgrass – Alfalfa Hay                                                                            Hay
         Spring                                                                  Lettuce
Y1
        Summer                  Plow-down – Fallow                                                                            Buckwheat
                                                                                 Beans

          Fall
                                                                                 Radish
                             Crimson Clover – Vetch                                                                       Oats – Field Peas
         Winter                                                                Winter Rye

         Spring
                                                                                 Carrots                         Multiple Crops in Strips: Onions/
Y2                                   Tomatoes                                                                   Spinach/ Beets/Radish/Salad Mix/
        Summer                                                                                                             Lettuce/Peas
                                                                       Beans                Turnips             Carrots         Beets         Lettuce
          Fall
                                    Rye – Vetch
         Winter                                                                   Rye
                                                                                                                                 Rye

         Spring                 Plow-down – Fallow                               Lettuce
Y3
        Summer                                                                                               Tomato / Pepper OR Cucumber/
                                                                            Winter Squash                     / Eggplant on  Zucchini / Melon
                                     Brassicas                             (with hay mulch)                       plastic       on plastic
          Fall
                                                                                 Mulch                                        Winter Rye
         Winter                          d



         Spring                                                                                                           Oats – Field Peas
                                     Lettuce                                      Beets
Y4
        Summer                                                                                                     Brassica
                                    Buckwheat                                                                                              Lettuce
                                                                                Radishes                           Greens
          Fall                               Arugula and
                           Spinach
                                               Radish
         Winter                                                                Winter Rye                                                   Rye
                                         d                                                                          Garlic
         Spring
Y5                                                                     Tomatoes (with hay mulch)                                           Flowers
                                  Summer squash
        Summer                                                                                                     Lettuce

          Fall                         Hay                                       Mulch                                           Rye

KEY • “Fallow” indicates a deliberate period of bare soil, often with frequent cultivation to kill weeds.
                                                                                                                    d
     • Split boxes indicate strip crops or split beds.                                                               Harvest of brassica and fall
     • Intercrops with crops from more than one family are represented by a dark gray background.                 cool-season crops extends into
     • Cash crops are indicated by black text, cover crops and fallows by white text.                              winter. Clovers may be inter-
The boxes below show the color codes for plant families in the rotation diagrams.                                  seeded at the last cultivation.

  Grasses –        Legumes –          Brassicas –       Nightshades–       Cucurbits –       Beets, spinach –
                                                                                                                        Mulch           Cash Crop
  Poaceae           Fabaceae         Brassicaceae        Solanaceae       Cucurbitaceae      Chenopodiaceae
  Lettuce –         Alliums –           Carrot–                                               Grass-legume
                                                      Miscellaneous            Fallow                               Intercrop           Cover Crop
 Asteraceae         Liliaceae          Apiaceae                                                    mix

                                                                               CHAPTER 4 | Crop Sequences from Expert Farmers’ Fields                51
                                      Real Fields on Real Farms:
                    Sample Four- and Five-Year Vegetable Crop Rotations (continued)

                              Roxbury Farm                              Village Acres Farm                    Wood Prairie Farm
                          Jean-Paul Courtens, N.Y.                       Roy Brubaker, Pa.                    Jim Gerritsen, Me.
          Winter                                                                Rye                                Plow-down – Fallow
                                      Clover
          Spring
  Y1
                                   Fallow – July
         Summer                                                                                                      Seed Potatoes
                                                                            Strawberries
           Fall                  Oats – Field Peas                           1st harvest

          Winter
                                                 Pepper /                                                                Fallow
          Spring                               Eggplant on
  Y2                                              plastic
                         White Clover                                                                              Wheat OR Oats
         Summer          between crop                                                                          (undersown with clover)
                             rows
           Fall                            Interseeded Rye                  Strawberries
                                                                            2nd harveste
          Winter
                                                                                                                         Clover
          Spring
  Y3
         Summer                      Broccoli
                                                                             Buckwheat

           Fall

          Winter                                                               Wheat                                Timothy – Clover
                                      Fallow                      (frost seed grass and clover into
          Spring                                                           wheat in spring)
  Y4
         Summer                    Sweet Corn
                                                                                                              Spring Mustard Plow-down
                             (overseeded with clover)
           Fall                                                                                                Buckwheat Plow-down

          Winter                                                    Forage Millet and Soybeans
                                                                   OR Grass-Clover Mix grazed by
                            Clover (mowed two or three                        poultry
          Spring
  Y5                                 times)                                                                        Return to Year One
         Summer

           Fall                                                                 Rye

 KEY • “Fallow” indicates a deliberate period of bare soil, often with frequent cultivation to kill weeds.
      • Split boxes indicate strip crops or split beds.                                                        e
                                                                                                                   This strawberry rotation
      • Intercrops with crops from more than one family are represented by a dark gray background.             is followed by cycling into a
      • Cash crops are indicated by black text, cover crops and fallows by white text.                        vegetable rotation sequence.
 The boxes below show the color codes for plant families in the rotation diagrams.

   Grasses –        Legumes –         Brassicas –       Nightshades–      Cucurbits –      Beets, spinach –
                                                                                                                Mulch             Cash Crop
   Poaceae           Fabaceae        Brassicaceae        Solanaceae      Cucurbitaceae     Chenopodiaceae
    Lettuce –        Alliums –           Carrot–                                           Grass-legume
                                                        Miscellaneous       Fallow                             Intercrop          Cover Crop
   Asteraceae        Liliaceae          Apiaceae                                                mix

52 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                     Real Fields on Real Farms:
                   Sample Four- and Five-Year Vegetable Crop Rotations (continued)

                          Beech Grove Farm
                        Anne and Eric Nordell, Pa.
         Winter                          Fallow

         Spring                              Oats
Y1
        Summer                    Cultivated Fallow

          Fall
                                      Field Peas
         Winter

         Spring
Y2                                       Onion
        Summer

          Fall

         Winter                              Rye

         Spring
Y3
        Summer                    Cultivated Fallow

          Fall

         Winter                      Rye – Vetch

         Spring
Y4
        Summer        Lettuce      Carrot               Spinach

          Fall          Lettuce     Carrot          Spinach        Rye
                                                              (interseeded)



         Winter

         Spring
Y5                                Return to Year One
        Summer

          Fall

KEY • “Fallow” indicates a deliberate period of bare soil, often with frequent cultivation to kill weeds.
     • Split boxes indicate strip crops or split beds.
     • Intercrops with crops from more than one family are represented by a dark gray background.
     • Cash crops are indicated by black text, cover crops and fallows by white text.
The boxes below show the color codes for plant families in the rotation diagrams.

  Grasses –        Legumes –            Brassicas –              Nightshades–     Cucurbits –    Beets, spinach –
                                                                                                                     Mulch          Cash Crop
  Poaceae           Fabaceae           Brassicaceae               Solanaceae     Cucurbitaceae   Chenopodiaceae
  Lettuce –         Alliums –                 Carrot–                                            Grass-legume
                                                                 Miscellaneous      Fallow                          Intercrop      Cover Crop
 Asteraceae         Liliaceae                Apiaceae                                                 mix

                                                                                     CHAPTER 4 | Crop Sequences from Expert Farmers’ Fields     53
                                           Real Fields on Real Farms:
                                 Sample Four- and Five-Year Grain Crop Rotations

                               Martens Farm                               Myer Farm                              Fair Hills Farm
                        Klaas & Mary-H Martens, NY                       John Myer, NY                             Ed Fry, MD
          Winter                    Red clover
                                   (plowdown)                                                                        Rye (silage)
          Spring
  Y1
         Summer                        Corn                                    Alfalfa                              Corn (grain)
                                                                            (fourth year)                         Rye (overseeded)
           Fall

          Winter                                                                                                     Rye (silage)
                                      Fallow
          Spring
  Y2
         Summer                      Soybean                                    Corn                                 Corn (silage)

           Fall

          Winter                   Winter wheat
                                                                               Fallow                                Rye (silage)

          Spring
                                  Winter wheat
  Y3
                             Red clover (overseeded)
         Summer
                                                                              Soybean                                Corn (silage)
           Fall                     Red clover


          Winter                                                            Winter wheat                                   Fallow

          Spring
  Y4                                                                        Winter wheat
         Summer                                                        Red clover (overseeded)

           Fall
                                 Return to Year One
          Winter
                                                                                                                           Alfalfa
          Spring                                                             Red clover
  Y5
         Summer

           Fall

 KEY • “Fallow” indicates a deliberate period of bare soil, often with frequent cultivation to kill weeds.
      • Split boxes indicate strip crops or split beds.
      • Intercrops with crops from more than one family are represented by a dark gray background.
      • Cash crops are indicated by black text, cover crops and fallows by white text.
 The boxes below show the color codes for plant families in the rotation diagrams.

   Grasses –        Legumes –         Brassicas –      Nightshades–       Cucurbits –       Beets, spinach –
                                                                                                                Mulch                Cash Crop
   Poaceae           Fabaceae        Brassicaceae       Solanaceae       Cucurbitaceae      Chenopodiaceae
    Lettuce –        Alliums –          Carrot–                                             Grass-legume
                                                       Miscellaneous        Fallow                             Intercrop             Cover Crop
   Asteraceae        Liliaceae         Apiaceae                                                  mix

54 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
botanical family. A few of the sequences include mulch             pattern characterizes the rotations on these successful,
applications, but most of the plans do not indicate other          expertly managed organic vegetable and field crop farms.
aspects of production such as compost applications and             Also notice that some fields or beds are subdivided among
tillage operations, which many of the farmers indicated            different crops at certain points in the rotation sequence.
were integral to their rotation management. The differ-            At the next planting they are cycled back and managed as
ences between the rotations are striking. Note that no one         single field units.




                                                         Sidebar 4.3
                                 Northeast Growers’ Rules of Thumb
     We asked numerous organic growers to share their crop sequencing “rules of thumb.” These illustrate the com-
     mon practices of many organic growers. Some sequences have been scientifically tested, and others have not.
     Below is a sampling of some of their recommended crop “couplets.” These are simply rules of thumb that
     individual farmers use in their own rotation planning. All farmers do not use the same couplets because of
     variation between farms in cropping practices, pest and weed pressures, marketing strategies, climate, length of
     season, and other factors. Growers’ rationales for these couplets include (1) disease and pest management, (2)
     fertility management, (3) weed management, (4) double cropping, and (5) seedbed preparation. Many rules
     relate to the nightshade family, perhaps because it is prone to problems that can be managed by crop rotation.

    General Rules:                                                 • Be cautious when growing bell pepper before another
    • Grow winter cover crops before late-planted crops to           vegetable crop, because of diseases.
      accumulate organic matter and nitrogen.                      • Avoid planting potatoes after corn, because of
    • Grow winter-killed cover crops (oat-pea) before early-         wireworm problems.
      season crops, so the seedbed will be easy to prepare.
                                                                   Grasses, Corn, and Grains:
    • Never grow any crop after itself.
                                                                   • Grow beans after corn to rebuild nitrogen.
    Nightshades (tomatoes, potatoes, peppers, eggplants):          • Avoid growing legumes before small grains to prevent
    • Grow tomatoes after peas, lettuce, or spinach, because         lodging.
      tomatoes take a lot out of the soil.
    • Grow lettuce before potatoes, because it is a light feeder   Alliums:
      and an aboveground crop.                                     • Use a summer fallow after onions, because usually
    • Grow legume cover crops before potatoes or corn, so            there are many weeds.
      that they can feed the crops.
    • Grow potatoes before crops that are poor competitors,        Lettuce and Crops in the Beet and Spinach Family:
      because potato production involves aggressive                • Grow peas before fall greens, because there is time
      cultivation and further working of the soil during             for double cropping, and fall greens benefit from the
      harvest, both of which reduce weed pressure.                   nitrogen fixed by the peas.
    • Avoid growing potatoes before corn, because both are         • Grow a root crop like beets after lettuce or cabbage.
      heavy feeders.




                                                                       CHAPTER 4 | Crop Sequences from Expert Farmers’ Fields   55
Observations on the                                                    Each growing season, 3 strips are used for spring-
                                                                       planted vegetables and 3 strips for summer-planted
Sample Sequences                                                       vegetables. The remaining 6 strips are taken out of
    The sample rotation sequences vary from farm to                    production. The strips that are out of production are
farm. The farmers explained that some cropping practices               cover cropped over the winter and produce substantial
relate to the immediately preceding or following cash                  biomass. For six weeks during midsummer they are
crop, and some relate to crops two or three seasons apart.             shallowly tilled several times, then planted to another
Couplets of cover crops and cash crops are common.                     cover crop in early August. Winter-killed covers like
Careful examination of the crop sequences reveals several              oats and field pea are used in strips that will be planted
interesting points.                                                    to early vegetable crops. Winter-hardy cover crops like
• For some fields, five years was inadequate to capture                rye and hairy vetch are used in strips where vegetable
    the full sequence of crops. For example, fields on                 crops will be planted the following summer. This
    Village Acres, Wood Prairie Farm, and Myers Farm                   creates a four-year rotation cycle of (1) cover crops and
    are cycling through a longer period of cropping and                fallow, (2) early vegetables followed by cover crops,
    have longer rotations due to the inclusion of perennial            (3) cover crops and fallow, and (4) summer vegetables.
    crops like hay and strawberries. In these cases, the crop          Alternating cash crops with bare fallow and cover crops
    sequences may show only two or three crops.                        appears to have exhausted the weed seed bank and
• Most of the farms rarely repeat a planting of the same               built high soil quality. As a result, weed control needs
    crop family in the same field from one season to the               and weed competition are minimal even when weather
    next. When they do, they try to move the crops from                interferes with timely cultivation. Harvest and planting
    bed to bed to avoid repeating on the same area of the              efforts are spread across the season.
    field. This limits the buildup of soilborne pests and          •   Brassicas are often followed by a grass cover crop (with
    diseases.                                                          or without a legume). Farmers indicated that this is
• Most of the farms use a diversity of cover crops and                 because brassicas are nutrient-demanding crops, and
    plant a cover crop in most years. Some farms are                   a cover crop is needed to rebuild the soil and provide
    exceptions, however. Notably, the two farms with the               quick soil cover.
    smallest acreage rely on compost to supply nitrogen            •   Cucurbits tend to follow a cover crop or an early salad
    and soil-building organic matter.                                  crop—spinach, lettuce, or brassica greens. Planting
• A series of cover crops is grown in sequence on                      cucurbits is delayed until early summer, to allow double
    Nesenkeag Farm (rye-vetch intercrop, sudan grass,                  cropping of the same ground in a single season.
    oat-pea intercrop). Riverbank Farm also follows rye            •   Tomatoes, potatoes, and peppers (nightshades) are
    with an oat-pea intercrop. In both cases, the sequence             often preceded by a legume like clover, vetch, or hay.
    of cover crops is used to prepare the seedbed for high-            On two farms nightshades are preceded by fallow, in
    value small-seeded crops.                                          part to improve weed control and in part to increase
• On those farms and on Golden Russet Farm, a winter-                  available soil nitrogen through breakdown of a cover
    killed cover crop of oats and field peas tends to precede          crop.
    spring plantings of high-value direct-seeded crops with        •   Fair Hills Farm operations are based around its dairy
    small seeds.                                                       and feed sales to organic dairies. As on many dairies
• Both cultivated fallows and mulching are important                   in the northeast US, grasses are grown continuously
    steps in sequences on some farms. Both are used for                (corn-rye-corn) for several years before rotation
    weed control.                                                      into alfalfa or mixed hay. Predominance of grasses in
• At Beech Grove Farm, crop rotation follows a fixed                   the rotation seems to cause few problems, possibly
    four-year cycle with prescheduled cultivated fallows               because the application of manure supplies nutrients
    and cover crops. The system is designed to minimize                and harvest and removal of the entire aboveground
    weeding and distribute labor. The vegetable production             portion of the rye and corn plants for silage keeps pest
    field is divided into 12 half-acre strips. In any particular       populations in check.
    year, only 6 of the strips are planted with vegetables.



56                                                                               Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
Summary                                                       farmers offered specific reasons particular crop sequences
                                                              work for them. Jack Gurley believes he needs to maximize
    Keep in mind that these sequences describe the            use of cover crops without losing growing space. Con-
cropping history of only one field or bed on farms that       sequently, he looks for opportunities to interseed cover
have many fields and beds (sometimes several hundred).        crops into cash crops (for example, hairy vetch into broc-
Since the sequences were described, several farmers have      coli, white clover into tomatoes). In her no-till bed sys-
reported that they continue to modify the sequences on        tem, Polly Armour follows potatoes with winter squash
the fields depicted as new lessons are learned or to deal     that she mulches heavily, thereby controlling weeds aris-
with changing conditions and opportunities (see chapter       ing from seeds that get stirred to the soil surface during
2, pages 3–20).                                               potato harvest.
    Note that cash crops rotate among members of different        Cover crops fulfill diverse and multiple roles on these
crop families. A diversified cropping approach produces       fields. The farmers stressed the importance of matching
both resilience and flexibility, for optimal ecological and   the cover crop to the following crop. For example, since
business management of a farming system.                      crops differ in their ability to tolerate cover crop residues,
    Expert farmers’ crop sequences make sense for indi-       some farmers plant winter-killed cover crops where early
vidual fields, but also for their farm businesses. Several    spring crops will be planted.




                                                                  CHAPTER 4 | Crop Sequences from Expert Farmers’ Fields   57
                                                               5
                    A CROP ROTATION PLANNING
                            PROCEDURE
                                          Charles L. Mohler




T        his chapter provides a step-by-step procedure for
         planning crop rotations on an individual farm. The
         procedure is based on methods used by the panel
of expert farmers (chapter 2, pages 3–20), supplemented
with other sources. It distills what experienced growers
                                                                       “The rewards of systematic
                                                                       crop rotation planning
do, based on experience, knowledge, and intuition,                     increase, however, with the
into a systematic method. For the sake of simplicity, the              number of crops and the
instructions are written as if the person doing the planning
is the manager of the farm.                                            complexity of the fields.”
    The crop rotation planning procedure works through a
series of steps. You will (1) organize your information, (2)
develop a general rotation plan (optional), (3) construct
a crop rotation planning map, (4) plan future crop                 how you manage it. It can also serve as a new baseline and
sequences for each section of the farm, and (5) refine your        record system for your farm.
crop sequence plan.                                                    The crop rotation planning process becomes more
    The procedure is easiest for a farm that produces only         complex if the crop mix is highly diverse, if you plant the
a few crops and has uniform field conditions, but it is            same crop multiple times each season, if you double or tri-
most useful for farms with complex operations. Examples            ple crop fields, or if the fields vary in their ability to grow
of farms with relatively simple rotation problems include          various crops. For farms that require a complex cropping
most grain farms and some wholesale vegetable opera-               plan, using Microsoft Excel spreadsheets instead of paper
tions, where all of the crops can be grown on all of the           worktables is advised. These can be downloaded from
fields. The procedure can be used to plan rotations with           http://www.neon.cornell.edu/croprotation. The
more crops and multiple soil types, but the process is             site also contains a modified version of this chapter in
time consuming. The rewards of systematic crop rotation            which the instructions are adapted to worksheets rather
planning increase, however, with the number of crops and           than paper tables. For any farm, the computer worksheets
the complexity of the fields. On farms that grow only a            will simplify data entry and sorting.
few crops, reasonable rotations can be maintained using a              The procedure described here is not a cookbook reci-
few rules of thumb. With a complex operation, however,             pe. It will not tell you which crop should follow another—
a long-term problem can develop without the farmer real-           for example, to precede a crop with hairy vetch or follow it
izing that the rotation practices are suboptimal. Although         with potato. Rather, the procedure will help you organize
the planning procedure described below is divided into             diverse data on the management and biology of the crops
many steps, it is not complicated. Simply proceed one              you want to grow to define rotations that work for your
step at a time, and you will end up with a plan. Besides           particular farm. You need to know your fields and your
helping you develop a plan, working through the proce-             crop mix to use this planner. Only you know the particu-
dure will likely give you new insights into your farm and          lar goals, problems, and opportunities of your farm opera-


58 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
tion. The procedure can help you recognize the critical de-
cisions that need to be made, however, and prompt you to
make them in a logical order. The worksheets (tables 5.1,
5.2, and 5.3, pages 61–67) will help you enter, compare,
and sort the information you need to plan a good crop
rotation, for each field and for the entire farm.
                                                                               Sidebar 5.1
                                                                Rotation Planning vs. Crop
                  “Expert growers simplify                             Sequencing
                their planning by building                     Cropping plans have two aspects: the
              their rotations around short                     development of a general rotation plan and
                                                               the sequencing of particular crops. The general
                 sequences of two or three                     rotation plan might specify, for example, that
                      crops or cover crops.”                   nightshade crops will be followed by mustard
                                                               family crops, then salad greens other than
                                                               mustards, and finally cucurbits; or that full-
                                                               season crops will be followed by a year of cover
                                                               crops and then early-planted short-season crops.
Tips for Sequencing Crops                                      The rotation plan provides the framework;
                                                               the sequencing plan provides the details of
     Because the planning procedure presented below is         what crop goes where in succeeding years. The
lengthy and detailed, some of the most useful steps are        rotation plan needs to be general enough to
summarized briefly in this section. Growers who do not         allow flexibility in sequencing. The sequencing
wish to go through the detailed planning procedure will        plan is necessarily tentative and ideally leaves
still find this summary useful in planning crop sequences.     room for alternative crops in case weather or
Note that the simplified steps presented here do not cover     markets force last-minute changes.
development of a flexible generalized rotation plan (see
sidebar 5.1) but rather summarize the ad hoc sequencing        The relative importance of rotation planning
introduced in chapter 2 (pages 3–20). To avoid confusion,      versus crop sequencing in overall crop planning
the steps in this simple summary section are labeled A,        depends on the farm. In general, as the
B, C to distinguish them from the numbered steps in the        complexity of the farm operation increases,
systematic planning procedure.                                 rotation planning becomes less possible and
                                                               careful crop sequencing becomes more critical
A. Identify and prioritize goals.                              (figure 5.1, page 60). If your farm operation is
   Write down what you want your crop rotation to              suited to rotation planning, developing a plan
accomplish (see sidebar 2.8, page 14 for rotation goals of     will greatly simplify your crop sequencing. If,
expert farmers). Decide which goals take precedence this       however, your operation is highly complex,
year if not all goals can be met simultaneously.               following a general plan is likely to prove futile.
                                                               In that case, detailed record keeping and careful
B. Write down your crop mix.                                   placement of crops become the keys to avoiding
    List the crops you plan to grow next season and the        rotation problems.
amount of land you will devote to each crop. For crops
grown in succession plantings, list each planting as a
separate crop (for example, spring broccoli, fall broccoli).
This will help with planning, since the crops and cover
crops that precede and follow will differ with the season
of the planting.


                                                                    CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure   59
C. Check for excessive acreage of one family.                    farms, they may be individual beds. Having the farm di-
    Write the family name next to each crop and add up           vided into relatively small units allows you to keep track of
the acreage of each family (family names of crops are giv-       exactly what you planted on a particular piece of ground
en in appendix 1, pages 101–103). If you find that any one       one, two, or five years later. In addition, if soil conditions,
family (other than grasses) would be grown on more than          weed problems, or other factors that affect management
25 percent of your land, consider increasing the diversity       vary across a field, managing the farm in small units allows
or balance of your crop mix. A high proportion of land           systematic matching of crops to conditions for site-specific
in one family necessarily means that most locations will         management. A single crop will often be planted on several
rotate back to that family quickly. This can lead to prob-       adjacent management units if that is convenient.
lems with soilborne diseases (see “Managing Plant Dis-               Make a map of your farm showing every management
eases with Crop Rotation,” page 32, and appendix 3, pages        unit. Make the map large enough so that information can
124–137).                                                        be written in each management unit (this may take more
                                                                 than one sheet of paper). Give each unit a number. When
D. Identify crop couplets and short sequences that work          you are satisfied with your map, make multiple (six or
    well on your farm.                                           more) copies. Creating a computer version of your map
   Expert growers simplify their planning by building            reduces the labor of writing crop names onto management
their rotations around short sequences of two or three           units, simplifies revising plans, and makes producing cop-
crops or cover crops. Think about what has worked on             ies of the map easy (see appendix 6, pages 148–149).
your farm in the past. Many additional short sequences
can be gathered by talking with other farmers or gleaned         F. Identify conditions that affect what crops can be
from the sample rotations in chapter 4 (pages 49–54)and              grown on each management unit.
from appendix 2 (pages 104–123).                                     On one copy of the map, note any difficult or desirable
                                                                 characteristics that influence what crops you may want to
E. Make a crop rotation planning map.                            plant there. Some locations may be wet; others may warm
   Thoughtfully dividing your farm into relatively small         earlier in the spring. Sidebar 2.9 (page 15) lists field prop-
management units of approximately equal size greatly             erties that expert growers take into account when placing
simplifies planning and record keeping. The management           crops, and table 5.5 (page 74–75) provides abbreviations
units should be no larger than the area you ever manage          that fit easily onto a map. Although these lists are long,
as an independent unit. On grain farms, management               note that many of the field characteristics probably do not
units are often long strips across the field. On vegetable       vary across your farm and thus are of no interest to you.

                                                                                                 G. Plan next summer.
                                                                                                     On another copy of your
       Simple operation                            Complex operation
                                                                                                 map, assign each crop to as
                                                                                                 many management units as
       Few crops                                   Many crops
                                                                                                 you need to meet the area
       Little variation in acreage                 Much variation in acreage among
                                                                                                 specified by your crop mix
       among crops                                 crops
                                                                                                 (see step B above). If a man-
       Rest years                                  All land cash cropped each year
                                                                                                 agement unit will be double
       No multiple cropping                        Multiple cash crops in a year                 or triple cropped, separate
       Minor variation in soils,                   Much variation in soils,                      the crop names with slashes
       topography etc.                             topography etc.
                                                                                                 (for example, May lettuce /
                                                                                                 buckwheat cover / fall spin-
       Focus on rotation planning                  Focus on crop sequencing                      ach). Placing crops in the
                                                                                                 following order often works
                                                                                                 well:
   Figure 5.1 The complexity of your farm determines how you plan.                                      (continued on page 68)



60 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                                  Table 5.1 Crop characteristics worktable



                                                                    Area/      MUs/              Planting   Harvest   Net $/
                                                 Crop               Year       Year     Family   Time       Ends      Acre




CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure



61
                                                        Table 5.2 Field conditions worktable — Part A




                                                                          Field    Mgmt      Crop Three    Crop Two      Crop Two
                                                       Field Name         Type     Unit      Summers Ago   Winters Ago   Summers Ago   Crop Last Winter   Crop Last Summer


62 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                                 Table 5.2 Field conditions worktable — Part B




                                                                   Current Winter



                                                 Field   Mgmt
                                                 Type    Unit      Crop                Plant     Harv




CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure



63
                                                       Table 5.3 Field futures worktable — Part A




                                                                                                      Next Summer                  Next Winter                  Two Summers from Now



                                                                             Field Type   Mgmt Unit                 Plant   Harv                 Plant   Harv                      Plant   Harv
                                                       Field name                                     Crop                         Crop                         Crop


64 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                                      Table 5.3 Field futures worktable — Part B



                                                                                                                Three
                                                                          Two Winters from Now                  Summers from Now                  Three Winters from Now              Four Summers from Now



                                                 Field Type   Mgmt Unit                          Plant   Harv                      Plant   Harv                        Plant   Harv                      Plant   Harv
                                                                          Crop                                  Crop                              Crop                                Crop




CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure



65
                                                            Table 5.3 Field futures worktable — Part C




                                                                                Four Winters from Now                  Five Summers from Now              Five Winters from Now                  Six Summers from Now



                                                       Field Type   Mgmt Unit                           Plant   Harv                       Plant   Harv                           Plant   Harv                          Plant   Harv
                                                                                Crop                                   Crop                               Crop                                   Crop


66 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                                      Table 5.3 Field futures worktable — Part D




                                                 Field Type   Mgmt Unit             Plant   Harv          Plant   Harv          Plant   Harv          Plant   Harv
                                                                          Crop                     Crop                  Crop                  Crop




CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure



67
   1. Crops that are already planted. (You do not want to         When placing a crop onto a management unit, refer
      plow them up!)                                          to your list of crop couplets, avoid units that have had the
   2. Crops in your major crop family, especially if one      same family in the past few years, and check appendix 2
      family will cover more than a fourth of your acreage.   (pages 104–123) for potential problems. To limit buildup
      Do these early in the process so that you can avoid     of pests and disease, avoid placing succession plantings of
      locations that have had that family recently. This      a crop species in adjacent management units.
      does not apply to grasses, since they rarely foster
      soilborne diseases.                                     H. Plan the following year.
   3. High-value crops that do best in particular field          To plan the next seasons, repeat the same process you
      conditions.                                             used in step G. For the moment, ignore winter cover crops.
   4. Other high-value crops.
   5. Lower-value crops that do best in particular            I. Plan fall-planted crops and cover crops.
      locations.                                                  Place your fall cover crops and overwintering cash crops
   6. Lower-value crops that can be grown anywhere.           on another copy of the map by the same process used for
                                                              G and H. Note that the cover crop on each management
                                                              unit needs to work well with both the preceding and the
                                                              following crops.

                     Sidebar 5.2                              J. Take your plans to the field.
                                                                  Take your maps with the crops written on them and
     Small Valley Farm: An Example                            walk your fields. For each group of management units as-
     to Illustrate the Procedures                             signed to a crop, imagine farming that piece of land through
     Small Valley Farm is a cash grain and beef               the coming years. Consider tillage, planting, maintenance,
     operation (figure 5.2, page 72). The farmers grow        and harvest of the crops to see if the proposed crop se-
     grain and soybeans for human consumption                 quence makes sense for that location. Note any changes
     and alfalfa-grass hay for winter feed for their          you decide to make.
     herd of beef cattle. The farm has 720 tillable
     acres. Although the farmers can grow all crops           K. Develop contingency plans.
     successfully on all of the tillable land, 240 acres         Think ahead to see what problems might arise with
     are sufficiently steep that erosion is a potential       growing the proposed crops in the planned management
     problem when they grow row crops. A desire to            units. How might the plans need to shift if the spring is
     avoid row crops on their steep land has motivated        too wet for early-planted crops, if labor for transplant-
     them to undertake rotation planning.                     ing is unavailable at a critical time, or if you experience
                                                              some other problem that could affect where various crops
     In the past, they have followed a six-year rota-         can be planted? Write action plans for coping with vari-
     tion: oat/clover/spelt → spelt/hay → hay → hay           ous potential problems and make provisions for possible
     → corn → soybean and then back to oat/clover/            problems (for example, by obtaining extra crop or cover
     spelt. Their crop mix is summarized in table             crop seed to fill in locations that could not be planted as
     5.4 (page 70). They establish alfalfa-grass hay          planned).
     by overseeding it into spelt in the spring. They
     plow hay in the fall before corn to allow the sod           The steps above capture the essence of the planning
     to break down, and they sow an oat cover crop to         procedure. The following sections include a method for
     protect the soil over the winter. They plant red         developing a general rotation plan, examples, additional
     clover with oat to provide a boost of N for the          hints, an explanation of why these steps are sensible, and a
     following spelt crop.                                    means of checking for errors to ensure that your plans do
                                                              not contain contradictions.




68 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
A Complete, Step-by-Step                                      how far forward you want to plan.
                                                                  Cut your copies of the Field Conditions Worktable,
Rotation Planning Guide                                       part B, along the vertical line between “Manage unit” and
                                                              “Current winter.” Now tape each part B sheet to each part
Before You Begin . . .                                        A sheet to make one extra-wide sheet. “Current winter”
    Before you begin, please read through the instruc-        should now be next to “Crop last summer” on Part A.
tions to see where you are headed with each step. This will   Discard the scrap with “Zone” and “Manage unit.” Place a
also tell you whether the effort involved is worthwhile for   long piece of tape on the back where the two sheets meet,
your farm. Earlier chapters in this manual provide many       as eventually you will need to cut the sheets lengthwise to
suggestions as to how to think about the problem of de-       sort the lines.
veloping general crop rotation plans and specific crop            Repeat the cutting and taping for the Field Futures
sequences. Tables in the appendices provide a wealth of       Worktable. The column for “Two winters from now” on
factual information to help you avoid problems and take       part B should end up adjacent to “Two summers from now”
advantage of opportunities related to particular cropping     on part A. Again, discard the scrap. Depending on how far
sequences. Becoming familiar and consulting with that         forward you are planning, add parts C and D to the strip.
information will help you work through the steps that fol-
low. The procedure may prompt you to rethink your farm-       2. Set rotation goals.
ing operation and crop mix, as you order the sequence of          Identify what you would like your crop rotation to
crops on particular fields.                                   accomplish. Sidebar 2.8 (page 14) provides a list of potential
                                                              rotation goals developed by experienced organic farmers.
Initial Steps                                                 The fictional example of Small Valley Farm will be used
                                                              to illustrate various steps in the planning process (sidebar
1. Copy tables from this manual.                              5.2). Their rotation goals are as follows:
    If you are using the Excel worksheets mentioned above,    • Avoid growing the same crop in the same location two
skip this step.                                                   years in a row (except hay, of course).
    Otherwise, make several copies of table 5.1 (Crop         • Ensure that all crops have sufficient nitrogen, especially
Characteristics Worktable, page 61). You will need enough         corn.
copies so that each planting of every crop during a typical   • Avoid planting row crops and spring grains on sloping
year can have one line. You may find a few extra copies           land.
useful, as well.
    Make several copies of table 5.2 (Field Conditions        3. Prioritize your goals.
Worktable, pages 62–63). Note that the table consists of           Order your goals. This is particularly useful if you have
two separate sheets (parts A and B), and you will need        a long list of goals, since you may find it impossible to meet
multiple copies of each sheet. How many copies you            all of the goals completely every year. Some goals may be
make to start with depends on how accessible the nearest      so easily met that, although they are critical, they need
copier is. The exact number of copies you will need can-      little attention in the rotation planning process. For Small
not be determined at the outset, but you can determine        Valley Farm, providing N for the crops is economically
the approximate number of copies as follows: Divide the       important, but since one third of the land is in nitrogen-
cropped area of the farm by the acreage of your smallest-     building grass-alfalfa hay each year and a clover cover
acreage crop. You probably will not need more than that       crop can be interseeded into either oat or spelt, providing
number of copies. You probably will need at least a fourth    sufficient N is easy to accomplish. Consequently, the farm’s
of that number.                                               goals are prioritized as follows:
    Make copies of table 5.3 (Field Futures Worktable,            a) Avoid growing the same crop in the same location
pages 64–67). Make as many copies of this table as you                 two years in a row.
made of table 5.2. Note that the Field Futures Worktable          b) Avoid planting row crops and spring grains on
consists of four sheets (parts A–D), and you will need                 sloping land.
multiple copies of at least the first two sheets. Whether         c) Ensure that all crops have sufficient nitrogen,
you need to copy the third and fourth sheets depends on                especially corn.


                                                                        CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure   69
                                                        Filling Out Your Crop Characteristics
                                                        Worktable
                        Sidebar 5.3                     4. Write down your desired crop mix for the coming year.
         Codes for Recording                                Make a list of the crops you grow and how many acres,
      Planting and Harvest Times                        beds, or square feet you want to grow of each crop to meet
                                                        your market requirements. Use your copy of the Crop
     Generally, attempting to target particular         Characteristics Worktable to organize the list by families.
     planting and harvest dates too carefully will      (Look up the family of your crops in appendix 1, pages
     prove futile due to the unpredictability of the    101–103, if necessary.)
     weather. The following codes may be useful for         Next, for each crop family, group crops that you grow
     tracking when you plant and harvest. If you have   using similar practices and planting and harvest times.
     a long growing season, you may want to divide      Members of these crop groups are functionally equivalent
     spring and fall into three categories instead of   with respect to many aspects of crop rotation.
     two. You can also create your own codes, but be        Fill in the name of each crop you plant down the left-
     sure to record them somewhere!                     hand column. If you plan to make multiple plantings of a
           Time                    Code                 crop, enter each planting on a separate line with a unique
           Early spring            espr
                                                        name (for example, lettuce 1, lettuce 2, etc.). Separating
                                                        plantings is useful because each has different planting and
           Late spring             lspr
                                                        harvest times and therefore has different cash and cover
           Early summer            esum
                                                        crops that can precede or follow it. For crops that remain
           Midsummer               msum                 in the ground for several years, you may find listing each
           Late summer             lsum                 crop year useful (for example, strawberry yr 1, strawberry
           Early fall              efall                yr 2, etc.). Table 5.4 shows the crop mix for Small Valley
           Late fall               lfall                Farm.

                                                        5. Add crop characteristics to the Crop Characteristics
                                                            Worktable.
                                                           Now look at your Crop Characteristics Worktable,
                                                        and going across the page add column titles in spaces to
                        Sidebar 5.4                     the right of “Net $/acre” that you think will be useful in
                                                        deciding either the sequence in which you order crops
           Minimum Return Time                          or where the crops will be placed on the farm. Crop
    A minimum return time of four to five years
    will prevent most soilborne diseases (appen-
    dix 3, pages 124–137), provided you practice               Table 5.4 Crop mix for Small Valley Farm
    good sanitation measures (see “Managing
    Plant Diseases with Crop Rotation,” page
                                                             Crop                           Acres/year
    32). A shorter return time can be used for
    grass family crops, particularly if the rotation          Tofu soybean                   120
    includes some alternation of corn, small grains,          Corn                           120
    and forage grasses. Although these different
    grass family crops share a few diseases (see ap-          Oat/clover/spelt               120
    pendix 2, pages 104–123), avoiding rapid                  Spelt/hay (1st year)           120
    return to a particular grass species is usually
                                                              Hay (2nd year)                 120
    sufficient to avoid disease problems.
                                                              Hay (3rd year)/oat cc          120



70 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
characteristics that expert farmers take into account when
planning their rotations are listed in sidebar 2.9 (page
15). Including columns for target planting and harvest
times will be useful if you plant some crops multiple                            Sidebar 5.5
times during the season or if you grow many different
crops. Next, fill in the appropriate information for each         Computation of Average
crop in the various columns. For now, ignore the column          Return Time for the Most
headed MUs/year—you will use that later. For crops that          Prevalent Crop Family: An
are harvested repeatedly, the final harvest is the critical              Example
time relative to crop rotation, since that is when the field   Suppose a farm has the crop mix shown below:
becomes available for planting the next cash or cover crop.
Sidebar 5.3 provides codes for planting and harvest times
that fit easily on the worksheet. Enter the net income per                                               Number
                                                                Crop                   Family            of Beds
acre (or other unit of land area). This information will
be used to help prioritize where crops go. Approximate          Lettuce                Lettuce           6
numbers are good enough—you just need to be able to             Onion                  Lily              6
tell the ranking of values for the various crops. Copy from     Leek                   Lily              3
appendix 1 (pages 101–103) any information you                  Garlic                 Lily              3
think is useful for sequencing crops on your farm.              Tomato                 Nightshade        6
                                                                Potato                 Nightshade        6
6. Check for lack of diversity in your crop mix.
                                                                Pepper                 Nightshade        4
    Scan your worktable and determine which plant fam-
                                                                Green bean             Legume            4
ily will have the greatest area. For this computation, ig-
nore the grass family (see sidebar 5.4). Add up the area for    Pea                    Legume            4
the most widely planted, non-grass family. Now divide the       Carrot                 Carrot            2
total cropped area of the farm by the area of that family.      Summer squash          Cucurbit          4
This number represents the average rotation return time for     Total                                    48
the most common non-grass crop family you grow. For
example, if the average rotation return time is 4, the most    The most prevalent crop family is the night-
prevalent non-grass plant family will occur on a given lo-     shades, with 16 of the 48 beds. Average return
cation once in every four years, provided you are careful      time for nightshades is 48/16 = 3 years. That is,
to ensure a maximum lag between planting members of            a given piece of ground will have a nightshade
that family throughout the farm. Of course, many factors,      crop every third year, even if the sequencing is
including field-to-field variation in soil conditions, pro-    ideal. This may be too frequent for long-term
duction of perennial crops, and changes in cropping plans      prevention of soilborne diseases of nightshade
due to weather will lead to shorter return times at some       crops (see appendix 3, page 124–137). The
locations. If the average rotation return time for the most    second-most prevalent group are the alliums
prevalent family is less than 4, check appendix 3 (pages       in the lily family, with an average return time
124–137), and consider renting additional land or changing     of 48/12 = 4 years. Consequently, shifting from
your crop mix so that a smaller percentage of the farm is      nightshades to an increase in alliums will not
planted with that family. Sidebar 5.5 shows an example of      help diversify the crop mix appreciably. With
return time calculation.                                       such rapid return times for two major families,
                                                               the farmer should consider either expanding
                                                               his land base or developing markets for crops in
                                                               other families.




                                                                      CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure   71
Identifying Good Sequences in Your                            • spelt/hay—hay—hay: Hay can be established by
Planning                                                        overseeding into spelt. The spelt provides a good
                                                                nurse crop and can be harvested before most spring-
7. Identify crop sequences that you use repeatedly.             germinating weeds go to seed.
    Look at your planting records and list all the 2- and     • hay/oat cover crop—corn: Alfalfa in the hay provides
3-year crop sequences that you have found work well             a source of nitrogen for the corn, and the decomposing
on your farm. These form the backbone around which              roots maintain good soil structure during the row crop
you will build your rotation plan. You will probably find       portion of the rotation. The oat cover crop protects
that these reliable sequences meet certain rotation goals       the soil after incorporation of the hay sod but winter-
or make your operation run smoothly. Note what each             kills so that corn can be planted as soon as the weather
sequence is doing to facilitate your operation. This will       permits.
allow you to explore alternative sequences that provide the   • oat/clover/spelt: There is plenty of time for planting
same benefits. For Small Valley Farm, sequences and notes       spelt after oat harvest, whereas the window of
might look like this:                                           opportunity is narrow after soybean and nonexistent
                                                                after corn. Sowing red clover with oat provides N for
                                                                the spelt.
               SMALL VALLEY FARM             N                   The “Real Fields on Real Farms” color plates in chapter
                                                              4 (pages 49–54) provides many examples of sequences
     C          A                                             that farmers use successfully. Appendix 2 (pages 104–
                                                              123) shows problems and opportunities associated with
                                                              various crop sequences.
                        240 acres
     80
      a
                                            Pasture           Identifying Critical Variations in Field
                                                              Conditions
                                                              8. Identify areas of your land that offer special
                                                                  opportunities or pose problems.
                    B                                             Identify fields and parts of fields that grow certain of
                                                              your crops particularly well or pose production problems
                        160 acres                             for particular crops. Note these areas on a map of your
                                                              farm. Table 5.5 (page 74–75) provides a list of field charac-
                                                              teristics that experienced growers take into account when
                                                              planning crop rotations.
                D                                                 For Small Valley Farm, the main problem area is the
                                                              east side of fields A and B, which slopes too steeply for
                                                              safe production of row crops (figure 5.2). Field D is flat,
                          240 acres                           fertile bottomland that can support intensive row crop
                                                              production.
                                                                  Choose a few of these field characteristics that you
                                                              think are most critical for planning your rotations, and
                                                              based on them, categorize the fields into a few basic types.
                                    Black Creek               Realize that you will probably need a separate rotation
                                                              plan for each type of field. Consequently, choose the most
                                                              important field characteristics on which to focus. Mesh-
   Figure 5.2 General map of Small Valley Farm.               ing many separate rotations to get your desired crop mix
   Excessive slopes occur east of the dashed line.            each year will become hopelessly complex, particularly
                                                              if you are producing many crops. Therefore, if you have


72 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
many critically different types of fields or if you grow         alternates spring-planted crops with a year of fallow and
many crops and all land is cash-cropped each year, do not        cover crops and then summer-planted crops. Basing the
bother developing a general rotation plan. Instead, skip         rotation plan on planting time can simplify field operations
to step 11. On the other hand, if you grow fewer than eight      by synchronizing them over substantial blocks of land.
types of cash crops (the crop groups discussed in step 4)        However, if your rotation plan is based on crops grouped
and have only one to three types of fields, you will prob-       by planting time, you may need to make additional
ably benefit from development of a general rotation plan.        provisions to ensure that botanically similar crops are
Similarly, if you rest at least a third of your land each year   not grown too closely in the sequence. This could be
without planting cash crops on it, consider developing a         accomplished, for example, by repeating the basic planting
general rotation plan. See figure 5.1 (page 60).                 time sequence with different families in each repetition.
                                                                      The Small Valley farmers decided on the following
Developing a General Rotation Plan                               rotations:
(optional)                                                       • Field type I. Spelt/hay—hay—hay/oat cover crop—
                                                                      corn—soybean—oat/clover/spelt. This is the six-year
9. Divide the farm into field types.                                  rotation they have used previously.
    Based on your map and notes from the previous step,          • Field type II. Spelt/hay—hay—hay/spelt—spelt/
block the farm into field types. All land with a particular           hay—hay—hay/spelt. This is a three-year rotation,
field type should be suitable for growing the same set of             repeated twice in a six-year period. It avoids row crops
crops. Note that if all areas of the farm are reasonably suit-        and spring tillage on the steep land.
able for all crops, you are lucky to have only a single field    • Field type III. Oat/clover—corn—soybean—oat/
type to deal with. Areas of a particular field type do not            clover—corn—soybean. This is an intensive rotation
have to be adjacent, and field types do not have to cover             with row crops two years out of three.
equal areas of the farm (in the Small Valley Farm example             Essentially, the Small Valley farmers moved the row
(table 5.6, page 77), the areas in the three field types were    crops and spring grain from field type II to field type III,
made equal to simplify the illustration).                        leaving only erosion-resistant sod and winter grain crops
    Small Valley Farm has the following field types:             on the erosion-prone land of field type II. Over the course
    I. Field C and the west sides of fields A and B—             of the six-year cycle, the mix of cash crops has not changed
         suitable for all crops.                                 at all. Placing these crop sequences on particular plots of
    II. East side of fields A and B—unsuitable for row           land to achieve the desired crop mix in each year, however,
         crops and spring grains due to excessive slope.         still requires some additional planning.
    III. Field D—particularly good land suitable for
         intensive row crop production.                          Making and Using a Crop Rotation
                                                                 Planning Map
10. Propose reasonable crop rotations for each field type.
    Using your short, 2- or 3-year sequences and other short     11. Draw a crop rotation planning map.
sequences you think might work, develop a preliminary                This map may need to be more detailed than the
rotation for each of the field types on your farm. Make          map you use for organic certification. Begin by noting
the crop rotations in each of the field types have the           the dimensions of each field on the map. In this step you
same number of years (cycle length) in the rotation or an        will subdivide fields into small management units (MUs)
exact multiple of the shortest rotation length. Otherwise,       of approximately equal size across the whole farm. Only
meshing the rotations to achieve your desired crop mix           one crop will be grown on any particular MU at a time,
each year will be difficult.                                     and usually several MUs will be required to grow the full
    Although the Small Valley rotation plan discussed            acreage of a crop in any given season. Crops will move
below focuses on particular crops, many farmers prefer           from one block of MUs to another between years. Dividing
to focus on crop types. These crop types could be                the farm into management units allows accurate record
botanical families or relate to the season when the crop is      keeping and helps you to stay organized when moving
in the ground. For example, the Nordells’ rotation plan,         crops between fields that vary in size, shape, and other
presented in chapter 4’s “Real Fields” chart (pages 49–54),      important characteristics.


                                                                           CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure   73
   Table 5.5 An explanation of data that can be entered in the field conditions worktable (table 5.2, pages 62–63)

Experienced growers have identified the factors listed here as factors they note when planning crop sequences. The table is laid out
to show column title codes and abbreviations that are useful when filling out the Field Conditions Worktable (table 5.2, pages 62–63) in
steps 17 through 19. Management units (MUs) are pieces of land of uniform size, each of which is farmed as a block. The usefulness of
dividing the farm into uniformly sized management units is discussed in step 11.

  Column title                    Explanation
  Field name                      Your name for the field—e.g., SW, upper creek.
  Field type                      Parts of the farm that share a common rotation plan—I, II, III, IV, etc. See optional steps 9–10.
  Mgmt. unit                      Number of this MU. Each unit should have a unique number. Number adjacent units sequentially.

                                  Field history
  Crop 3 summers ago              Names of crops (and cover crops) three summers ago.
  Crop 2 winters ago              Name of cover crop or crop two winters ago.
  Crop 2 summers ago              Names of crops (and cover crops) two summers ago.
  Crop last winter                Name of last winter’s cover crop or crop.
  Crop last summer                Names of last summer’s crops (and cover crops).
  Current winter—crop             Name of the current cover crop or crop.
  Current winter—plant            Planting time of the current cover crop or crop.
  Current winter—harv.            Expected harvest or incorporation time of the current cash crop or cover crop.

                                  Field Characteristics that can be entered in the blank columns of the Field Conditions
                                  Worktable
  Soil series                     Name of the soil series from your county soil survey.
                                  SaL (sandy loam), SiL (silt loam), CL (clay loam), etc. Obtain this from your county soil survey but
  Texture
                                  temper it with your judgment.
  Drainage                        E (excessive—droughty), W (well), MW (moderately well), SP (somewhat poor), P (poor).
  Slope                           Percent slope of the MU. Enter range if it varies.
  Aspect                          Direction the land slopes: N, NE, E, etc. C for complex slopes, F for flat.
  Irrig?                          Is irrigation available? Y (yes), N (no).
  Shaded?                         Is the MU shaded by trees or steep hills? Y (yes), N (no).
                                  Air drainage. G (good), I (intermediate), P (poor). Air drainage affects tendency toward late spring
  Air drain.
                                  and early fall frosts.
                                  E (exposed), I (intermediate), S (sheltered). Exposed fields may be susceptible to wind damage;
  Air circ.
                                  sheltered fields may be more susceptible to spread of disease.
  Access                          G (good—e.g., near farmstead), I (intermediate), P (poor—e.g., the other side of the woodlot).
                                  VV (very visible) , V (visible), H (hidden). You may prefer to put crops that attract customers near the
  Visibility
                                  road, and experiments that may fail where they cannot be seen.
                                  Note issues with neighbors—e.g., may not want to spray next to homes; pollen drift from
  Neighbors
                                  conventional growers.
  Moist. hold. cap.               Moisture holding capacity. G (good), I (intermediate), P (poor).
  Org. matter                     Enter range of recent percent organic matter values.



74 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
   Table 5.5 An explanation of data that can be entered in the field conditions worktable (continued)


 Column title                 Explanation
                               Your judgment of the quality of the organic matter. Is it well decomposed to humus, or is a lot of
  Org. mat. qual.
                               coarse fiber and wood present? G (good), I (intermediate), P (poor).
                               Your judgment of the tilth of the soil. G (good—tilled soil is loose, with little tendency to crust),
  Tilth
                               I (intermediate), P (poor—tilled soil is cloddy, compacted, tends to crust).
                               G (good—soil has good crumb structure), I (intermediate), P (poor—soil is massive and blocky or
  Aggregation
                               loose sand with few crumbs).
  Nut. release                 Ability of soil to release nutrients to the crop. G (good), I (intermediate), P (poor).
  Nut. imbal?                  Note any nutrient imbalances—e.g., poor Ca:Mg or Ca:K ratios.
  Erosion                      Tendency toward erosion if soil is left uncovered. H (high), I (intermediate), L (low).
  Deer pres.                   Deer or other animal pressure. H (high), I (intermediate), L (low).
  Dis. crops                   List crops that in this MU have had a recent history of soilborne diseases.
  Diseases                     Names of the diseases of the crops just listed.
                               Annual weed pressure. H (high—many annual weeds if not controlled), I (intermediate), L (low—
  Ann. weeds
                               little history of annual weed problems).
  Worst ann. spp.              List the worst annual weed species.
                               Perennial weed pressure. H (high—perennial weeds have posed problems recently), I
  Peren. weeds
                               (intermediate), L (low—little history of perennial weed problems).
  Worst peren. spp.            List the worst perennial weed species.




    Figure 5.3 (page 76) shows how Small Valley Farm laid              of the number of years in the longest rotation sequence
out its 40-acre MUs across the farm. Since the farm has a              for any field type. For example, on Small Valley Farm,
total of 720 tillable acres, it has a total of 18 MUs.                 each field type should have six MUs, or some multiple
    Appendix 6 (pages 148–149) provides easy instruc-                  of six, since the longest rotation sequence is six years
tions for making rotation planning maps using Microsoft                (in field type I). They chose to keep things simple and
Excel.                                                                 use six MUs per field type (figure 5.3, page 76). If you
    Consider the following points when determining the                 skipped steps 8 and 9 due to high farm complexity, you
size and arrangement of your management units:                         can ignore this consideration.
• MUs should be no larger than the area planted to your              • If you use permanent beds, each bed should be a
    smallest acreage crop. If some crops that are grown on             separate MU. If fields vary in length, subdivide long
    small acreage (for example, annual herbs) are rotated as           beds at cross alleys as necessary to ensure that the MUs
    a block, the several species could be considered as one            are approximately equal in area.
    “crop” for rotation purposes.                                    • On grain farms and large wholesale vegetable farms,
• Choose an MU size that allows areas of each crop on                  vary the length and width of management strips for
    your Crop Characteristics Worktable to convert to a                your convenience, and keep the MUs large enough so
    whole number of MUs. On Small Valley Farm, since 1                 that you can perform field operations like tillage or
    MU = 40 acres, they thus grow three MUs of each crop               cultivation on a single unit.
    per year.                                                        • Make the map at a scale that allows writing information
• If you did steps 8 and 9 (rotation planning), the                    onto the area representing each MU. If necessary, use
    number of MUs in a field type should be some multiple              separate pages for various fields or groups of fields.


                                                                                 CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure        75
    Now divide the fields into management units on your
map. Note that small variations in the size of MUs due to                                                                     N
                                                                                      SMALL VALLEY FARM
irregularities in field shape are unavoidable but probably
will not matter much since most crops will be grown on            C          A
several to many MUs.
                                                                 1 2         3         4       5     6      7         8
12. Record your crop mix in terms of management units.           I I         I         I    II       II     II        II
    On your Crop Characteristics Worktable, record how
many management units you want to grow of each crop.
You already have the amount of each crop recorded in
acres, square feet, or some other unit, but converting these
                                                                                                                           Pasture
to MUs will simplify thinking about how you sequence
the crops on particular MUs. If you made an error in the
previous step, the conversion of area to MUs may result
in some crops being grown on fractions of an MU. In this
case, adjust your crop mix slightly, so that all crops will be
grown on a round number of MUs.                                                   B

13. Number each management unit.                                                 9         10         11         12
    Put the number of each MU in the upper left corner                            I        I          II         II
of each management unit on the map. Make the numbers
sufficiently large and legible that they will photocopy well.
Blocks of land that you commonly manage together should
be numbered sequentially.

14. Make several copies of the maps.
                                                                              D       13       III
    You will need at least eight copies of the maps, and a
few more may be useful later. Be sure to save the original
                                                                                      14       III
map in a safe place for making future copies. And be sure
to label each map as you complete steps 15–16.                                        15       III

15. Record especially valuable MUs on one copy of the                                 16       III
     map.                                                                             17       III
    You noted the most important field characteristics in a
general way in step 8. Now it is time to characterize each                            18       III
MU in detail. Note MUs that have especially useful prop-
erties on one copy of the map. Favorable properties may
include proximity to the farmstead, access to irrigation if
irrigation is limited, slope or drainage characteristics that
                                                                                                          Black Creek
allow early planting, and many others (see table 5.5, page
74). Note only exceptional properties on the map. Writing
something for each MU would be time consuming and is
not necessary. Use the abbreviations in table 5.5 if you are
cramped for space.
                                                                 Figure 5.3 Map of Small Valley Farm showing loca-
                                                                 tion of management units. Excessive slopes occur east
16. Record problem MUs on another copy of the map.
                                                                 of the dashed line. Management units are numbered
   Label another copy of the map, and note on that copy
                                                                 and field type is indicated by Roman numerals.
management units with problems that restrict the types


76 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
of crops you can grow. Such problems include poor soil               Table 5.7 (page 78) shows the cropping history of Small
drainage, severe animal pressure, shadiness, frost pockets,      Valley Farm.
and slope characteristics that lead to slow warming in the
spring. See table 5.5 (pages 74–75) for a list of characteris-   20. Sort the management units.
tics assembled by experienced growers.                               Cut your completed Field Conditions Worktable into
                                                                 strips to separate the management units. Management units
Filling Out the Field Conditions                                 with similar histories often do not need to be separated.
Worktable                                                        If you did steps 9 and 10, group the strips by field type.
                                                                 Arrange the strips so that, within each field type, (1) units
17. Number MUs on your Field Conditions Worktable.               with similar crop histories are together; and (2) within
    Put the field name and number of each MU on a line in        those groups, adjacent management units are in numerical
the Field Conditions Worktable (your copy of tabl e 5.2,         order. If you skipped steps 9 and 10, arrange the strips
pages 62–63). Number the MUs sequentially. If you did            so that (1) MUs with similar critical field conditions are
steps 9 and 10 above (general rotation planning), fill in        together; (2) within those groups, MUs with similar crop
the column titled “Field type,” also; otherwise, leave this
column blank. See the first three columns of table 5.6 for
an example. (Hint: If you commonly plant several crops              Table 5.6 Example of the field characteristics por-
and cover crops on individual MUs within a single season,           tion of the Field Conditions worktable (table 5.2,
leave a blank line between units so you will have enough            pages 62–63) for Small Valley Farm
room to include them all when you fill in the crops later.)
                                                                  Field     Field     Mgmt.     Erosion         Soil
18. Fill in your map data.                                        name      type      unit      potential       quality
   Copy the information you noted on the maps into the
                                                                   C         I         1         low             good
blank columns of the Field Conditions Worktable. This
puts the map data in a form that allows you to sort manage-        C         I         2         low             good
ment units on the basis of their characteristics. Using your
                                                                   A         I         3         low             good
maps of valuable fields and problem fields, label a blank
column for each different type of characteristic you noted         A         I         4         low             good
(for example, “erosion potential,” “soil quality”; see table       A         II        5         high            fair
5.6). Then record information about each MU in the ap-
propriate box.                                                     A         II        6         high            fair

                                                                   A         II        7         high            fair
19. Record your recent cropping history.
                                                                   A         II        8         high            fair
    Fill out the columns in the Field Conditions Worktable
describing the cropping history for each management unit           B         I         9         low             good
for the past three years. Write the actual year above “Crop        B         I         10        low             good
3 summers ago.” This planning procedure assumes that you
are doing your planning in the winter and thus begins with         B         II        11        high            fair
the current winter’s cover or cash crops. Write in the names       B         II        12        high            fair
of current crops and their planting and expected harvest
                                                                   D         III       13        very low        very good
times. Now work backward from the present to preceding
years as you go from right to left. If more than one cash or       D         III       14        very low        very good
cover crop was grown during a given period, enter both
                                                                   D         III       15        very low        very good
names into the cell in the order they will be grown using
a slash (/) as a separator (for example, spelt/hay). If two        D         III       16        very low        very good
crops were grown on different parts of an MU in some past          D         III       17        very low        very good
year, for the sake of simplicity, just enter the name of the
crop that covered the largest portion of the MU.                   D         III       18        very low        very good



                                                                           CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure    77
histories are together; and (3) within each crop history         defined management units.
group, adjacent management units are in numerical order.             After the Small Valley farmers sorted their MUs, units
    Everyone: For this purpose “similar crop histories”          9 and 10 were grouped with the other flat, ordinary MUs
means similar in how the history affects what crops you          (units 1–4). Similarly, the steep MUs (units 5–8, 11, and
will grow in the future. For example, if one management          12) were grouped together (table 5.8, page 80).
unit had broccoli and another had cauliflower two
summers ago but otherwise their histories do not differ,         Planning Future Crop Sequences
you may decide that they are not sufficiently different to
warrant separating them into different groups for planning  21. Number the management units on the Field Futures
future crop sequences. Use coins or other weights to hold       Worktable.
the strips in place while you sort them. When you are           Number the MUs on the Field Futures Worktable
satisfied with your sorting, tape the strips to a piece of  (your copy of table 5.3, pages 64–65) in the se-
paper with clear tape, so that you have a permanent record  quence in which they appear on your sorted Field Con-
of the cropping history of the farm in terms of your newly  ditions Worktable. Also fill in the field name and, if you
                                                                                          did steps 9 and 10, the zone.
                                                                                          For example, MU 9 appears
                                                                                          on line 5 of both the sorted
   Table 5.7 Cropping history of Small Valley Farm (part of their Field Conditions
   worktable)                                                                             Field Conditions Worktable
                                                                                          and the Field Futures Work-
                                                                                          table for Small Valley (table
 Field    Field   Mgmt.                                                                   5.8, page 80).
 name     type      unit      3 years ago         2 years ago          Last year
                                                                                             22. Plan the next growing
  C        I         1         corn                soybean              oat/clover/spelt
                                                                                                 season.
  C        I         2         corn                soybean              oat/clover/spelt         Look at your completed
  A        I         3         soybean             oat/clover/spelt     spelt/hay            crop worktable (your version
                                                                                             of table 5.1, page 61) and
  A        I         4         soybean             oat/clover/spelt     spelt/hay            note how many management
  A        II        5         soybean             oat/clover/spelt     spelt/hay            units of each crop you plan to
                                                                                             grow. Fill in the names of the
  A        II        6         oat/clover/spelt    spelt/hay            hay2
                                                                                             crops you will grow on each
  A        II        7         oat/clover/spelt    spelt/hay            hay2                 MU next summer. If more
  A        II        8         oat/clover/spelt    spelt/hay            hay2
                                                                                             than one crop will be grown
                                                                                             on an MU, write them all in
  B        I         9         corn                soybean              oat/clover/spelt     the cell in the sequence they
  B        I         10        spelt/hay           hay2                 hay3/oat cc          will be grown (for example,
                                                                                             “lettuce/buckwheat cc/fall
  B        II        11        spelt/hay           hay2                 hay3/oat cc          broccoli”). Place crops in the
  B        II        12        spelt/hay           hay2                 hay3/oat cc          following order, referring to
                                                                                             your field conditions maps as
  D        III       13        hay2                hay3/oat cc          corn
                                                                                             needed:
  D        III       14        hay2                hay3/oat cc          corn                 a) Begin by writing in
  D        III       15        hay2                hay3/oat cc          corn
                                                                                             cash crops that are already
                                                                                             planted but will not be har-
  D        III       16        hay3/oat cc         corn                 soybean              vested until next summer
  D        III       17        hay3/oat cc         corn                 soybean              or later. Examples include
                                                                                             garlic, strawberries, winter
  D        III       18        hay3/oat cc         corn                 soybean
                                                                                             grains, and hay.


78 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
b) Now place high-value crops that require special field          mustard greens) is a way to stay organized while still
   conditions. For example, melons may produce a large            separating succession plantings of a given crop type.
   net income per acre, but you can grow them well on             To be effective, however, the intervening strips must be
   only one field. So place melons or other high-value            wide enough to act as an effective barrier to dispersal
   crops with special needs onto MUs first.                       of diseases and insects. Consult appendix 3 (pages
c) Next, place crops that have the shortest family return         124–137) to see how particular diseases are spread.
   times, as computed in step 6 (but ignore grass-family
   crops). Begin with the most valuable crop in the family         For those developing a general rotation plan (you did
   with the shortest average rotation return time. Work        steps 9 and 10 above); others skip to step 23: Most of the
   through all crops in families (other than grasses) with     considerations discussed above are essentially covered by
   average return times of less than four years.               your general rotation plan. The key for placing crops next
d) Next, place other crops that produce a large net income     season is to begin converting from the previous cropping
   per acre but can be grown almost anywhere.                  history to the general rotation plan. This requires look-
e) Place less profitable and low-acreage crops that require    ing forward more than just one year. Getting each MU on
   special MU characteristics.                                 track requires some imagination and a lot of trial and er-
f) Place any remaining crops.                                  ror (on paper). Remember, however, that once you have
                                                               the desired crop mix within a field type, future crops can
  Points to take into account when placing crops:              follow more or less automatically. If your general rotation
• When possible, use the proven crop sequences you             plan is based on crop categories (for example, early-season
  identified in step 7. Be careful not to repeat crops of      greens, full-season nightshades) rather than specific crops,
  the same family too soon. This is especially important if    place the crop categories on the MUs first. Then go back
  you have noticed symptoms of soilborne disease. If you       through and place the specific crops within each category.
  have noticed such disease in the past, check appendix            Consider the example of Small Valley Farm in table 5.8
  3 (pages 124–137) to see how many years to wait before       (page 80). In field type I last year they planted three man-
  repeating a crop with similar susceptibility. If you have    agement units of oat/clover/spelt. Ultimately, they would
  not noticed soilborne diseases, try to use a minimum         like to get one MU of field type I into each of the six crop-
  separation of at least one year between similar crops,       years of the six-year rotation. The spelt, however, is already
  and remember that a longer separation is a good pre-         planted, and they are loath to plow it under. This results in
  ventative measure. Growing the same crop in close            three MUs of spelt in field type I next spring and none in
  succession may be an acceptable practice if you then         field type II, where they would ultimately like to have it.
  rotate the MU into other crops for many years. Even              In MUs 1, 3, and 10 they simply proceed into the
  then, however, growing at least one cash or cover crop       planned next crop. Instead of overseeding hay into the
  in between will help minimize direct transmission of         spelt in MU 2, they overseed with clover next spring and
  diseases on crop residue (see “Managing Plant Diseas-        then plant oat followed by spelt two years from now. Sim-
  es with Crop Rotation, ” page 32). Note that most of the     ilarly, instead of overseeding hay into the spelt in MU 9
  sample rotations used by experienced farmers shown           they overseed red clover, and then plant corn the following
  in chapter 4 (pages 49–54) have return times for crops       year. To get MU 4 on track, they treat the overseeded hay
  in a family of four years or longer.                         as a cover crop and plant oat followed by spelt next sum-
• Refer to appendix 2 (pages 104–123) as you work to           mer. Thus, by two years from now, they have one of each of
  check for problems and opportunities in the crop se-         the six crop-years on one MU of field type I, and the rota-
  quences you are choosing.                                    tion plan is in place for that field type of the farm.
• If an MU has special characteristics, try to plant it with       Similar slight departures from their desired sequences
  a crop that takes advantage of them, but remember that       are necessary in the other two field types. Most notably,
  that may not be possible every year.                         in field type II they grow oat as a hay crop on MU 11 next
• Separate the locations of early and later plantings of the   year and on MU 12 two years from now to make up for the
  same crop to avoid disease buildup through the season.       shortage of grass-alfalfa hay. Except for the substitution
  Alternating strips of different crop types with similar      of oat hay for their usual grass-alfalfa hay, note that they
  planting and harvest times (for example, lettuce and         grow the desired crop mix in each future year. Note also


                                                                         CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure   79
that they meet their explicit goal of avoiding the same crop     crop multiple times during the season (for example,
immediately in succession. Three years from their planning       succession plantings of lettuce or spring and fall broccoli
exercise, the rotation plan has been implemented for the         crops). See sidebar 5.3 (page 70) for a simple system of
whole farm.                                                      codes for recording planting and harvest times.

23. Check next growing season’s crop mix.                        24. Plan next winter and two growing seasons from now.
   After you have assigned crops to all MUs, add the                 Fill in any cash crops that will be present next winter
number of MUs of each crop. Compare these with the               (for example, garlic, spelt). Do not assign winter cover
number of MUs you intended to grow, as indicated on your         crops yet.
Crop Characteristics Worktable. If the two numbers do not            Fill in cash and cover crops for two summers from
agree, either assign some MUs to other crops or change           now as you did for next summer (see step 22).When mak-
the planned number of units on the Crop Characteristics          ing decisions, always look back over the whole cropping
Worktable.                                                       history of the management unit up to this point, as well
   If you think it will be helpful, enter the planting and       as the special properties of the MU. Refer to appendix 2
harvest times for next summer’s crops. The planting and          (pages 104–123) to check for potential problems and op-
harvest times are most useful when you plant the same            portunities.


   Table 5.8 Recent crop history and future crop sequences for Small Valley Farm (continues on next page)


Field     Field                                                                                             2 years
name      type      MU        3 years ago         2 years ago        Last year           Next year          from now

 A         I         1         corn               soybean             oat/clover/spelt   spelt/hay          hay2

 A         I         2         corn               soybean             oat/clover/spelt   spelt/clover cc    oat/clover/spelt

 B         I         3         soybean            oat/clover/spelt    spelt/hay          hay2               hay3/oat cc

 B         I         4         soybean            oat/clover/spelt    spelt/hay          oat/clover/spelt   spelt/hay

 C         I         9         corn               soybean             oat/clover/spelt   spelt/clover       corn

 C         I         10        spelt/hay          hay2                hay3/oat cc        corn               soybean

 B         II        5         soybean            oat/clover/spelt    spelt/hay          hay2               hay3/spelt

 B         II        6         oat/clover/spelt   spelt/hay           hay2               hay3               hay4/spelt

 B         II        7         oat/clover/spelt   spelt/hay           hay2               hay3/spelt         spelt/hay

 B         II        8         oat/clover/spelt   spelt/hay           hay2               hay3/spelt         spelt/hay

 C         II        11        spelt/hay          hay2                hay3/oat cc        oat hay/hay        hay2

 C         II        12        spelt/hay          hay2                hay3/oat cc        soybean            oat hay/hay

 D         III       13        hay2                hay3/oat cc        corn               soybean            oat/clover cc

 D         III       14        hay2                hay3/oat cc        corn               soybean            oat/clover cc

 D         III       15        hay2                hay3/oat cc        corn               oat/clover cc      corn

 D         III       16        hay3/oat cc         corn               soybean            oat/clover cc      corn

 D         III       17        hay3/oat cc         corn               soybean            corn/ryegrass      soybean

 D         III       18        hay3/oat cc         corn               soybean            corn/ryegrass      soybean



80 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
    Check your crop mix, as in step 23, to be sure that the        Refining Your Plan
field plan provides the correct amount of each crop.
    Now fill in cover crops for next winter that make sense        26. Put your plans on maps.
given the crops that precede and follow them. Consider                Copy the information from the Field Futures Worktable
especially (1) the harvest time of the preceding crop, (2)         onto blank maps. Put the crops for next summer on one
the planting time of the following crop, and (3) the needs         map, the crops for next winter on another, etc., for as many
of the following crop (N demand, ability to incorporate            seasons as you have planned ahead.
cover crop before planting, etc.).
                                                                  27. Take the maps to the field.
25. Plan future years.                                                Take these maps and walk through your fields. For
    Repeat, as in step 23, for each succeeding year. Plan as      each cluster of adjacent MUs, farm the cropping sequence
far ahead as you feel will be useful. Realize that your plans     through in your head. Compare the maps with your feel
may need to change due to weather events and market               for the various management units and how they have
conditions.                                                       performed in the past. Take notes on what seems right and
                                                                  what may not work.
                                                                                        Write down what you could do if
                                                                                    problems arise. This is an important con-
                                                                                    sideration. Think about what will happen
                                                                                    if rain delays timely incorporation of a
                                                                                    cover crop or timely planting of a cash
 3 years             4 years            5 years            6 years                  crop. What will you do if cultivation is
 from now            from now           from now           from now                 delayed and the crop becomes exces-
                                                                                    sively weedy? Consider other potential
  hay3/oat cc         corn               soybean            oat/clover/spelt
                                                                                    problems and whether they may require
  spelt/hay           hay2               hay3/oat cc        corn                    a change in the planned sequence. Make
  corn                soybean            oat/clover/spelt   spelt/hay               notes on potential alternative strategies to
                                                                                    meet circumstances you may encounter.
  hay2               hay3/oat cc        corn                soybean

  soybean            oat/clover/spelt   spelt/hay           hay2                    28. Modify planned sequences.
                                                                                       Return to your office (or kitchen table)
  oat/clover/spelt   spelt/hay          hay2                hay3/oat cc
                                                                                    and lay out your maps and notes. Based
  spelt/hay          hay2               hay3/spelt          spelt/hay               on insights gained from walking the fields,
                                                                                    modify the planned sequences where
  spelt/hay          hay2               hay3/spelt          spelt/hay
                                                                                    necessary on the Field Futures Worktable.
  hay2               hay3/spelt         spelt/hay           hay2

  hay2               hay3/spelt         spelt/hay           hay2                    29. Recheck your crop mix.
                                                                                        When you have a reasonable plan,
  hay3/spelt         spelt/hay          hay2                hay3                    add up the numberof MUs of each crop
  hay2/spelt         spelt/hay          hay2                hay3                    in each year and check this against your
                                                                                    intended production, as indicated on
  corn               soybean            oat/clover cc       corn
                                                                                    the Crop Characteristics Worktable.
  corn               soybean            oat/clover cc       corn                    Make further adjustments on the
  soybean            oat/clover cc      corn                soybean
                                                                                    Crop Characteristics Worktable or the
                                                                                    Field Futures Worktable if necessary.
  soybean            oat/clover cc      corn                soybean                 Remember, however, that year-to-year
  oat/clover cc      corn               soybean             corn                    variation in productivity may swamp out
                                                                                    slight variation in the number of MUs
  oat/clover cc      corn               soybean             corn
                                                                                    grown for major crops.


                                                                             CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure   81
     Table 5.9 Crop characteristics worktable for Summer Acres Vegetable Farm


                            Acres/        MUs/                           Plant           Harvest         Harvested         Cold
    Crop1                   year          year        Family             Time2           Ends2           Part              Tolerance
    Garlic                  0.16          2           Lily               lfall           msum            root              very hardy

    Pea                     0.32          4           Legume             espr            msum            fruit             hardy

    Lettuce 5               0.16          2           Lettuce            espr            esum            leaf              half-hardy

    Lettuce 6               0.16          2           Lettuce            esum            msum            leaf              half-hardy

    Lettuce 7e              0.16          2           Lettuce            msum            lsum            leaf              half-hardy

    Lettuce 7l              0.16          2           Lettuce            msum            efall           leaf              half-hardy

    Lettuce 8               0.16          2           Lettuce            lsum            lfall           leaf              half-hardy

    Potato                  0.32          4           Nightshade         lspr            lsum            root              half-hardy

    Tomato                  0.48          6           Nightshade         lspr            efall           fruit             tender

    Pepper                  0.24          3           Nightshade         lspr            efall           fruit             tender

    Carrot                  0.16          2           Carrot             espr            efall           root              half-hardy

    Kohlrabi                0.08          1           Mustard            espr            msum            leaf              hardy

    Broccoli                0.16          2           Mustard            lspr            lsum            flower bud        hardy

    Summer squash           0.24          3           Cucurbit           esum            efall           fruit             tender

    Winter squash           0.48          6           Cucurbit           lspr            efall           fruit             tender

    Spinach 5               0.16          2           Beet               espr            esum            leaf              hardy

    Spinach 8e              0.16          2           Beet               lsum            efall           leaf              hardy

    Spinach 8l              0.16          2           Beet               lsum            lfall           leaf              hardy

    Beet 5                  0.08          1           Beet               lspr            msum            root              half-hardy

    Beet 7                  0.08          1           Beet               msum            lfall           root              half-hardy

     Total                  4.08          51

1
    The number after the names of some crops refers to the planting month; e and l refer to early and late in the month.
2
    Abbreviations for planting time and the end of harvest are given in Sidebar 5.3 (page 70).


30. Note your contingency plans.                                         Worktable, so that they stay together.
    When you have the Field Futures Worktable adjusted                       Small Valley has multiple possibilities for meeting
the way you want it, add notes indicating your contingency               contingencies. For example, if weather hopelessly delays
plans (see your field notes from step 27). Enter these                   planting of oat, the farmer can substitute corn. Similarly,
either in the margins if they are few or on a separate piece             soybean can be substituted if planting corn is not feasible.
of paper if there are many. If necessary create a separate               If plowing down the hay or planting spelt proves impos-
page to show the contingency plans for a given group of                  sible, the hay can be left for an extra year. Each of these
MUs. Staple the contingency plans to the Field Futures                   essentially moves the rotation ahead one year, which is



82 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                     Early                                                           Far
                             1               2                                              39               40
                             3               4                                              41               42
                             5               6                  Pasture                     43               44
           d
         Ro                  7               8                                              45               46
            a
                             9              10                                              47               48
                                                                                            49               50



    Long
           11              12              13              14              15               16               17
           18              19              20              21              22               23               24
           25              26              27              28              29               30               31
           32              33              34              35              36               37               38



  Figure 5.4 Map of Summer Acres Farm showing division into management units.




fairly easy to compensate for in the future. Obviously, all
of these circumstances result in a crop mix that is differ-
                                                                A More Complex Example:
ent from the original plan, but that is necessarily the case    Summer Acres Vegetable
when a crop cannot be planted.
    The Small Valley example also illustrates potential for
                                                                Farm
adjusting the crop mix to meet market demand without                Table 5.9 shows the Crop Characteristics Worktable
significant modification of the basic rotation plan. For        for Summer Acres Farm, and figure 5.4 shows a map of
example, a different spring grain could be substituted for      the farm divided into management units. Table 5.10 (pag-
oat, dry bean or snap bean for soybean, or a heavy-feeding      es 84–88) gives completed Field Conditions and
vegetable crop like cabbage or pumpkin for corn.                Field Futures Worktables. The example is fictitious, but it
                                                                is based on a sample crop mix and planting and harvest
31. Make your crop placement maps match your revised            times provided by a New York vegetable grower.
    Field Futures Worktable.                                        This sample farm is sufficiently land limited to con-
    Finally, modify the maps for each year so that they         strain the cropping sequences but not so land limited as
match the Field Futures Worktable. Make several copies          to force a serious departure from good rotation practices.
of these maps so that you can take them into the field          The farmers grow 51 management units of cash crops on
when you are preparing seedbeds and planting while still        50 MUs of land, so some double cropping is necessary.
retaining a clean copy for your records.                            Because of the land area constraint, the farmers’ pri-
                                                                mary rotation goal is to maximize the time between crops
                                                                in the same or similar families. Within this constraint,
   Congratulations! You have created a complete cropping        they choose sequences that supply cover crop nitrogen
plan for your farm. Be prepared to modify it as you gain        whenever possible, especially before heavy-feeding crops.
knowledge and experience. Continue to grow with your            The farmers attempt to keep the ground covered with a
farm.                                                           cash or cover crop throughout the year to prevent erosion
                                                                                                     (continued on page 89)



                                                                          CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure   83
   Table 5.10 Field history and future for Summer Acres Farm

 Field   Mgmt
 Name    Unit       Crop 3 Summers Ago           Crop 2 Winters Ago   Crop 2 Summers Ago                  Crop Last Winter
 Early   1          Lettuce5/beet7               Bare                 Carrot                              Oat
 Early   2          Lettuce5/cowpea              Oat                  Carrot                              Oat
 Early   3          Pea/sorgh                    Oat                  Kohlrabi/cowpeaw                    Oat & HV
 Early   4          Pea/sorgh                    Oat                  Beet5/buckwheat                     Oat & HV
 Early   5          Pea/sorgh                    Oat                  Spinach5/cowpea                     Oat & HV
 Early   6          Pea/sorgh                    Oat                  Spinach5/cowpea                     Oat
 Early   7          Carrot                       Oat                  Pea/sorgh                           Oat
 Early   8          Carrot                       Oat                  Pea/sorgh                           Oat
 Early   9          Kohlrabi/buckwheat           Oat                  Pea/sorgh                           Oat
 Early   10         Beet5/buckwheat              Oat                  Pea/sorgh                           Oat
 Long    11         Pepper                       Oat                  Summer squash                       Oat
 Long    12         Pepper                       Oat                  Summer squash                       Oat
 Long    13         Pepper                       Oat                  Summer squash                       Oat
 Long    14         Spinach5/cowpea              Garlic               Garlic/field pea-oat                Oat
 Long    15         Spinach5/cowpea              Garlic               Garlic/field pea-oat                Oat
 Long    16         Lettuce6/fallow/spinach8e    Oat                  Oat-red clover                      Red clover
 Long    17         Lettuce6/fallow/spinach8e    Oat                  Oat-red clover                      Red clover
 Long    18         Lettuce7e/fallow/spinach8l   Bare                 Oat-red clover                      Red clover
 Long    19         Tomato                       Rye                  Lettuce6/fallow/spinach8e           Rye
 Long    20         Tomato                       Rye                  Lettuce6/fallow/spinach8e           Rye
 Long    21         Tomato                       Oat                  Broccoli/fallow/lettuce8            Bare/field pea
 Long    22         Tomato                       Oat                  Broccoli/fallow/lettuce8            Bare
 Long    23         Tomato                       Rye                  Fallow/lettuce7e/fallow/spinach8l   Bare
 Long    24         Tomato                       Rye                  Fallow/lettuce7e/fallow/spinach8l   Bare
 Long    25         Lettuce7e/fallow/spinach8l   Bare                 Oat-red clover                      Red clover
 Long    26         Winter squash                Oat                  Tomato                              Rye
 Long    27         Winter squash                Oat                  Tomato                              Rye
 Long    28         Winter squash                Oat                  Tomato                              Rye
 Long    29         Winter squash                Oat                  Tomato                              Rye
 Long    30         Winter squash                Oat                  Tomato                              Rye
 Long    31         Winter squash                Oat                  Tomato                              Rye
 Long    32         Summer squash                Oat                  Pepper                              Rye
 Long    33         Summer squash                Oat                  Pepper                              Rye
 Long    34         Summer squash                Oat                  Pepper                              Rye
 Long    35         Potato                       Oat & HV             Lettuce5/fallow                     Rye & HV
 Long    36         Potato                       Oat & HV             Lettuce5/fallow                     Rye & HV
 Long    37         Potato                       Oat & HV             Sorgh/lettuce7l                     Bare
 Long    38         Potato                       Oat & HV             Sorgh/lettuce7l                     Bare
 Far     39         Broccoli/fallow/lettuce8     Bare                 Oat/beet7                           Rye
 Far     40         Broccoli/fallow/lettuce8     Bare                 Oat-red clover                      Red clover
 Far     41         Lettuce7l-interseeded HV     HV                   Potato/oat                          Garlic
 Far     42         Lettuce7l-interseeded HV     HV                   Potato/oat                          Garlic
 Far     43         Garlic/fallow                Oat & HV             Potato                              Oat
 Far     44         Garlic/fallow                Oat & HV             Potato                              Oat
 Far     45         Oat-red clover               Red clover           Winter squash                       Oat
 Far     46         Oat-red clover               Red clover           Winter squash                       Oat
 Far     47         Oat-red clover               Red clover           Winter squash                       Oat
 Far     48         Oat-red clover               Red clover           Winter squash                       Oat
 Far     49         Oat-red clover               Red clover           Winter squash                       Oat
 Far     50         Oat-red clover               Red clover           Winter squash                       Oat


84 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
  Table 5.10 Field history and future for Summer Acres Farm (continued)

                                                Current Winter
Field Mgmt
Name Unit        Crop Last Summer               Crop             Plant    Harv.
Early   1        Pea/sorgh                      Oat              efall    espr
Early   2        Pea/sorgh                      Oat              efall    espr
Early   3        Pepper                         Oat              efall    espr
Early   4        Pepper                         Oat              efall    espr
Early   5        Pepper                         Oat              efall    espr
Early   6        Kohlrabi/buckwheat             Oat              efall    espr
Early   7        Spinach5/cowpea                Oat              efall    espr
Early   8        Spinach5/cowpea                Oat              efall    espr
Early   9        Carrot                         Oat              efall    espr
Early   10       Carrot                         Oat & HV         lsum     lspr
Long    11       Pea/sorgh                      Rye              efall    lspr
Long    12       Pea/sorgh                      Rye              efall    lspr
Long    13       Fallow/spinach8l               Rye              efall    lspr
Long    14       Oat-red clover                 Red clover       —        lspr
Long    15       Oat-red clover                 Red clover       —        lspr
Long    16       Potato                         Rye & HV         lsum     lspr
Long    17       Potato                         Rye & HV         lsum     lspr
Long    18       Potato                         Rye & HV         lsum     espr
Long    19       Summer squash                  Oat              efall    espr
Long    20       Summer squash                  Oat              efall    espr
Long    21       Summer squash                  Oat              efall    espr
Long    22       Lettuce7e                      Rye & HV         lsum     lspr
Long    23       Oat-red clover                 Red clover       —        lspr
Long    24       Oat-red clover                 Red clover       —        lspr
Long    25       Potato                         Oat & HV         lsum     lspr
Long    26       Lettuce6/fallow/spinach8e      Garlic           lfall    —
Long    27       Lettuce6/fallow/spinach8e      Garlic           lfall    —
Long    28       Fallow/spinach8l               Bare             —        —
Long    29       Broccoli/lettuce8              Bare             —        —
Long    30       Broccoli/lettuce8              Bare             —        —
Long    31       Lettuce7e                      Oat & HV         efall    esum
Long    32       Cowpea/lettuce7l               Rye              efall    lspr
Long    33       Cowpea/lettuce7l               Rye              efall    lspr
Long    34       Beet5/buckwheat                Rye              efall    lspr
Long    35       Winter squash                  Oat              efall    espr
Long    36       Winter squash                  Oat              efall    espr
Long    37       Winter squash                  Oat              efall    espr
Long    38       Winter squash                  Oat              efall    espr
Far     39       Winter squash                  Oat              efall    espr
Far     40       Winter squash                  Oat              efall    espr
Far     41       Garlic/field pea-oat           CC residue       —        —
Far     42       Garlic/field pea-oat           CC residue       —        —
Far     43       Lettuce5/fallow/cowpea         CC residue       —        —
Far     44       Lettuce5/beet7                 Rye              efall    espr
Far     45       Tomato                         Rye              efall    lspr
Far     46       Tomato                         Rye              efall    lspr
Far     47       Tomato                         Rye              efall    lspr
Far     48       Tomato                         Rye              efall    lspr
Far     49       Tomato                         Rye              efall    esum
Far     50       Tomato                         Rye              efall    esum


                                                                    CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure   85
   Table 5.10 Field history and future for Summer Acres Farm (continued)

                   Next Summer                                                            Next Winter
 Field Mgmt
 Name Unit         Crop                                Plant            Harv.             Crop          Plant   Harv.
 Early   1         Spinach5/cowpea                     espr/esum        esum/efall        Oat           efall   espr
 Early   2         Spinach5/cowpea                     espr/esum        esum/efall        Oat           efall   espr
 Early   3         Pea/sorgh                           espr/msum        msum/efall        Oat           efall   espr
 Early   4         Pea/sorgh                           espr/msum        msum/efall        Oat           efall   espr
 Early   5         Pea/sorgh                           espr/msum        msum/efall        Oat           efall   espr
 Early   6         Pea/sorgh                           espr/msum        msum/efall        Oat           efall   espr
 Early   7         Carrot                              espr             efall             Oat           efall   espr
 Early   8         Carrot                              espr             efall             Oat           efall   espr
 Early   9         Kohlrabi/buckwheat                  espr/msum        msum/efall        Oat           efall   espr
 Early   10        Beet5/buckwheat                     lspr/msum        msum/lsum         Oat           efall   espr
 Long    11        Cowpea/Lettuce7l                    esum/msum        msum/efall        Rye           efall   lspr
 Long    12        Potato                              lspr             lsum              Rye & HV      lsum    esum
 Long    13        Potato                              lspr             lsum              Rye & HV      lsum    esum
 Long    14        Potato                              lspr             lsum              Rye & HV      lsum    esum
 Long    15        Potato                              lspr             lsum              Rye & HV      lsum    lspr
 Long    16        Cowpea/lettuce8                     esum/lsum        lsum/lfall        Bare          —       —
 Long    17        Cowpea/lettuce8                     esum/lsum        lsum/lfall        Bare          —       —
 Long    18        Winter squash                       lspr             efall             Rye           lfall   lspr
 Long    19        Pepper                              lspr             efall             Oat & HV      efall   lspr
 Long    20        Pepper                              lspr             efall             Oat & HV      efall   lspr
 Long    21        Pepper                              lspr             efall             Rye           efall   lspr
 Long    22        Summer squash                       esum             efall             Oat & HV      efall   espr
 Long    23        Summer squash                       esum             efall             Oat & HV      efall   lspr
 Long    24        Summer squash                       esum             efall             Oat & HV      efall   lspr
 Long    25        Winter squash                       lspr             efall             Rye           lfall   lspr
 Long    26        Garlic/field pea&oat                —/lsum           msum              CC residue
 Long    27        Garlic/field pea&oat                —/lsum           msum              CC residue
 Long    28        Field pea/buckwheat/spinach8e       espr/msum/lsum   esum/lsum/efall   Rye           efall   lspr
 Long    29        Field pea/buckwheat/spinach8e       espr/msum/lsum   esum/lsum/efall   Rye           efall   lspr
 Long    30        Oat-red clover                      espr             mow esum          Red clover            lspr
 Long    31        Fallow/Beet7                        msum             lfall             Rye           efall   lspr
 Long    32        Broccoli                            lspr             lsum              Oat & HV      lsum    lspr
 Long    33        Broccoli                            lspr             lsum              Oat & HV      lsum    lspr
 Long    34        Cowpea/lettuce7l                    esum/msum        msum/efall        Rye           efall   lspr
 Long    35        Tomato                              lspr             efall             Rye & HV      efall   esum
 Long    36        Tomato                              lspr             efall             Rye & HV      efall   esum
 Long    37        Tomato                              lspr             efall             Rye & HV      efall   esum
 Long    38        Tomato                              lspr             efall             Rye & HV      efall   esum
 Far     39        Tomato&Lettuce5                     lspr             efall             Rye           efall   espr
 Far     40        Tomato&Lettuce5                     lspr             efall             Rye & HV      efall   esum
 Far     41        Winter squash                       lspr             efall             Rye           efall   espr
 Far     42        Winter squash                       lspr             efall             Rye           efall   espr
 Far     43        Winter squash                       lspr             efall             Rye           efall   espr
 Far     44        Winter squash                       lspr             efall             Rye           efall   espr
 Far     45        Lettuce6/cowpea&oat                 esum/msum        msum              CC residue    —       —
 Far     46        Lettuce6/cowpea&oat                 esum/msum        msum              CC residue    —       —
 Far     47        Cowpea/spinach8l                    esum/lsum        lsum/lfall        Bare          —       —
 Far     48        Cowpea/spinach8l                    esum/lsum        lsum/lfall        Bare          —       —
 Far     49        Fallow/Lettuce7e                    msum             lsum              Garlic        lfall   —
 Far     50        Fallow/Lettuce7e                    msum             lsum              Garlic        lfall   —


86 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
  Table 5.10 Field history and future for Summer Acres Farm (continued)


                 Two Summers from Now                                             Two Winters from Now
Field Mgmt
Name Unit        Crop                           Plant            Harv.            Crop            Plant     Harv.
Early   1        Kohlrabi/buckwheat             espr/msum        msum/lsum        Oat             efall     espr
Early   2        Pepper                         lspr             efall            Oat             efall     espr
Early   3        Spinach5/cowpea                espr/esum        esum/efall       Oat             efall     espr
Early   4        Spinach5/cowpea                espr/esum        esum/efall       Oat             efall     espr
Early   5        Carrot                         espr             efall            Oat             efall     espr
Early   6        Carrot                         espr             efall            Oat             efall     espr
Early   7        Pea/fallow                     espr             msum             Oat & HV        lsum      espr
Early   8        Pea/fallow                     espr             msum             Oat & HV        lsum      espr
Early   9        Pea/fallow                     espr             msum             Oat & HV        lsum      espr
Early   10       Pea/fallow                     espr             msum             Oat             efall     espr
Long    11       Pepper                         lspr             efall            Oat             efall     espr
Long    12       Lettuce6/buckwheat             esum/msum        msum/lsum        Oat             efall     espr
Long    13       Lettuce6/buckwheat             esum/msum        msum/lsum        Oat             efall     lspr
Long    14       Cowpea/spinach8l               esum/lsum        lsum/lfall       Bare            efall     lspr
Long    15       Summer squash                  esum             efall            Rye             efall     lspr
Long    16       Summer squash                  esum             efall            Rye             efall     lspr
Long    17       Summer squash                  esum             efall            Rye             efall     lspr
Long    18       Cowpea/lettuce8                esum/lsum        lsum/lfall       Bare            —         —
Long    19       Broccoli                       lspr             lsum             Oat & HV        lsum      espr
Long    20       Broccoli                       lspr             lsum             Oat & HV        lsum      espr
Long    21       Cowpea/spinach8l               esum/lsum        lsum/lfall       Bare            —         —
Long    22       Pepper                         lspr             efall            Bare            —         —
Long    23       Potato                         lspr             lsum             Rye             efall     lspr
Long    24       Potato                         lspr             lsum             Rye             efall     lspr
Long    25       Cowpea/lettuce8                esum/lsum        lsum/lfall       Bare            —         —
Long    26       Winter squash                  lspr             efall            Rye             efall     lspr
Long    27       Winter squash                  lspr             efall            Rye             efall     lspr
Long    28       Winter squash                  lspr             efall            Rye             efall     lspr
Long    29       Winter squash                  lspr             efall            Rye             efall     lspr
Long    30       Potato                         lspr             lsum             Rye & HV        lsum      lspr
Long    31       Potato                         lspr             lsum             Rye & HV        lsum      lspr
Long    32       Beet5/buckwheat                lspr/msum        msum/lsum        Rye & HV        lsum      lspr
Long    33       Tomato                         lspr             efall            Rye             efall     lspr
Long    34       Tomato                         lspr             efall            Rye             efall     lspr
Long    35       Fallow/Buckwheat/spinach8e     msum/lsum        lsum/efall       Rye & HV        lsum      lspr
Long    36       Fallow/Buckwheat/spinach8e     msum/lsum        lsum/efall       Bare            —         —
Long    37       Fallow/Lettuce7e               msum             lsum             Rye             lsum      esum
Long    38       Fallow/Lettuce7e               msum             lsum             Rye             lsum      esum
Far     39       Oat-red clover                 espr             mow esum         Garlic          lfall     —
Far     40       Fallow/beet7                   msum             lfall            Garlic          lfall     —
Far     41       Tomato&Lettuce5                lspr             esum&efall       Rye             efall     lspr
Far     42       Tomato&Lettuce5                lspr             esum&efall       Rye             efall     lspr
Far     43       Tomato                         lspr             efall            Rye             efall     lspr
Far     44       Tomato                         lspr             efall            Rye             efall     lspr
Far     45       Winter squash                  lspr             efall            Rye             efall     espr
Far     46       Winter squash                  lspr             efall            Rye             efall     espr
Far     47       Cowpea/lettuce7l               esum/msum        msum/efall       Rye             efall     espr
Far     48       Cowpea/lettuce7l               esum/msum        msum/efall       Rye             efall     espr
Far     49       Garlic/field pea&oat           —/lsum           msum             CC residue      —         —
Far     50       Garlic/field pea&oat           —/lsum           msum             CC residue      —         —

                                                                   CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure   87
   Table 5.10 Field history and future for Summer Acres Farm (continued)

                    Three Summers from Now
 Field Mgmt
 Name Unit          Crop                               Plant       Harv.
 Early   1          Pea/sorgh                          espr/msum   msum/efall
 Early   2          Pea/sorgh                          espr/msum   msum/efall
 Early   3          Carrot                             espr        efall
 Early   4          Carrot                             espr        efall
 Early   5          Tomato & spinach5                  lspr        esum&efall
 Early   6          Tomato&spinach5                    lspr        esum&efall
 Early   7          Pepper                             lspr        efall
 Early   8          Pepper                             lspr        efall
 Early   9          Pepper                             lspr        efall
 Early   10         Kohlrabi/cowpea                    espr/msum   msum/lsum
 Long    11         Pea/sorgh                          espr/msum   msum/efall
 Long    12         Pea/sorgh                          espr/msum   esum/lsum
 Long    13         Winter squash                      lspr        efall
 Long    14         Winter squash                      lspr        efall
 Long    15         Beet5/buckwheat                    lspr/msum   msum/lsum
 Long    16         Tomato                             lspr        efall
 Long    17         Tomato                             lspr        efall
 Long    18         Tomato                             lspr        efall
 Long    19         Lettuce5/cowpea                    espr/esum   esum/lsum
 Long    20         Lettuce5/cowpea                    espr/esum   esum/lsum
 Long    21         Field pea/lettuce7e                espr/msum   esum/lsum
 Long    22         Field pea/lettuce7e                espr/msum   esum/lsum
 Long    23         Cowpea/lettuce8                    esum/lsum   lsum/lfall
 Long    24         Cowpea/lettuce8                    esum/lsum   lsum/lfall
 Long    25         Field pea/beet7                    espr/msum   esum/lfall
 Long    26         Potato                             lspr        lsum
 Long    27         Potato                             lspr        lsum
 Long    28         Potato                             lspr        lsum
 Long    29         Potato                             lspr        lsum
 Long    30         Lettuce6/cowpea                    esum/msum   msum/efall
 Long    31         Lettuce6/cowpea                    esum/msum   msum/efall
 Long    32         Winter squash                      lspr        efall
 Long    33         Winter squash                      lspr        efall        Abbreviations:
 Long    34         Winter squash                      lspr        efall
 Long    35         Winter squash                      lspr        efall        Plant          Planting time
 Long    36         Oat-red clover                     espr        mow esum     Harv           End of harvest,
 Long    37         Fallow/Buckwheat/spinach8e         msum/lsum   lsum/efall                  or for cover
 Long    38         Fallow/Buckwheat/spinach8e         msum/lsum   lsum/efall                  crops, the time of
 Far     39         Garlic/field pea&oat               —/lsum      msum                        incorporation
 Far     40         Garlic/field pea&oat               —/lsum      msum
                                                                                Sorgh          Sorghum-sudan
 Far     41         Cowpea/spinach8l                   esum/lsum   lsum/lfall                  grass hybrid
 Far     42         Cowpea/spinach8l                   esum/lsum   lsum/lfall
 Far     43         Cowpea/lettuce7l                   esum/msum   msum/efall   HV             Hairy vetch
 Far     44         Cowpea/lettuce7l                   esum/msum   msum/efall   CC residue     Winter-killed
 Far     45         Broccoli                           lspr        lsum                        cover crop residue
 Far     46         Broccoli                           lspr        lsum
 Far     47         Tomato                             lspr        efall        Abbreviations for planting and
 Far     48         Summer squash                      esum        efall        harvest times are given in sidebar
 Far     49         Summer squash                      esum        efall        5.3 (page 70).
 Far     50         Summer squash                      esum        efall

88 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                                                    early lettuce or spinach with tomato (see chapter 7, pag-
                                                                    es 95–100). The lettuce or spinach is planted at the same
                                                                    time as the tomato in an adjacent row on the same bed and
             “The farmers attempt to keep                           is harvested in early summer before the tomatoes crowd
                                                                    it. Although double-cropping and intercropping allow in-
                 the ground covered with a                          tensive use of the land, they also mean that more different
             cash or cover crop throughout                          crop families are grown within a given number of years on
               the year to prevent erosion                          those MUs. This can increase the difficulty of separating
                                                                    families in time.
                and improve soil quality...”                             The only MUs with special properties are in the field
                                                                    called “Early.” That field is well drained and has a south-
                                                                    facing slope that warms early in the spring. Consequently,
                                                                    the farmers attempt to grow their earliest crops on this
                                                                    field whenever possible. These crops include pea, carrot,
and improve soil quality, even when the opportunity for             kohlrabi, and early plantings of lettuce and spinach. Since
biomass production by a cover crop is limited. The excep-           kohlrabi requires only one MU, whereas the other early
tion is that they include a one-month fallow period in late         crops use two or four MUs, the farmers sometimes use the
spring or early summer for weed control whenever this is            first planting of beet (beet5 in tables 5.9, page 82 and 5.10,
convenient.                                                         pages 84–88), which also requires only one MU, as a “fill-in”
    Mostly, the Summer Acres farmers manage to plant                crop to balance the rotation plan. When possible, they
a given crop in adjacent MUs. However, since they grow              also like to grow peppers on the field, since peppers are
most crops in even numbers of MUs, the configuration of             a high-value crop that takes advantage of the warm tem-
the “Long” field in figure 5.4 (page 83), with its strips of sev-   peratures provided by the field’s southerly aspect.
en MUs, poses a problem. If they cannot manage to plant                  The rotation on this field is complicated, however, by
the same crop in a long strip, they try to plant pairs of MUs       the need to grow four MUs of peas and the use of cowpea
that are side by side. This reduces time spent planting and         and hairy vetch cover crops (close relatives of peas) as ni-
managing the crop. Pepper, tomato, summer squash, and               trogen sources for the other crops. To minimize problems,
winter squash are less bothersome to have in multiple lo-           they decide to plant peas on a given MU only one year out
cations since the farmers grow several varieties of each of         of three, and to avoid preceding them with a cowpea cover
these crops. To the extent possible, they attempt to sepa-          crop during summer the year before. Since nitrogen-fixing
rate successive plantings of lettuce and spinach with one           cover crops are limited by these decisions, they also de-
or more MUs of other crops. When successive plantings               cide to use a purchased amendment, if necessary, to sup-
are forced onto adjacent MUs by other considerations,               ply N needs. To meet the first of these decisions, in some
they try to provide a time lag within the season, so that           years they plant two MUs of peas on MU 11 and 12 of the
insect pests and diseases cannot easily spread from one             field Long. Even with their precautions, the frequency of
planting to the next.                                               peas and pea relatives may eventually lead to disease prob-
    Before the planning process, the growers often double-          lems for this crop.
cropped short-season crops (for example, an early lettuce                Many of the early-season crops grown on field Early
planting with a late spinach planting). This allowed them           are harvested in time for a late planting of lettuce, spinach,
to produce 51 MUs of crops on 50 MUs of land. It also al-           or beet. Lettuce, however, shares diseases with peas (see
lowed them to plant a soil-building full-season cover crop          appendix 2, pages 104–123), which is the crop most de-
of oat (mowed in June) and red clover on a few MUs each             pendent on field Early. Similarly, since the farmers want to
year. However, it made including shorter-season legume              grow early-season crops of spinach and beet on field Early,
cover crops like cowpea and field pea difficult on an even          if late-season plantings of these same crops are grown af-
greater number of MUs, thereby requiring substantial use            ter peas, or kohlrabi, adequately long lags between beet
of compost to meet N needs. Consequently, this practice             family crops would be difficult to obtain. Consequently,
was discontinued. In order to continue to grow more MUs             the spring cash crops on field Early are followed by sum-
of crops than they have land, they began intercropping              mer cover crops.


                                                                              CHAPTER 5 | A Crop Rotation Planning Procedure   89
     The principal limiting factor on the remaining 40 MUs    if it is planted in a block of adjacent MUs. Other crops
in fields Long and Far relate to the need to grow 13 MUs of   are then filled in wherever they can fit given the goals
species in the nightshade family (tomato, potato, and pep-    discussed above.
pers). The farmers have to juggle their crops carefully to         With the exception of the nightshades, which are prob-
avoid growing a nightshade crop more often than one year      ably planted too frequently, the farmers in this example
in three (40/13 ≈ 3). A longer interval between night-        manage a reasonable separation in time for most families
shade crops is desirable (see appendix 3, pages 124–137),     on most MUs in most years. Accomplishing this, however,
and they sometimes manage this on some MUs by grow-           requires considerable juggling of crop placement: Regular
ing peppers in field Early. To minimize the problem of        repetition of particular crop sequences is largely impos-
finding locations for nightshades that maximize return        sible, and development of a general crop rotation plan
times, they begin the placement process for fields Long       would probably require a shift in the crop mix. Increasing
and Far by locating these crops first.                        the land base could simplify the rotation and avoid the
     The farmers then proceed to place the winter and         problem of too many MUs of nightshade crops. In addi-
summer squashes. Squash also occupies a large percentage      tion, increased land would allow greater use of legumes to
of fields Long and Far, and therefore providing adequate      supply nitrogen for heavy-feeding crops and allow more
breaks between squash crops is difficult. In addition, they   convenient placement of crops on the farm.
grow six MUs of winter squash, and management is easier




90 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                                                6
                CROP ROTATION DURING THE
              TRANSITION FROM CONVENTIONAL
                 TO ORGANIC AGRICULTURE
                                           Charles L. Mohler



T        he primary purpose of this manual is to help or-
         ganic farmers plan crop rotations on land that is
         already being farmed organically. Nevertheless,
a brief discussion of how to sequence crops during the
transition from conventional to organic management may
                                                                        “Old hay fields and pastures
                                                                        are excellent habitats for
be useful for beginning organic farmers and those who                   establishment of perennial
are adding new land to their farms. Organic farms in the
northeastern US usually begin either with land that has                 weed species.”
been actively farmed using conventional practices or with
land that has been semi-fallow for several years (for ex-
ample, an old hay field). In both cases, soil improvement
and weed management are usually large challenges.                   abundant, consider choosing a different field or using con-
                                                                    ventional methods to get the weed under control before
                                                                    attempting the transition. If taking an initial weed survey
Transition from Old Sod to                                          is not practical, it will be safest to assume that perennial
                                                                    weeds pose a substantial problem. Reducing weed numbers
Vegetable Production                                                to manageable levels at the outset will pay lasting dividends
    Many small organic vegetable farms in the northeastern          in reduced labor over the coming years. Consequently, a full
US begin on land that has been a hay field or pasture for           growing season of cover crops and fallow periods is often
several years. Often the previous manager applied no                a good investment when converting old sod to vegetable
fertilizers or pesticides for several years, and thus the           production (see sidebar 6.1, page 92). If perennials show up
land can be quickly certified as organic. The long period           in the fall cover crop after the fallow, a second year of fal-
in sod will have improved soil physical quality, but export         low and cover crops may be necessary.
of several tons of hay per acre over several years may have             If a full year of summer fallow and cover crops to con-
depleted soil nutrients.                                            trol weeds and improve soil quality is not practical, work-
    Old hay fields and pastures are excellent habitats for          ing a summer fallow period into the first year’s cropping
establishment of perennial weed species. Also, some for-            sequence may help get the weeds under control. For exam-
age grasses like smooth brome can be challenging weeds              ple, a fallow can be worked in after a spring lettuce crop or
in organic vegetable fields. At the start, making a system-         before fall broccoli. However, avoid leaving the soil bare in
atic assessment of the plant species present and mapping            the spring or mid to late fall, when conditions may prevent
potential weed problems may be worthwhile. Weeds of the             working the soil for long periods, as this will allow weed
Northeast is a useful guide for weed identification (116).          growth and nutrient leaching.
Taking an initial survey will help you avoid spreading a                Whether or not the transition process begins with a full
few patches of weeds like johnsongrass or bindweed all              season of fallow and cover crops, the first cash crop after a
over the field during tillage. If any bad perennial weeds are       sod should be transplanted, not direct seeded. In general,


                                      CHAPTER 6 | Crop Rotation during the Transition from Conventional to Organic Agriculture   91
                                                             transplants compete better with weeds because they be-
                                                             gin larger, and they can be cultivated or hoed sooner after
                                                             planting. Also, unless mulch is used, avoid widely spread-
                      Sidebar 6.1                            ing vine crops like winter squash or pumpkins in the first
                                                             two years after sod, because these become impossible to
         Summer Fallow for Weed
                                                             weed late in their growth cycle.
           Management during
                                                                 In general, working a lot of cover crops into the rota-
         Transition from Sod to                              tion during the first few years of transition is advisable to
               Vegetables                                    build soil physical quality, increase nutrient storage, and
     If possible, break the sod in the fall so that it can   compete with weeds. Soil that has been built up in physical
     decompose over the winter. Use moderately               quality and nutrient storage over several years will often
     deep tillage (for example, 8 inches) to disrupt         support multiple vegetable crops within a single growing
     root systems. Then level the field and sow a            season. During transition, however, multiple cropping may
     winter cover crop like rye. The cover crop will         result in low yields and poor-quality produce, whereas
     capture nutrients that could otherwise be lost by       investing in soil development and weed control through
     leaching and will protect the soil from erosion         cover cropping and mulching will provide a basis for long-
     and puddling.                                           term prosperity.
     In the spring, mow the cover crop once or twice
     to prevent seed production and prevent stems
     from becoming too long and stringy to incorpo-          Transition from Conventional
     rate. Incorporate the cover crop in early summer.       Cropping on a Farm with
     Cultivate the soil thoroughly but shallowly at
     about three-week intervals through the hot part         Forages
     of the growing season. This causes most peren-
                                                                 When the land has been actively farmed by conven-
     nial weeds to repeatedly sprout, without allow-
                                                             tional means, often soil organic matter and soil tilth are
     ing them time to replenish food reserves in their
                                                             low. If the land has been in field crops, the dominant weeds
     roots and rhizomes. It will also flush out and kill
                                                             will likely be full-season, spring-germinating annuals like
     a lot of weed seeds. A spring tooth harrow is ideal
                                                             lambsquarters, pigweed, and foxtail. No-till farmed land
     for the task because it brings roots to the surface,
                                                             may have a lot of perennial weeds, as well.
     where they will dry out and die. Avoid repeat-
                                                                 If the farm has a use for forages, beginning the transi-
     edly rototilling the soil, as this will damage soil
                                                             tion with a sod crop like alfalfa or a mixed grass–legume
     structure. In the late summer or fall, again plant a
                                                             hay has multiple advantages. A few years in sod will build
     cover crop to restore soil organic matter lost dur-
                                                             soil structure and organic matter better than any alterna-
     ing the fallowing and to protect the soil over the
                                                             tive crop will (68). Moreover, annual weeds do not get a
     winter. A cover crop that will winter-kill is best
                                                             chance to go to seed in a mowed hay field, so the density
     before early-planted crops like pea and early let-
                                                             of their seeds in the soil will decline by natural mortality.
     tuce. Winter-hardy cover crops are best before
                                                             However, heavy weed seed production may occur during
     summer-planted crops like tomatoes.
                                                             the establishment year of the sod crop, and steps should be
     Eric and Anne Nordell developed the strategy            taken to prevent this.
     outlined above during the transition process on             Usually, organic growers sow perennial forages with a
     their northern Pennsylvania farm. Their farm            small grain nurse crop. The nurse crop helps compete with
     now has excellent soil quality and is one of the        weeds while the forage crop establishes. Winter grains
     most weed-free organic farms in the northeast           like winter wheat and spelt are better at competing with
     US.                                                     weeds than spring grains because they are already well es-
                                                             tablished in the spring when the dominant weeds in the
                                                             field begin to germinate. Also, they are harvested before
                                                             most of the spring-germinating weeds go to seed. Red clo-


92 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
ver will establish well if overseeded onto the soil surface in
very early spring, while the ground is freezing and thawing
(frost seeding). For alfalfa and grasses, planting with a no-
till drill is safer. Spring grains and forages can be planted            “The extensive fine root
together at the same time. If the farm has a use or market
for cereal grain, hay, or green chop, taking the spring grain
                                                                         system of the grain will help
crop off for one of those uses can prevent most mid-season               build soil quality.”
weed seed production. The young forage crop should be
mowed at four to five inches in late summer to further re-
duce weed seed production.
     Often the sod is broken in the fall to allow it to break
down over the winter, and a cover crop like rye is planted         crops are especially important to build soil quality. Ac-
to protect the soil. If the sod includes a substantial com-        cordingly, avoid crops that are harvested too late to plant a
ponent of legumes, planting a heavy feeder like corn the           winter cover, or overseed a cover crop into the cash crop.
next year is advisable. Avoid planting this first corn crop        Establishment will be better if the cover crop seed is cov-
after transition too early in the spring. A late spring plant-     ered by hoeing or cultivation.
ing will let more weeds germinate before final seedbed                 On cash grain farms, avoid starting the transition
preparation, reduce seed losses to rot and insects, and            with corn, even if this would be the logical next crop for
ensure that the corn grows rapidly enough to be competi-           the field (see table 6.1 for potential sequences). Corn is
tive. The corn will do nothing for restoring soil quality, so      likely to suffer from nitrogen deficiency early in the transi-
if it is harvested for silage, sow a winter grain cover crop       tion process (58, 119) unless large amounts of manure,
after harvest. If the corn is harvested as grain, consider in-     compost, or expensive organic fertilizer are applied. In
terseeding a cover crop like red clover or annual ryegrass         contrast, soybean supplies its own N. If possible, plant a
just after last cultivation (96). Planting the cover crop af-      winter grain like wheat or spelt after soybean is harvested.
ter the corn is well established will not reduce yield (96),       This may require using a short-season soybean. A winter
but it will allow plenty of time for good cover to develop         grain has multiple benefits early in the transition and rep-
before winter.                                                     resents an alternative to soybean as a starting point. Since
                                                                   the soil does not yet have good N supplying power, how-
                                                                   ever, compost or some other source of N may be required
Transition to Cash Grain or                                        to reach full yield potential. The extensive fine root sys-
                                                                   tem of the grain will help build soil quality. Also, a densely
Vegetables on a Farm Without
Forages
                                                                        Table 6.1 Some cropping sequences for transition
    If the farm does not need forages, the transition                   on a cash grain farm
cropping sequence will probably rely on cover crops to
build soil quality. Stale seedbeds (see table 3.6, page 43)
and other fallow periods may be needed to reduce weed               Year     Sequence 1                   Sequence 2
density.                                                            1        Soybean (short-season)       Winter grain with frost-
    In vegetables, rely on transplanted crops and large-                     followed by winter grain     seeded red clover
seeded crops like sweet corn and snap beans the first few           2        Winter grain with frost-     Corn with interseeded
years. These are more competitive and easier to cultivate                    seeded red clover            annual ryegrass at last
and hoe than direct-seeded crops with small seeds. Short-                                                 cultivation
season crops like transplanted lettuce are useful early in          3        Corn with interseeded        Soybean
transition because they can be harvested before weeds                        red clover or annual
have a chance to go to seed. They also allow time for a fal-                 ryegrass at last cultivation
low period for weed control or an additional cover crop
                                                                    4        Spring grain or soybean      Winter or spring grain
to build soil quality. Early in the transition, winter cover


                                       CHAPTER 6 | Crop Rotation during the Transition from Conventional to Organic Agriculture      93
sown winter grain will suppress weeds well, and it will be      with weed regrowth if the weeds are cut after they have
harvested before most spring-germinating weeds can go           flowered.
to seed.                                                            The full year’s growth of clover will supply enough N
    Many organic grain growers in the northeastern US           for a corn crop the following year. If the growing season is
overseed winter grains with clover in late winter, when         long enough, sow a winter cover crop after harvest. Oth-
frost can work the seed into the soil. The clover establishes   erwise, interseed a cover crop at last cultivation to ensure
slowly but will be ready for rapid growth by the time the       continued soil building. Small seeds like clover will fall
grain is harvested. If weeds have started to go to seed, set    into the broken soil after cultivation, but large-seeded spe-
the combine head low at grain harvest to cut off the seed-      cies should be sown before cultivation. Interseeding into
producing parts of the weeds. If the weeds have not yet         corn at last cultivation usually produces good stands but
flowered at harvest, set the combine head high, and then        may occasionally fail due to drought during cover crop
return and mow the field at a height of about five inches       establishment (see chapter 7, pages 95–100) for more on
before weed seeds set. The clover will compete heavily          interseeding cover crops).




94 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                                                7
                     Guidelines for Intercropping
                 Charles L. Mohler and Kimberly A. Stoner




I    ntercropping is an all-encompassing term for the prac-
     tice of growing two or more crops in close proximity:
     in the same row or bed, or in rows or strips that are
close enough for biological interaction. Mixed cropping,
companion planting, relay cropping, interseeding, over-
                                                                        “[Intercropping systems]
                                                                        call for careful timing of
seeding, underseeding, smother cropping, planting poly-                 field operations, and they
cultures, and using living mulch are all forms of intercrop-            may necessitate special
ping (see glossary at the end of this chapter). Intercropping
includes the growing of two or more cash crops together. It             interventions to keep
also includes the growing of a cash crop with a cover crop              competition between the
or other non-cash crop that provides benefits to the pri-               intercropped species in
mary crop or to the overall farm system. Cover crops can
also be intercropped with one another. The purpose of this              balance.”
chapter is to outline some of the basic principles for using
intercropping successfully and to relate these to the prin-
ciples of crop rotation detailed in the rest of this manual.        more difficult and less effective. Planting crops in alternate
    Advantages of intercropping fall into three basic               rows or strips greatly simplifies management and captures
categories. First, an intercrop may use resources of light,         some of the benefits of intercropping for pest control. It
water, and nutrients more efficiently than single crops             may do little, however, to increase resource capture by the
planted in separate areas, and this can improve yields and          crops, unless alternating strips are close together.
income. Second, crop mixtures frequently have lower                     Intercropping also poses a special problem for crop ro-
pest densities, especially of insect pests. This occurs both        tation. One fundamental principle of crop rotation is the
because the mixture confuses the insects and, if the mixture        separation of plant families in time. As explained in chap-
is chosen carefully, because the mixture attracts beneficial        ters 2 and 3, pages 3–46, this is critical for management
predators. Finally, intercropping may allow more effective          of diseases and, to a lesser extent, insects. If plants from
management of cover crops.                                          two families are mixed in the same bed or field, however,
    The advantages of intercropping, however, do not                achieving a substantial time lag before replanting either
come for free. Intercropping systems require additional             of those families may be difficult. Suppose, for example,
management. They often call for careful timing of field             that a farm grows an acre each of tomato, squash, broccoli,
operations, and they may necessitate special interventions          and mid-season lettuce. A simple rotation would put each
to keep competition between the intercropped species                of the crops in a different year, with a three-year interval
in balance. A crop mix that works well in one year may              before a crop is repeated on the same bed. If, however,
fail the next if weather favors one crop over another. A            the lettuce and tomato are grown together (see the next
mixture of crops with different growth forms or timing              section), crops would be separated by only a two-year in-
of development may make cultivation and use of mulches              terval, which may be insufficient to keep some diseases


                                                                                     CHAPTER 7 | Guidelines for Intercropping   95
under control (see appendix 3, pages 124–137). Thus, in-       winter-kills, which potentially restricts it to use following
tercropping requires extra care and effort in planning and     early-harvested crops. It can, however, be interplanted
maintaining a viable crop rotation.                            successfully into many full-season crops. For example,
    For an intercropping scheme to be useful, it should        NEON collaborators Eric and Anne Nordell plant single
improve the overall economics of the farm. A new               rows of hairy vetch between rows of many types of late-
intercropping idea should be tested first on a relatively      season vegetables. Despite trampling during harvest, the
small area. This will allow evaluation of whether it fits      vetch sprawls out and provides good winter ground cover
into the overall management system and whether benefits        and nitrogen for crops the following year.
outweigh extra costs, labor, or yield reduction. Note that         Most cover crops will compete heavily with the cash
some consequences of intercropping—such as better or           crop unless seeding is delayed until the cash crop is well
worse weed control, or difficulties in timing planting or      established. Consequently, cover crops planted into estab-
harvest—may not show up in a single test year.                 lished cash crops usually produce negligible organic mat-
                                                               ter or nitrogen by the time of crop harvest. Attempts to use
                                                               interseeded cover crops to smother weeds have generally
Interplanting Crops with                                       shown that if the cover crop is sufficiently dense and vigor-
                                                               ous to suppress the weeds, it also competes with the cash
Partially Overlapping                                          crop. Successful exceptions require subtleties of timing,
Growing Seasons                                                sowing densities, and relative growth rates of the cash and
                                                               cover crops that are difficult to repeat consistently. Thus,
    Interplanting crops that share the field for only part     the primary use of interseeded cover crops is the early es-
of the season can increase the capture of sunlight over        tablishment of cover. Note that if the cover crop is left after
the course of the whole year. Expert panel farmer Drew         the cash crop is harvested, cleanup of weeds after harvest
Norman (page 51) provides an example of this sort of           is restricted to mowing or hand weeding. Consequently,
intercropping. He transplants lettuce next to his tomato       interseeded cover crops are most useful in late-harvested
plants. The lettuce uses the space that is not yet occupied    crops or fields with low weed pressure. Table 7.1 shows
by the tomatoes and is harvested about the time the            opportunities and problems with interseeding cover crops
tomatoes are branching out to cover the full width of the      into established cash crops.
bed. Usually, when two cash crops are intercropped, they
are either planted at the same time or harvested at the same
time. Mechanical planting may be difficult if the crops are
not planted simultaneously. Without careful planning,
                                                               Intercropping Legumes with
harvesting the early crop may damage the late crop.            Nonlegumes
    Nurse crops are another variation on staggered-season
intercropping. Forage legumes and grasses establish                Legumes like beans and alfalfa have nitrogen-fixing
so slowly that weeds tend to take over the field if a fast-    bacteria associated with their roots. Consequently they
growing, competitive nurse crop like oats, barley, or wheat    compete only slightly with nonlegumes for soil nitrogen
is not there to use the available sunlight. After the grain    and in some cases even supply nitrogen to adjacent plants
is harvested, the forages continue to grow through the         via leakage and root decomposition (fine roots grow and
remainder of the season and are ready for a first cutting in   die rapidly within the season, even in healthy plants).
the autumn.                                                        For example, field pea can be grown with a small grain
    Interseeding cover crops into established cash crops       and the two crops combine-harvested together (119).
can increase cover crop productivity and the range of          Intercropping of beans and corn (usually with squash, as
cover crop species that can be used in a region. For           well) formed the basic farming system of Native Ameri-
example, clover can be interseeded into corn during the        cans from Central America to the northeastern US. The
last inter-row cultivation (96), whereas clovers sown          scientific literature has documented the value of intercrop-
after corn harvest establish poorly and have little time       ping legumes with nonlegumes, especially grain crops,
for growth before winter. Similarly, in New York and           though much of this work has been done in the tropics (for
New England, hairy vetch sown after September 15 often         example, see reference 126).


96 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
   Table 7.1 Cover crop interseeding systems


  Cover crop                 Cash crop         Method                       Benefits                                 Problems

  Red clover, annual         Corn, late        Broadcast after last         Good organic matter                      Establishment may be poor in
  or perennial               sweet corn        cultivation2                 production; N-fixation by red            a dry summer; annual ryegrass
  ryegrass1                                                                 clover                                   may winter-kill
  Rye                        Corn, late        Broadcast in early fall      Reasonable establishment most            Stand may be patchy; stand
                             sweet corn        at 3 bu/A                    years3                                   may be poor if the fall is dry
  Annual ryegrass,           Soybean           Broadcast after last         No interference with harvest;            Establishment may be poor in a
  creeping red fescue,       (planted in       cultivation2                 N-fixation by legumes                    dry summer
  red clover, white          rows)
  clover, alfalfa4
  Rye, winter wheat,         Soybean           Broadcast at 1.5X            Allows establishment in wet              Timing is critical5; stand may be
  spelt                                        usual rate at leaf           years and late harvested                 poor if the fall is dry
                                               yellowing                    soybean
  Crimson clover             Soybean           Broadcast at 20 lb/A         N-fixation; good production              Useful only from zone 6 & south
                                               at leaf yellowing                                                     – further north it winter-kills
                                                                                                                     after little growth
  Red clover, alsike         Winter            Sow on frozen                Good organic matter                      Ground may not freeze
  clover, alfalfa,           wheat, spelt      ground in early              production and N-fixation                sufficiently to support tractor
  yellow sweet clover                          spring                       before next spring crop
  Bell bean6                 Fall              Plant two rows of            N-fixation for next crop; grows          Expensive seed. Cover crop will
                             brassicas         bell bean between            fast and then winter-kills;              be damaged at harvest.
                                               crop rows after last         upright growth does not
                                               cultivation                  interfere with crop
  Annual ryegrass            Tomato,           Broadcast after last         Good dry matter production by            May winter-kill
                             pepper            cultivation2                 next spring
  Hairy vetch                Late              Plant 1 or 2 rows            N-fixation for next crop; no             None apparent
                             harvested         between rows of              interference with crop; spreads
                             vegetables        vegetables after last        out to give fair winter cover and
                                               cultivation                  good spring production
  Rye                        Late              Plant 1 or 2 rows            Falls over to give fair winter           None apparent
                             harvested         between rows of              cover; no interference with crop
                             vegetables        vegetables after last
                                               cultivation
  Rye                        Late              Broadcast at 2 to 3          Provides more uniform cover              Stand may be patchy; stand
                             harvested         bu/A 3 to 5 weeks            than drilling between rows3              may be poor if the fall is dry;
                             vegetables        before harvest                                                        interferes with harvest of short,
                                                                                                                     leafy crops

Note: Only systems that cause negligible yield reduction have been included. All of these systems provide either a living or winter-killed
cover through the winter. All resist damage during harvest of the cash crop unless otherwise noted, but some damage is inevitable.
1
  Alfalfa, yellow sweetclover, crimson clover, birdsfoot trefoil, white clover, alsike clover and hairy vetch can also be established by this
method, but fall cover and spring dry matter production tend to be less than for red clover, annual ryegrass or perennial ryegrass.
2
  Seed can be applied at cultivation by attaching a forage seeder box to dribble seed onto the ground behind the cultivator tools. It can also
be spun on with an attachment or by hand. Seeding should be completed before the first rain after cultivation.
3
  Rye is the only cover crop that usually establishes well when surface sown in the fall. Spelt and annual ryegrass also have a reasonable
chance of success. Other surface seeded cover crops usually either fail to germinate or are heavily consumed by seed and seedling feeding
insects (species that are normally considered beneficials due to their consumption of weed seeds and pest insects).
4
  Wheat or rye seeded by this method will grow several inches above the height of the lowest pods by harvest.
5
  If the grain is sown too soon before leaf drop, grain establishment will be poor due to shading by the soybeans. If the grain is sown after
leaf drop, many seeds will not make contact with the soil and those that do will not have the benefit of coverage by dead leaves.
6
  Bell bean is a small seeded variety of fava bean. It is preferred over field pea in this application because it does not fall over or twine into the crop.


                                                                                                      CHAPTER 7 | Guidelines for Intercropping          97
                     “Specialist pests have
            different ways of finding their
                 host plants, and non-host
               plants disrupt some species
                  more easily than others.”


    Grass-legume combinations are often used for forage         Using Intercropping to Disrupt
and for cover crops. Hairy vetch combined with a winter
grain like rye, wheat, or spelt is a good combination for       Host Finding by Some Host-
a fall-planted, overwintering cover crop. Oat and field pea     Specific Insect Pests
planted in August in the northern US and southern Can-
ada will produce substantial organic matter and will then           Intercropping reduced densities of insect and mite
winter-kill, allowing early tillage the following spring. Hay   pests in about 50 percent of the cases that have been stud-
meadows and pastures are often planted with a mixture           ied, usually by disrupting the ability of the pest to find
of grasses and legumes. In all of these cases, the legume       its host (2). Choosing an intercrop that does not host
provides nitrogen, while the grass produces the bulk of the     key pests on the main crop is critical. Intercropping usu-
organic matter. Some research indicates that a pound of         ally does not reduce, and may even increase, the density
clover will fix more nitrogen into plant-usable form when       of generalist pests. Whether insects are actually repelled
grown with grasses than when grown in a pure stand. In          by the odor of non-host plants is a matter of controversy.
some cases this can result in as much nitrogen fixation by      The odor of non-hosts does confuse insects that search for
the mixture as by a pure stand, but with a greater yield of     hosts by smell (110), making mixtures of dissimilar crops
organic matter (44).                                            less attractive than monocultures. A mixture of leaf shapes
                                                                can similarly confuse insects that search for their hosts by
                                                                sight. For some pests, simply alternating rows or strips of
Using Tall Crops to Reduce                                      different crops can be sufficient to interfere with insect
                                                                movement or host-finding ability.
Drought or Heat Stress of                                           Specialist pests have different ways of finding their host
Shorter Crops                                                   plants, and non-host plants disrupt some species more
                                                                easily than others. Crucifer flea beetles (Phyllotreta cru-
    Two mechanisms are involved in using tall crops to re-      ciferae), for example, are attracted to an area by odors of
duce drought or heat stress of shorter crops: partial shad-     plants in the cabbage family. Since they move somewhat
ing and reduction in wind speed. Partial shade cast by a        randomly within that area, landing on anything green,
trellised crop or a well-spaced planting of sweet corn can      intercropping tends to reduce flea beetle numbers on the
reduce heat stress of summer crops of spinach or lettuce        host plants (although often not enough to control dam-
(19). This may be useful in preventing early bolting. On        age). Imported cabbageworm butterflies (Pieris rapae),
windy sites, periodic rows of tall crops can reduce water       on the other hand, are good at finding their host plants
stress by slowing wind speed. For example, one study            in a mixture of other plants, and many studies have found
showed that soybean yields in Minnesota increased by as         that intercropping has no effect on their numbers. In the
much as 28 percent when pairs of corn rows were inter-          spring, newly emerged Colorado potato beetles find their
spersed in the fields to block wind (89).                       hosts primarily by walking, and densely planted grass or
                                                                heavy mulch interferes with their ability to do that. Expert
                                                                farmer Eero Ruuttila (page 50) leaves strips of rye–hairy



98 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
vetch cover crop between widely spaced rows of pota-            ist insect predators to prevent chance colonization of the
toes, which interfere with the beetles’ movement. He later      field from turning into a major outbreak. Some generalist
mows the cover strips and uses the clippings as mulch,          predators, like spiders, ground beetles, and rove beetles,
which interferes with beetle movement and provides habi-        typically have only one or two generations per year and are
tat for beetle predators.                                       not highly mobile; so they need steady food sources and
                                                                undisturbed vegetation nearby to colonize the field when
                                                                pests arrive. For example, grass strips between fields pro-
How Intercrops Affect                                           vide overwintering sites for ground beetles, which colo-
                                                                nize adjacent fields during the growing season.
Populations of Beneficial
Parasitoids and Pest Predators
    The effects of intercropping on pest species vary, de-
                                                                Using Trap Crops to
pending on the specific behaviors and life cycles of the        Reduce Pests
beneficial insects. Many parasitoids are limited to a nar-
row range of insect hosts. Some of these use plant odors or         Designing a successful strategy for trap cropping re-
visual cues to locate their hosts by first finding the plants   quires a sophisticated understanding of the pest insect:
on which the hosts are located. In those cases, intercrop-      its host plant preferences, pattern of movement, and tim-
ping can interfere with host finding by the beneficial para-    ing of infestation and reproduction. One strategy that has
sitoids (99).                                                   recently proved successful for several species is perimeter
    For the intercrop to increase the numbers of beneficial     trap cropping. This method is used for pest species that
insects, it should provide the beneficials with an impor-       move into a field from the edges, have strong preferences
tant resource, such as pollen, nectar, alternate prey, shel-    for particular species or varieties of hosts, and generally
ter, or overwintering sites. Organic growers often plant        require several months to a year for reproduction. The trap
buckwheat, alyssum, and other flowering plants as sources       crop, which is strongly preferred to the main crop, is plant-
of nectar and pollen for beneficials. Corn and other grass-     ed all around the main crop, like walls of a fortress. The
es also produce large quantities of pollen. Many major          pest, arriving in the field from the edges, encounters the
groups of beneficial insects—including predators such as        trap crop first and stops, staying along the edge of the field.
lacewings, lady beetles, minute pirate bugs, and hover flies,   The trap crop may be sprayed with an insecticide or flamed
as well as parasitoids and pollinators—feed on pollen or        to kill the pest before it moves to the main crop. This strat-
nectar. But beware: So do many pests, including tarnished       egy is currently used to manage pepper maggot on bell
plant bug and imported cabbageworm butterflies. One             peppers, with hot cherry peppers as the trap crop. It is also
way to evaluate “insectary plantings” is to look at both        used to manage cucumber beetles and squash vine borers
the pests and the beneficials attracted by the flowers and      on yellow summer squash, with blue Hubbard squash as
evaluate the beneficial/pest ratio (64).                        the trap crop. Research into various combinations of mus-
    Alternate food or prey, shelter, and overwintering          tard family crops for trap cropping of flea beetles and dia-
sites can be important in building up a buffer of general-      mondback moth is under way (8).




                                                                     “For the intercrop to increase
                                                                     the numbers of beneficial
                                                                     insects, it should provide the
                                                                     beneficials with an important
                                                                     resource.”


                                                                                  CHAPTER 7 | Guidelines for Intercropping   99
A Glossary of
Intercropping Terms
Alley cropping: Growing annual crops in tilled strips              Nurse crop: A fast-growing crop that suppresses weeds
between rows of a tree or shrub crop.                              while a slow-growing crop establishes.

Biostrips: Permanent sod strips, usually of high botanical         Overseeding, oversowing: Planting a direct-seeded crop
diversity, maintained to provide food and habitat for              or cover crop into an already established crop, usually by
beneficial organisms and disrupt dispersal of pests.               surface sowing of the seeds.

Companion planting: A general term essentially                     Parasitoid: An insect that lays its eggs in or on another
synonymous with intercropping but often used to refer              arthropod. The larvae develop inside the host, eventually
to the planting of non-crop or ornamental species with             killing it.
vegetables for attraction of beneficial insects.
                                                                   Polyculture: A field (or cropping system) with multiple,
Insectary planting: Planting strips or patches in a field          interacting crops, or pertaining to such a field or cropping
with species that attract beneficial insects.                      system.

Interplanting: Intercropping.                                      Relay (inter)cropping: Planting a second crop into an
                                                                   already established crop. Usually the first crop is harvested
Interseeding: Planting a direct-seeded crop into another           before the second matures.
crop, either at planting of the first crop or later, after it is
established.                                                       Smother crop: An interseeded crop sown with the intent
                                                                   of smothering weeds; sometimes also applied to a weed-
Living mulch: Permanent sod strips of perennial grasses            suppressive cover crop grown alone.
or legumes between rows or beds.
                                                                   Underseeding, undersowing: Overseeding or oversowing.
Monoculture: A field with a single crop in it, or pertaining
to such a field.




100 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
  APPENDIX 1 Characteristics of Crops Commonly Grown in the Northeastern United States
                      Compiled by Charles L. Mohler and Anusuya Rangarajan
Yield and nutrient removal data are unavailable for some minor crops. Vegetable crops are arranged alphabetically by family.

                                                                 Net Removal
                                       Har-         Average      (lb/1000 lb product, fresh wt.)                Weed
                                       vested       Yield1                                         Cold         Competi-   Seedbed
                       Family          Part         (lbs/acre)   N          P2          K2         Tolerance    tion       Required
Vegetable crops
Beet3                  Beet            root, leaf   25,000       2.7        0.9         3.4        half hardy   moderate   fine
Spinach & chard        Beet            leaf          8,000       5.0        1.0         5.0        hardy        moderate   fine
Carrot, parsnip        Carrot          root         26,000       1.6        0.4         4.0        half hardy   low        fine
Celeriac               Carrot          root            n/a       n/a        n/a         n/a        half hardy   low        fine
Celery                 Carrot          leaf         50,000       1.7        0.3         3.8        half hardy   low        fine
Fennel                 Carrot          leaf            n/a       n/a        n/a         n/a        half hardy   low        fine
Cucumber               Cucurbit        fruit        20,000       3.1        1.1         5.2        tender       moderate   medium
Melons4                Cucurbit        fruit        15,000       4.2        0.8         5.3        tender       high       medium
Pumpkin,               Cucurbit        fruit        30,000       5.4        1.2         n/a        tender       high       coarse
winter squash
Summer squash          Cucurbit        fruit        17,000       1.8        0.4         n/a        tender       high       medium
Sweet corn             Grass           seed         11,000       5.0        0.7         2.5        tender       high       coarse
Bean, snap             Legume          fruit         6,000       4.0        2.0         5.0        tender       moderate   medium
Pea, in pods           Legume          fruit         9,000       n/a        n/a         n/a        hardy        low        medium
Endive etc.5           Lettuce         leaf         23,000       n/a        n/a         n/a        half hardy   low        fine/medium
Lettuce                Lettuce         leaf         24,000       2.5        1.2         5.0        half hardy   moderate   medium7
Salsify, scorzonera    Lettuce         root            n/a       n/a        n/a         n/a        hardy        low        fine
Garlic                 Lily            bulb         16,500       n/a        n/a         n/a        very hardy   low        medium
Leek                   Lily            bulb         16,000       3.6        0.5         n/a        hardy        low        fine
Onion6                 Lily            bulb         25,000       2.7        0.5         2.7        hardy        low        fine
Scallion               Lily            bulb         18,000       n/a        n/a         n/a        half hardy   low        fine
Okra                   Mallow          fruit        15,000       n/a        n/a         n/a        tender       low        fine
Sweet potato           Morning         root         15,000       n/a        n/a         n/a        tender       moderate   medium
                       glory
Broccoli,              Mustard         flower       10,000       2.8        0.8         4.0        hardy        moderate   medium7
cauliflower                            bud
Brussels sprouts       Mustard         bud          10,000       9.4        1.2         7.8        hardy        moderate   medium7
Cabbage                Mustard         bud          35,000       3.1        0.8         3.3        hardy        moderate   medium7
Mustard greens8        Mustard         leaf         12,000       6.2        1.5         5.5        hardy        low        fine
Radish                 Mustard         root          6,000       n/a        n/a         n/a        half hardy   low        medium7
Turnip, rutabaga,      Mustard         root          3,650       n/a        n/a         n/a        hardy        moderate   fine
daikon
Eggplant               Nightshade      fruit        20,000       1.6        0.3         n/a        tender       moderate   medium7
Pepper                 Nightshade      fruit        20,000       2.0        0.3         2.3        tender       moderate   medium7
Potato                 Nightshade      root         30,000       3.7        0.7         5.0        half hardy   high       coarse
Tomato                 Nightshade      fruit        20,000       1.7        0.8         3.0        tender       moderate   medium7
Strawberry             Rose            fruit        10,000       1.0        0.3         2.2        very hardy   moderate   medium7



                                        APPENDIX 1 | Characteristics of Crops Commonly Grown in the Northeastern United States 101
      APPENDIX 1 Characteristics of Crops Commonly Grown in the Northeastern United States (continued)


                                                                 Net Removal
                                        Har-        Average      (lb/1000 lb of produce)                       Weed
                                        vested      Yield10                                       Cold         Competi-   Seedbed
                         Family         Part        (lbs/acre)   N          P              K      Tolerance    tion       Required
    Field crops
    Field corn—grain     Grass          seed        5,600        17         1.7            2.1    tender       moderate   coarse
    Spring barley
      grain              Grass          seed        2,880        18         1.7            2.2    hardy        moderate   medium
      straw              Grass          stem        1,210        18         1.3            15.4   —            —          —
    Oat
      grain              Grass          seed        3,030        16         1.4            2.1    hardy        moderate   medium
      straw              Grass          stem        4,020        5          0.8            8.3    —            —          —
    Spring wheat
      grain              Grass          seed        2,410        25         2.1            2.9    hardy        moderate   medium
      straw              Grass          stem        2,770        9          0.5            8.3    —            —          —
    Winter wheat
      grain              Grass          seed        2,410        25         2.1            2.9    very hardy   high       medium
      straw              Grass          stem        3,030        8          0.4            7.5    —            —          —
    Spelt—grain          Grass          seed        2,000        n/a        n/a            n/a    very hardy   high       medium
    Rye
      grain              Grass          seed        2,500        22         1.3            2.5    very hardy   high       medium
      straw              Grass          stem        1,610        12         1.4            7.8    —            —          —
    Buckwheat            Buckwheat      seed          950        17         3.2            4.5    tender       high       medium
    Soybean              Legume         seed        2,410        59         6.0            14.0   tender       high       coarse
    Dry bean             Legume         seed        1,790        36         4.0            9.5    tender       moderate   medium
    Alfalfa hay          Legume         leaf        5,220        25         2.4            19.1   very hardy   high       fine
    Grass & grass—leg.   Grass-         leaf        3,790        21         3.5            18.1   very hardy   high       fine
    hay9                 legume

Note: Appendix 1 is divided into sections for vegetable, grain, and cover crops. The type of data available differ slightly between these
crop types.
1
   Averages are for all producers, not just organic producers. Turnip yield is for Maryland, and garlic and sweet potato yields are U.S.
   averages; all other vegetable crop yields are for New York.
2
   P and K removal and capture rates are for elemental P and K, not P2O5 or K2O.
3
   Yield and nutrients are for roots only.
4
   Includes cantelope and watermelon.
5
   Includes endive, escarole, radicchio, Italian dandelion.
6
   Yield and nutrients are for bulbs only.
7
   For transplants.
8
  Includes kale, collards, mustard greens, Asian greens, napa cabbage, arugula, cress
9
   Nutrient removals are an average of alfalfa-smooth brome, alfalfa-orchardgrass and alfalfa-timothy. Afalfa-timothy removes more P
   than the others.
10
    Average yield data for field crops is from Canada (119).




102 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
     APPENDIX 1 Characteristics of Crops Commonly Grown in the Northeastern United States (continued)



                                        Har-        Capture                                          Weed
                                        vested                                        Cold           Competi-      Seedbed
                        Family          Part        N11         P         K           Tolerance      tiveness      Required
 Cover crops
 Winter grain, cc12     Grass           whole       high        moder-    moder-      very hardy     high          medium
                                        plant                   ate       ate
 Spring grain, cc13     Grass           whole       moder-      low       low         hardy          moderate      medium
                                        plant       ate
 Annual ryegrass        Grass           whole       moder-      moder-    moder-      very hardy     moderate      medium
                                        plant       ate         ate       ate
 Sorghum/               Grass           whole       high        moder-    moder-      tender         high          medium
 sudangrass                             plant                   ate       ate
 Buckwheat              Buckwheat       whole       low         high      high        tender         high          medium
                                        plant
 White clover           Legume          whole       fixes       low       low         very hardy     moderate      medium
                                        plant       80–200
 Clovers, hardy14       Legume          whole       fixes       moder-    moder-      very hardy     moderate      medium
                                        plant       70–150      ate       ate
 Clovers, not hardy15   Legume          whole       fixes       moder-    moder-      tender         moderate      medium
                                        plant       70–130      ate       ate
 Sweet clover           Legume          whole       fixes       high      high        very hardy     moderate      medium
                                        plant       90–170
 Hairy vetch            Legume          whole       fixes       moder-    moder-      very hardy     moderate      medium
                                        plant       90–200      ate       ate
 Field pea              Legume          whole       fixes       low       low         hardy          high          coarse
                                        plant       90–150
 Bell bean              Legume          whole       fixes       n/a       n/a         hardy          moderate      coarse
                                        plant       70–220
 Rape, canola           Mustard         whole       high        high      n/a         hardy          moderate      medium
                                        plant
 Oilseed radish         Mustard         whole       high        high      n/a         hardy          high          medium
                                        plant

11
   N fixation rates are in pounds per acre.
12
   cc, as a cover crop. Includes rye winter wheat, spelt.
13
   cc, as a cover crop. Includes barley, oat, spring wheat.
14
   Includes red clover, alsike clover, and crimson clover in the south.
15
   Includes berseem clover and crimson clover in the north.

Sources:
Some vegetable nutrient composition data adapted from (69). Other results are based upon Cornell laboratory testing of harvested portions.
Cold tolerance and weed competitiveness for vegetable crops partially from (39).
Field crop nutrient data computed from (119) and, if missing there, from (78).
Cover crop information was adapted largely from (107).




                                           APPENDIX 1 | Characteristics of Crops Commonly Grown in the Northeastern United States 103
      APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities
                             Compiled by Charles L. Mohler

Find the preceding crop in the second column     A                     B       C          D      E        F        G        H          I
and the following crop in the 5th row. The row
goes across pp. 104–108. Using the row num-      FAMILY
ber and column number, locate the detailed                                                                                             Night-
note in the notes section, pp. 109–123.          —                     Lily    Lily       Lily   Lily     Legume   Legume   Lettuce    shade
                                                 FOLLOWING CROP
                                                                                                          Bean,             Lettuce,
       FAMILY         PRECEDING CROP             General               Onion   Scallion   Leek   Garlic   snap     Pea      etc.1      Potato
 1     —              General                                          W-                                                              W-
 2     Lily           Onion                      C                     XXXX               D      D
 3     Lily           Scallion                   C                             XXXX
 4     Lily           Leek                       C                     D                  XXXX   D, S                                  S
 5     Lily           Garlic                     C                     D                  D, S   XXXX                                  S, S-, N-
 6     Legume         Bean, snap                                                                          XXXX              D          D
 7     Legume         Pea                                                                                          XXXX     D, C-
 8     Lettuce        Lettuce etc.1                                    W-                 W-              D        D        XXXX       D
 9     Nightshade     Potato                     W-                                       S      S, C-    D                 D          XXXX
 10    Nightshade     Tomato                                                                              D                 D          D, I
 11    Nightshade     Eggplant                                                                                                         D, I
 12    Nightshade     Pepper                                                                                                           D
 13    Carrot         Carrot, parsnip                                  W                  S      S        D                 D          D, S
 14    Carrot         Celery, herbs etc.2                                                                                              D
 15    Carrot         Celeriac                                                                                                         D
 16    Mustard        Crucifer greens3
 17    Mustard        Broccoli, cauliflower                                                               D                 D          D
 18    Mustard        Cabbage, b. sprouts4                                                                D        D-       D          D
 19    Mustard        Kale, collards                                                                      D        D-       D          D
 20    Mustard        Radish                                                                                       D-                  D
 21    Mustard        Turnip, rutabaga, daikon                                                                     D-                  D
 22    Cucurbit       Cucumber                   W-                                                       W-                W
 23    Cucurbit       Melons5                    W-                                                       W-                W
 24    Cucurbit       Pumpkin, winter squash     W-                                                       W-                W
 25    Cucurbit       Summer squash              W-                                                                         W
 26    Beet           Spinach, chard                                   W-                 W-                                C-
 27    Beet           Beet                                                                                                             D
 28    Grass          Sweet corn                                                                          D-                           C-
 29    Rose           Strawberry                                                                                                       D
 30    Grass          Field corn                                                                          D-                           C-
 31    Grass          Oat                        D-, W                 W, I    W, I       W, I            D-                D-         D-, I
 32    Grass          Spring barley              D-, W                 W, I    W, I       W, I            D-       D-       D-         D-, I
 33    Grass          Winter wheat, spelt        D-                    W, I    W, I       W, I            D-                D-         D-, I
 34    Grass          Rye                        D-                    W, I    W, I       W, I            D-                D-         D-, I
 35    Legume         Soybean                                                                             D                            D-
 36    Legume         Dry bean                                                                            D                 D          D
 37    Legume         Alfalfa hay                                                                                                      D-
 38    Grass-legume   Grass & grass-legume hay                         I       I          I                                            D-
 39    Grass          Winter grain, cc6          W-, I-, N, S, C, C-   I       I          I               D-       D-       C          D-
 40    Grass          Spring grain, cc7          D-, I-, N, S, C-      I       I          I               D-                           D-
 41    Grass          Annual ryegrass            N, S                  I       I          I                                            D-
 42    Grass          Sorghum-sudangrass         D-                    I       I          I                                            D-
 43    Buckwheat      Buckwheat                                                                                                        D-, S-
 44    Legume         White clover               I, N-                                                                      I
 45    Legume         Clovers, hardy8            I, N-                                                             D        D, I
 46    Legume         Clovers, not hardy9        N-                                                                         I
 47    Legume         Sweet clover               N-                                                       D                            D
 48    Legume         Hairy vetch                D, N-, C-                                                         D
 49    Legume         Field pea                  N-, C-                                                            D        D
 50    Legume         Bell bean                  N-                                                                D        D
 51    Mustard        Rape, canola               D-                                                                                    D-
 52    Mustard        Oilseed radish             D-                                                                                    D-


104 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
     APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)


      J        K        L        M          N             O          P          Q             R            S         T         U               V
      FAMILY
      Night-   Night-   Night-
      shade    shade    shade    Carrot     Carrot        Carrot     Mustard    Mustard       Mustard      Mustard   Mustard   Mustard         Cucurbit
      FOLLOWING CROP
                                 Carrot,    Celery,                  Crucifer   Broccoli,     Cabbage, Kale,                   Turnip, ruta-
      Tomato   Eggplant Pepper   parsnip    herbs etc.2   Celeriac   greens3    cauliflower   b. sprouts4 collards   Radish    baga, daikon    Cucumber
1
2
3
4                                S                                                                                             S
5                                S                                                                                             S
6                                                                               D-            D-           D-        D-        D-
7                                                                    C-                                              C-
8     D, C-    C-       C-       W-                                                                                                            C-
9     D, I     D, I              D, S, W-   D, S-         D          S-                                                        S
10    XXXX     D, I     D                                                       D-            D-           D-        D-        D-              D
11    D, I     XXXX     D                                                                                                                      D
12    D        D        XXXX                                                                                                                   D
13                               XXXX       D             D                                                                    S               D
14                               D          XXXX          D
15                               D          D             XXXX
16    D, C-    C-       C-                                           XXXX       D             D            D         D         D               N-, C-
17                                                                   D          XXXX          D            D         D         D               N-
18    D                                                              D          D             XXXX         D         D         D               N-
19                                                                   D          D             D            XXXX      D         D               N-
20                                                                   D          D             D            D         XXXX      D               N-
21                                                                   D          D             D            D         D         XXXX            D, N-
22             D        D        W                                   W, N-      D-, N-        D-, N-       D-, N-    D-        D-              XXXX
23             D        D        W                                   W, N-      N-            N-           N-                                  D
24             D        D        W                                   W, N-      N-            N-           N-                                  D
25             D        D        W                                   W, N-      N-            N-           N-                                  D
26                               W-                                                                                  C-
27                                                                              D             D            D
28                                                                              D-            D-           D-
29    D        D
30                                                                              D-            D-           D-
31                               W, I       W                                   D-            D-           D-                                  I
32                               W, I       W                                   D-            D-           D-                                  I
33                               W, I       W                                   D-            D-           D-                                  I
34                               W, I       W                                   D-            D-           D-                                  I
35
36
37                               D
38                               W, I                                                                                                          I
39                               C          C                        C          D-            D-           D-
40                                                                              D-, W-, S-    D-, W-, S-   D-, W-, S-
41                                                                   D-         D-            D-           D-         D-       D-
42
43                                                                              D-            D-           D-        D-        D-
44
45                                                                   C-         C-                         C-
46
47
48                                                                                                                                             N-
49                                                                              N-, W-        N-, W-       N-, W-
50                                                                   N-         N-            N-           N-        N-        N-
51                                                                   D          D             D            D         D         D
52                                                                   D          D             D            D         D         D


                                                                                APPENDIX 2 | Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities 105
      APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

Find the preceding crop in the second column     W          X           Y          Z          AA      AB          AC         AD           AE
and the following crop in the 5th row. The row
goes across pp. 104–108. Using the row num-      FAMILY
ber and column number, locate the detailed
note in the notes section, pp. 109–123.          Cucurbit   Cucurbit    Cucurbit   Beet       Beet    Grass       Rose       Grass        Grass
                                                 FOLLOWING CROP
                                                            Pumpkin,    Summer     Spinach,           Sweet
       FAMILY         PRECEDING CROP             Melons5    w. squash   squash     chard      Beet    corn        Strawberry Field corn   Oat
 1     —              General
 2     Lily           Onion
 3     Lily           Scallion
 4     Lily           Leek
 5     Lily           Garlic
 6     Legume         Bean, snap
 7     Legume         Pea                                                          C-
 8     Lettuce        Lettuce etc.1              C-         C-          C-
 9     Nightshade     Potato                                                                  D                   D
 10    Nightshade     Tomato                     D          D           D                                         D
 11    Nightshade     Eggplant                   D          D           D
 12    Nightshade     Pepper                     D          D           D
 13    Carrot         Carrot, parsnip
 14    Carrot         Celery, herbs etc.2
 15    Carrot         Celeriac
 16    Mustard        Crucifer greens3           N-, C-     N-, C-      N-, C-
 17    Mustard        Broccoli, cauliflower      N-         N-          N-, C-                                    D-
 18    Mustard        Cabbage, b. sprouts4       N-         N-          N-                    D
 19    Mustard        Kale, collards             N-         N-          N-
 20    Mustard        Radish                     N-         N-          N-
 21    Mustard        Turnip, rutabaga, daikon   N-         N-          N-
 22    Cucurbit       Cucumber                   D          D           D                             I                      I
 23    Cucurbit       Melons5                    XXXX       D           D                             I                      I
 24    Cucurbit       Pumpkin, winter squash     D          XXXX        D                             I                      I
 25    Cucurbit       Summer squash              D          D           XXXX                          I                      I
 26    Beet           Spinach, chard                                               XXXX
 27    Beet           Beet                                                                    XXXX
 28    Grass          Sweet corn                            D                                 D-      XXXX                   I            D
 29    Rose           Strawberry                                                                                  XXXX
 30    Grass          Field corn                            D                                 D-      I                      XXXX         D
 31    Grass          Oat                        I                                            D-, I   I                      I            XXXX
 32    Grass          Spring barley              I                                            D-, I   I                      I
 33    Grass          Winter wheat, spelt        I                                            D-, I   I                      D, I         I
 34    Grass          Rye                        I                                            D-, I   I                      I            I
 35    Legume         Soybean                                                                                                D-
 36    Legume         Dry bean
 37    Legume         Alfalfa hay
 38    Grass-legume   Grass & grass-legume hay   I                                            I       D-, I, N-   I          D-, I, N-    D, I
 39    Grass          Winter grain, cc6                                                       D-
 40    Grass          Spring grain, cc7                                                       D-
 41    Grass          Annual ryegrass
 42    Grass          Sorghum-sudangrass
 43    Buckwheat      Buckwheat
 44    Legume         White clover
 45    Legume         Clovers, hardy8
 46    Legume         Clovers, not hardy9
 47    Legume         Sweet clover
 48    Legume         Hairy vetch                D-, N-     N-          N-
 49    Legume         Field pea
 50    Legume         Bell bean
 51    Mustard        Rape, canola
 52    Mustard        Oilseed radish



106 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
     APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

      AF       AG             AH      AI        AJ         AK        AL          AM          AN           AO         AP        AQ       AR
      FAMILY
                                                                     Grass-                                                    Buck-
      Grass    Grass          Grass   Legume    Legume     Legume    legume      Grass       Grass        Grass      Grass     wheat    Legume
      FOLLOWING CROP
      Spring   Winter                                                Grass-     Winter       Spring       Annual     Sorghum-   Buck-   White
      barley   wheat, spelt   Rye     Soybean   Dry bean   Alfalfa   legume hay grain, cc6   grain, cc7   ryegrass   sudangrass wheat   clover
1
2
3
4
5
6                                     D         D
7
8
9
10
11
12
13                                                                                           W-, S-
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22                                              W-
23                                              W-
24                                              W-
25
26
27
28             D                                D-
29
30    D        D, D-                            D-
31             D, D-, I       I                 D-
32    XXXX     D, I           D, I              D-
33    D        XXXX           D, I              D-
34                            XXXX              D-                   D
35                                    XXXX      D
36             D-                     D         XXXX
37                                              N-, S-     XXXX
38             D, I           D, I              N-, S-               XXXX        C-
39    D                                         D-                               XXXX
40                                              D-                                           XXXX
41                                                                                                        XXXX
42                                                                                                                   XXXX
43                                                                                                                             XXXX
44                                                                                                                                      XXXX
45                                    D         D
46
47                                    D                                          C-
48                                                                               W
49
50
51
52                                    D-



                                                                              APPENDIX 2 | Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities 107
      APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

Find the preceding crop in the second column     AS         AT         AU       AV       AW          AX          AY        AZ
and the following crop in the 5th row. The row
                                                 FAMILY
goes across pp. 104–108. Using the row num-
ber and column number, locate the detailed
note in the notes section, pp. 109–123.          Legume     Legume     Legume   Legume   Legume      Legume      Mustard   Mustard
                                                 FOLLOWING CROP
                                                 Clovers,   Clovers,   Sweet    Hairy                            Rape,     Oilseed
       FAMILY         PRECEDING CROP             hardy8     not hardy9 clover   vetch    Field pea   Bell bean   canola    radish
 1     —              General
 2     Lily           Onion
 3     Lily           Scallion
 4     Lily           Leek
 5     Lily           Garlic
 6     Legume         Bean, snap                                                         D           D
 7     Legume         Pea                        D                                       D           D
 8     Lettuce        Lettuce etc.1              D                                       D           D
 9     Nightshade     Potato
 10    Nightshade     Tomato
 11    Nightshade     Eggplant
 12    Nightshade     Pepper
 13    Carrot         Carrot, parsnip                                                    W-, N-
 14    Carrot         Celery, herbs etc.2
 15    Carrot         Celeriac
 16    Mustard        Crucifer greens3                                                                           D         D
 17    Mustard        Broccoli, cauliflower                                                                      D         D
 18    Mustard        Cabbage, b. sprouts4                                                                       D         D
 19    Mustard        Kale, collards                                                                             D         D
 20    Mustard        Radish                                                                                     D         D
 21    Mustard        Turnip, rutabaga, daikon                                                                   D         D
 22    Cucurbit       Cucumber
 23    Cucurbit       Melons5
 24    Cucurbit       Pumpkin, winter squash                                    C-
 25    Cucurbit       Summer squash
 26    Beet           Spinach, chard
 27    Beet           Beet
 28    Grass          Sweet corn
 29    Rose           Strawberry
 30    Grass          Field corn
 31    Grass          Oat
 32    Grass          Spring barley
 33    Grass          Winter wheat, spelt
 34    Grass          Rye
 35    Legume         Soybean                                                                                    D
 36    Legume         Dry bean                                                           D           D
 37    Legume         Alfalfa hay                                                        D           D
 38    Grass-legume   Grass & grass-legume hay                                  C-
 39    Grass          Winter grain, cc6
 40    Grass          Spring grain, cc7
 41    Grass          Annual ryegrass
 42    Grass          Sorghum-sudangrass
 43    Buckwheat      Buckwheat
 44    Legume         White clover
 45    Legume         Clovers, hardy8            XXXX                                    D           D
 46    Legume         Clovers, not hardy9                   XXXX
 47    Legume         Sweet clover               D                     XXXX                          D
 48    Legume         Hairy vetch                                               XXXX
 49    Legume         Field pea                  D                                       XXXX        D
 50    Legume         Bell bean                  D                                       D           XXXX
 51    Mustard        Rape, canola                                                                               XXXX      D
 52    Mustard        Oilseed radish                                                                             D         XXXX



108 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
    APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

                                                                          Row     Col.   Notes
    Notes:
                                                                          4       B      D, onion smut (danger is primarily to seedlings before
    A blank cell indicates that the sequence has no known                                transplanting), white rot (36).
    advantages or disadvantages. Follow general rotation                  4       D      XXXX
    guidelines described in this book.
                                                                          4       E      D, white rot (36). S, root crops tend to reduce soil
    Shading indicates that the crops are in the same family.                             structure due to the additional soil disturbance during
                                                                                         harvest; consequently, growing “soil building” crops
    XXXX = Crops are the same; do not plant.                                             before and after a root crop is often desirable (80).
    D = Disease problems.
                                                                          4       I      S, root crops tend to reduce soil structure due to
    D- = Decreases disease problems.
                                                                                         the additional soil disturbance during harvest;
    W = Weed problems.                                                                   consequently, growing “soil building” crops before and
    W- = Decreases weed problems.                                                        after a root crop is often desirable (80).
    I = Insect problems.
                                                                          4       M      S, root crops tend to reduce soil structure due to
    I- = Decreases insect problems.                                                      the additional soil disturbance during harvest;
    N = Crop nutrition problems.                                                         consequently, growing “soil building” crops before and
    N- = Decreases crop nutrition problems.                                              after a root crop is often desirable (80).
    S = Soil structural problems.
                                                                          4       U      S, root crops tend to reduce soil structure due to
    S- = Decreases soil structural problems.                                             the additional soil disturbance during harvest;
    C = Crop management problems.                                                        consequently, growing “soil building” crops before and
    C- = Decreases crop management problems.                                             after a root crop is often desirable (80).

    1                                                                     5       A      C, many crops do well after Alliums, possibly due to
      Includes lettuce, chicory, endive, and escarole.                                   mycorrhizal buildup (82, 83).
    2
      Includes celery, fennel, parsley, dill, and related herbs.
    3                                                                     5       B      D, white rot (36).
      Includes mustard greens, Asian greens, napa cabbage, 		
      arugula, and cress.                                                 5       D      D, white rot (36). S, root crops tend to reduce soil
    4                                                                                    structure due to the additional soil disturbance during
      Includes cabbage, Brussels sprouts, and kohlrabi.
    5                                                                                    harvest; consequently, growing “soil building” crops
      Includes cantaloupe and watermelon.
    6                                                                                    before and after a root crop is often desirable (80).
      Includes winter wheat, spelt, and rye.
    7                                                                     5       E      XXXX
      Includes barley, oat, and spring wheat.
    8
      Includes red clover, alsike clover, and crimson clover in           5       I      S, root crops tend to reduce soil structure due to
      the south.                                                                         the additional soil disturbance during harvest;
    9                                                                                    consequently, growing “soil building” crops before and
      Includes berseem clover and crimson clover in the north.
                                                                                         after a root crop is often desirable (80). S-, N-, mulched
                                                                                         garlic, however, tends to restore soil structure and
Notes on Interactions:                                                                   fertility after the relatively extractive potato crop (80).
                                                                          5       M      S, root crops tend to reduce soil structure due to
Row     Col.   Notes                                                                     the additional soil disturbance during harvest;
                                                                                         consequently, growing “soil building” crops before and
1       B      W-, weed control in onion, which is a weak competitor,
                                                                                         after a root crop is often desirable (80).
               is easier following the good weed suppression that
               results when a competitive crop like tomato or squash is   5       U      S, root crops tend to reduce soil structure due to
               heavily mulched with hay (80).                                            the additional soil disturbance during harvest;
                                                                                         consequently, growing “soil building” crops before and
1       I      W-, due to cultivation, hilling, and digging, potato is
                                                                                         after a root crop is often desirable (80).
               useful for cleaning up after a weedy crop (83).
                                                                          6       F      XXXX
2       A      C, many crops do well after alliums, possibly due to
               mycorrhizal buildup (82, 83).                              6       H      D, sclerotinia drop (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
2       B      XXXX                                                       6       I      D, sclerotinia stalk rot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
2       D      D, white rot, onion smut (danger is primarily to           6       Q      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,
               seedlings before transplanting) (36).                                     cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see
                                                                                         chapter 3, p. 21).
2       E      D, white rot (36).
                                                                          6       R      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,
3       A      C, many crops do well after alliums, possibly due to
                                                                                         cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see
               mycorrhizal buildup (82, 83).
                                                                                         chapter 3, p. 21).
3       C      XXXX
                                                                          6       S      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,
4       A      C, many crops do well after alliums, possibly due to                      cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see
               mycorrhizal buildup (82, 83).                                             chapter 3, p. 21).


                                                                              APPENDIX 2 | Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities 109
     APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

 Row    Col.   Notes                                                          Row   Col.   Notes
 6      T      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,                8     D      W-, a short-season crop like lettuce or spinach allows
               cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see                             good weed control and low weed seed production prior
               chapter 3, p. 21).                                                          to slow-growing, long-season, hard-to-weed crops like
                                                                                           onion and carrot (83).
 6      U      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,
               cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see                8     F      D, sclerotinia white mold (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
               chapter 3, p. 21).
                                                                              8     G      D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably
 6      AI     D, common bacterial blight (Xanthomonas campestris;                         including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
               appendix 3, p. 124); soybean cyst nematode (Heterodera                      related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a
               glycines) increases to high density on bean, though the                     variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
               bean crop is scarcely affected (28, 41).                                    other plants (36).
 6      AJ     D, common bacterial blight (Xanthomonas campestris;            8     H      XXXX
               appendix 3, p. 124); soybean cyst nematode (Heterodera
                                                                              8     I      D, sclerotinia stalk rot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
               glycines) (28).
                                                                              8     J      D, lettuce, cabbage, and cress can be symptomless
 6      AW     D, field pea and bell bean should not be planted after
                                                                                           carriers of Colletotrichum coccodes, which causes tomato
               bean due to Fusarium, Pythium, and Sclerotinia (119).
                                                                                           anthracnose and black dot. C-, short-season salad
 6      AX     D, field pea and bell bean should not be planted after                      greens act as a cover crop and are harvested in time to
               bean due to Fusarium, Pythium, and Sclerotinia (119).                       plant tomato, eggplant, or pepper (83).
 7      G      XXXX                                                           8     K      C-, short-season salad greens act as a cover crop and are
                                                                                           harvested in time to plant tomato, eggplant, or pepper
 7      H      D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably
                                                                                           (83).
               including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
               related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a       8     L      C-, short-season salad greens act as a cover crop and are
               variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly                      harvested in time to plant tomato, eggplant, or pepper
               other plants (36). C-, there is time for a short-season crop                (83).
               after harvesting pea, and the second crop benefits from
                                                                              8     M      W-, a short-season crop like lettuce or spinach allows
               N supplied by the pea (81).
                                                                                           good weed control and low weed seed production prior
 7      P      C-, there is time for a crop of crucifer greens or spinach                  to slow-growing, long-season, hard-to-weed crops like
               after harvesting pea, and the second crop benefits from                     onion and carrot (83).
               N supplied by the pea (81).
                                                                              8     V      C-, leafy greens can make a crop before cucurbits need
 7      T      C-, timing works well to plant lettuce or radish after pea                  to be planted, and residue from the greens act as a
               or spinach within a year (82).                                              green manure (81).
 7      Z      C-, there is time for a crop of crucifer greens or spinach     8     W      C-, leafy greens can make a crop before cucurbits need
               after harvesting pea, and the second crop benefits from                     to be planted, and residue from the greens act as a
               N supplied by the pea (81).                                                 green manure (81).
 7      AS     D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably               8     X      C-, leafy greens can make a crop before cucurbits need
               including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely                         to be planted, and residue from the greens act as a
               related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a                    green manure (81).
               variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
                                                                              8     Y      C-, leafy greens can make a crop before cucurbits need
               other plants (36).
                                                                                           to be planted, and residue from the greens act as a
 7      AW     D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably                            green manure (81).
               including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
                                                                              8     AS     D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably
               related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a
                                                                                           including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
               variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
                                                                                           related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a
               other plants (36).
                                                                                           variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
 7      AX     D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably                            other plants (36).
               including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
                                                                              8     AW     D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably
               related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a
                                                                                           including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
               variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
                                                                                           related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a
               other plants (36).
                                                                                           variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
 8      B      W-, a short-season crop like lettuce or spinach allows                      other plants (36).
               good weed control and low weed seed production prior
                                                                              8     AX     D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably
               to slow-growing, long-season, hard-to-weed crops like
                                                                                           including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
               onion and carrot (83).
                                                                                           related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a
                                                                                           variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
                                                                                           other plants (36).


110 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
    APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

Row    Col.   Notes                                                            Row   Col.   Notes
9      A      W-, due to cultivation, hilling, and digging, potatoes are       10    J      XXXX
              useful for cleaning up weeds prior to other crops (83, 81).
                                                                               10    K      D, verticillium wilt (67; see appendix 3, p. 124),
9      D      S, root crops tend to reduce soil structure due to                            phytophthora crown, and collar rot (31; see appendix 3,
              the additional soil disturbance during harvest;                               p. 124). I, Colorado potato beetle (see table 3.5, p. 40).
              consequently, preceding and following root crops with
                                                                               10    L      D, phytophthora blight (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
              “soil building” crops is often desirable (80).
                                                                               10    Q      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato, cucumber,
9      E      S, root crops tend to reduce soil structure due to
                                                                                            snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see chapter 3, p. 21).
              the additional soil disturbance during harvest;
              consequently, growing “soil building” crops before and           10    R      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato, cucumber,
              after a root crop is often desirable (80). C-, the timing                     snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see chapter 3, p. 21).
              of potato harvest and garlic planting are well suited for        10    S      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato, cucumber,
              following potato with garlic (83).                                            snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see chapter 3, p. 21).
9      F      D, sclerotinia white mold (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).          10    T      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato, cucumber,
9      H      D, sclerotinia drop (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).                             snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see chapter 3, p. 21).
9      I      XXXX                                                             10    U      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato, cucumber,
                                                                                            snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see chapter 3, p. 21).
9      J      D, early blight, anthracnose, verticillium wilt (67; see
              appendix 3, p. 124); stem canker (36). I, Colorado potato        10    V      D, phytophthora blight (31; see appendix 3, p. 124).
              beetle (see table 3.5, p. 40).                                   10    W      D, phytophthora blight (31; see appendix 3, p. 124).
9      K      D, verticillium wilt (67; see appendix 3, p. 124). I,            10    X      D, phytophthora blight (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
              Colorado potato beetle (see table 3.5, p. 40).
                                                                               10    Y      D, phytophthora blight (31; see appendix 3, p. 124).
9      M      D, any 2-year sequence involving carrot, celery, and
              potato should be avoided due to root-knot nematode               10    AC     D, verticillium wilt (36); brown and black root rot by
              (Meloidogyne hapla) (20). S, root crops tend to reduce                        Corticium solani (36).
              soil structure due to the additional soil disturbance            11    I      D, verticillium wilt (67; see appendix 3, p. 124). I,
              during harvest; consequently, preceding and following                         Colorado potato beetle (see table 3.5, p. 40).
              root crops with “soil building” crops is often desirable
              (80). W-, due to cultivation and competitiveness, potato         11    J      D, verticillium wilt (67; see appendix 3, p. 124). I,
              cleans up weeds prior to carrots, which are a poor                            Colorado potato beetle (see table 3.5, p. 40).
              competitor and hard to weed (83).                                11    K      XXXX
9      N      D, any 2-year sequence involving carrot, celery, and             11    L      D, phytophthora blight (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
              potato should be avoided due to root-knot nematode
              (Meloidogyne hapla) (20). S-, potatoes improve soil              11    V      D, phytophthora blight (see appendix 3, p. 124).
              structure before small direct-seeded crops due to low            11    W      D, phytophthora blight (see appendix 3, p. 124).
              traffic (83).
                                                                               11    X      D, phytophthora blight (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
9      O      D, any 2-year sequence involving carrot, celery, and
                                                                               11    Y      D, phytophthora blight (see appendix 3, p. 124).
              potato should be avoided due to root-knot nematode
              (Meloidogyne hapla) (20).                                        12    I      D, verticillium wilt (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
9      P      S-, potatoes improve soil structure before small direct-         12    J      D, bacterial spot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
              seeded crops due to low traffic (83).
                                                                               12    K      D, verticillium wilt (67; see appendix 3, p. 124);
9      U      S, root crops tend to reduce soil structure due to                            phytophthora crown and collar rot (see appendix 3).
              the additional soil disturbance during harvest;
                                                                               12    L      XXXX
              consequently, preceding and following root crops with
              “soil building” crops is often desirable (80).                   12    V      D, phytophthora blight (see appendix 3, p. 124).
9      AA     D, scab of beet is caused by several of the Actinomycete         12    W      D, phytophthora blight (see appendix 3, p. 124).
              species that cause common scab of potato (36).                   12    X      D, phytophthora blight (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
9      AC     D, verticillium wilt (36); brown and black root rot of           12    Y      D, phytophthora blight (see appendix 3, p. 124).
              strawberries can be caused by the same organism as
              rhizoctonia canker (black scurf ) of potato (36).                13    B      W, weed control is difficult in carrots and can lead to
                                                                                            heavy weed pressure in onions, which is also a difficult-
10     F      D, sclerotinia white mold (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).                       to-weed crop.
10     H      D, sclerotinia drop (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).                13    D      S, root crops tend to reduce soil structure due to
10     I      D, verticillium wilt, sclerotinia stalk rot, early blight (67;                the additional soil disturbance during harvest;
              see appendix 3, p. 124). I, Colorado potato beetle (see                       consequently, growing “soil building” crops before and
              table 3.5, p. 40).                                                            after a root crop is often desirable (80).


                                                                                APPENDIX 2 | Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities 111
   APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

 Row   Col.   Notes                                                        Row   Col.   Notes
 13    E      S, root crops tend to reduce soil structure due to           15    N      D, celery root rot and celeriac scab are caused by the
              the additional soil disturbance during harvest;                           same organism (Phoma apiicola); once a crop has shown
              consequently, growing “soil building” crops before and                    infection, neither crop should be grown for 3–4+ years
              after a root crop is often desirable (80).                                (36); any 2-year sequence involving carrot, celery, and
                                                                                        potato should be avoided due to root-knot nematode
 13    F      D, sclerotinia white mold (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
                                                                                        (Meloidogyne hapla) (20).
 13    H      D, sclerotinia drop (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
                                                                           15    O      XXXX
 13    I      D, sclerotinia stalk rot, common scab (67; see appendix
                                                                           16    J      D, lettuce, cabbage, and cress can be symptomless
              3, p. 124); any 2-year sequence involving carrot,
                                                                                        carriers of Colletotrichum coccodes, which causes tomato
              celery, and potato should be avoided due to root-
                                                                                        anthracnose and black dot (chapter 3, p. 21). C-, short-
              knot nematode (Meloidogyne hapla) (20). S, root crops
                                                                                        season salad greens act as a cover crop and are harvested
              tend to reduce soil structure due to the additional soil
                                                                                        in time to plant tomato, eggplant, or pepper (83).
              disturbance during harvest; consequently, preceding
              and following root crops with “soil building” crops is       16    K      C-, short-season salad greens act as a cover crop and are
              often desirable (80).                                                     harvested in time to plant tomato, eggplant, or pepper
                                                                                        (83).
 13    M      XXXX
                                                                           16    L      C-, short-season salad greens act as a cover crop and are
 13    N      D, any 2-year sequence involving carrot, celery, and
                                                                                        harvested in time to plant tomato, eggplant, or pepper
              potato should be avoided due to root-knot nematode
                                                                                        (83).
              (Meloidogyne hapla) (20).
                                                                           16    P      XXXX
 13    O      D, any 2-year sequence involving carrot, celery, and
              potato should be avoided due to root-knot nematode           16    Q      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
              (Meloidogyne hapla) (20).                                                 including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
                                                                                        Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
 13    U      S, root crops tend to reduce soil structure due to
              the additional soil disturbance during harvest;              16    R      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
              consequently, growing “soil building” crops before and                    including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
              after a root crop is often desirable (80).                                Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
 13    V      D, Cucumber can be infected with canker from soil            16    S      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
              containing diseased remains of carrots or turnips (36).                   including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
                                                                                        Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
 13    AN     W-, S-, a spring oat cover crop (often with field pea)
              helps control weeds and restore soil structure after late-   16    T      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
              harvested root crops like parsnip.                                        including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
                                                                                        Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
 13    AW     W-, N-, a spring-planted field pea cover crop (often with
              oat) controls weeds and helps restore N after late-          16    U      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
              harvested root crops like parsnip.                                        including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
                                                                                        Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
 14    I      D, any 2-year sequence involving carrot, celery, and
              potato should be avoided due to root-knot nematode           16    V      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year
              (Meloidogyne hapla) (20).                                                 and vice versa without need for additional compost
                                                                                        (83). C-, leafy greens can make a crop before cucurbits
 14    M      D, any 2-year sequence involving carrot, celery, and
                                                                                        need to be planted, and residue from the greens act as a
              potato should be avoided due to root-knot nematode
                                                                                        green manure (81).
              (Meloidogyne hapla) (20).
                                                                           16    W      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year
 14    N      XXXX
                                                                                        and vice versa without need for additional compost
 14    O      D, celery root rot and celeriac scab are caused by the                    (83). C-, leafy greens can make a crop before cucurbits
              same organism (Phoma apiicola); once a crop has shown                     need to be planted, and residue from the greens act as a
              infection, neither crop should be grown for 3–4+ years                    green manure (81).
              (36); any 2-year sequence involving carrot, celery, and
                                                                           16    X      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year
              potato should be avoided due to root-knot nematode
                                                                                        and vice versa without need for additional compost
              (Meloidogyne hapla) (20).
                                                                                        (83). C-, leafy greens can make a crop before cucurbits
 15    I      D, any 2-year sequence involving carrot, celery, and                      need to be planted, and residue from the greens act as a
              potato should be avoided due to root-knot nematode                        green manure (81).
              (Meloidogyne hapla) (20).
                                                                           16    Y      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year
 15    M      D, any 2-year sequence involving carrot, celery, and                      and vice versa without need for additional compost
              potato should be avoided due to root-knot nematode                        (83). C-, leafy greens can make a crop before cucurbits
              (Meloidogyne hapla) (20).                                                 need to be planted, and residue from the greens act as a
                                                                                        green manure (81).


112 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
 APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

Row   Col.   Notes                                                          Row   Col.   Notes
16    AY     D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,          18    Q      D, clubroot, fusarium yellows, blackleaf, black rot, white
             including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,                       mold (67).
             Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
                                                                            18    R      XXXX
16    AZ     D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
                                                                            18    S      D, clubroot, fusarium yellows, blackleaf, black rot, white
             including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
                                                                                         mold (67).
             Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
                                                                            18    T      D, clubroot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
17    F      D, sclerotinia white mold (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
                                                                            18    U      D, clubroot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
17    H      D, sclerotinia drop (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
                                                                            18    V      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year
17    I      D, sclerotinia stalk rot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
                                                                                         and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
17    P      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
                                                                            18    W      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year
             including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
                                                                                         and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
             Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
                                                                            18    X      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year
17    Q      XXXX
                                                                                         and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
17    R      D, clubroot, fusarium yellows, blackleaf, black rot, white
                                                                            18    Y      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year
             mold (67).
                                                                                         and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
17    S      D, clubroot, fusarium yellows, blackleaf, black rot, white
                                                                            18    AA     D, beet cyst nematode attacks both cabbage and beet (10).
             mold (67).
                                                                            18    AY     D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
17    T      D, clubroot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
                                                                                         including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
17    U      D, clubroot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).                                   Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
17    V      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year        18    AZ     D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
             and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).                    including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
                                                                                         Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
17    W      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year
             and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).       19    F      D, sclerotinia white mold (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
17    X      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year        19    G      D-, residues of crops in the mustard family suppress
             and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).                    aphanomyces root rot of pea (85).
17    Y      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year        19    H      D, sclerotinia drop (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
             and vice versa without need for additional compost
                                                                            19    I      D, sclerotinia stalk rot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
             (83). C-, two rows of broccoli fit comfortably in the space
             needed for one row of summer squash.                           19    P      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
                                                                                         including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
17    AC     D-, broccoli residue reduces the severity of verticillium
                                                                                         Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
             wilt (Verticillium dahliae) in subsequent strawberry (106).
                                                                            19    Q      D, clubroot, fusarium yellows, blackleaf, black rot, white
17    AY     D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
                                                                                         mold (67).
             including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
             Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).          19    R      D, clubroot, fusarium yellows, blackleaf, black rot, white
                                                                                         mold (67).
17    AZ     D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
             including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,          19    S      XXXX
             Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).          19    T      D, clubroot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
18    F      D, sclerotinia white mold (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).        19    U      D, clubroot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
18    G      D-, residues of crops in the mustard family suppress           19    V      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year
             aphanomyces root rot of pea (85).                                           and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
18    H      D, sclerotinia drop (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).              19    W      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year
18    I      D, sclerotinia stalk rot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124); black                and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
             scurf and stem canker (Corticum solani) (36).                  19    X      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year
18    J      D, lettuce, cabbage, and cress can be symptomless                           and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
             carriers of Colletotrichum coccodes, which causes tomato       19    Y      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year
             anthracnose and black dot (chapter 3, p. 21).                               and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
18    P      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,          19    AY     D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
             including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,                       including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
             Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola. and many weeds (36).                       Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).



                                                                             APPENDIX 2 | Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities 113
   APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

 Row   Col.   Notes                                                            Row   Col.   Notes
 19    AZ     D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,            21    AY     D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
              including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,                         including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
              Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).                         Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
 20    G      D-, residues of crops in the mustard family suppress             21    AZ     D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
              aphanomyces root rot of pea (85).                                             including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
                                                                                            Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
 20    I      D, common scab (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
                                                                               22    A      W-, mulched vine crops clean up weeds before hard-to-
 20    P      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
                                                                                            weed crops (83).
              including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
              Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).            22    F      W-, intense cultivation of bean can help clean up weeds
                                                                                            following a weedy vine crop (83).
 20    Q      D, clubroot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
                                                                               22    H      W, unmulched vine crops get weedy; therefore, do not
 20    R      D, clubroot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
                                                                                            follow them with direct-seeded salad greens or carrots (83).
 20    S      D, clubroot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
                                                                               22    K      D, phytophthora crown and collar rot (see appendix 3,
 20    T      XXXX                                                                          p. 124).
 20    U      D, clubroot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).                        22    L      D, phytophthora blight (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
 20    V      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year          22    M      W, unmulched vine crops get weedy; therefore, do not
              and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).                      follow them with direct-seeded salad greens or carrots
 20    W      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year                       (83).
              and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).         22    P      W, unmulched vine crops get weedy; therefore, do not
 20    X      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year                       follow them with direct-seeded salad greens or carrots (83).
              and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).                      N-, brassicas can follow vine crops within the same year
                                                                                            and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
 20    Y      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year
              and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).         22    Q      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,
                                                                                            cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see
 20    AY     D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,                         chapter 3, p. 21). N-, brassicas can follow vine crops
              including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,                         within the same year and vice versa without need for
              Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).                         additional compost (83).
 20    AZ     D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,            22    R      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,
              including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,                         cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see
              Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).                         chapter 3, p. 21). N-, brassicas can follow vine crops
 21    G      D-, residues of crops in the mustard family suppress                          within the same year and vice versa without need for
              aphanomyces root rot of pea (85).                                             additional compost (83).

 21    I      D, common scab (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).                     22    S      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,
                                                                                            cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see
 21    P      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,                         chapter 3, p. 21). N-, brassicas can follow vine crops
              including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,                         within the same year and vice versa without need for
              Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).                         additional compost (83).
 21    Q      D, clubroot, blackleaf, blackrot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).   22    T      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,
 21    R      D, clubroot, blackleaf, blackrot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).                cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see
                                                                                            chapter 3, p. 21).
 21    S      D, clubroot, blackleaf, blackrot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
                                                                               22    U      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,
 21    T      D, clubroot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).                                     cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see
 21    U      XXXX                                                                          chapter 3, p. 21).
 21    V      D, cucumber can be infected with canker from soil                22    V      XXXX
              containing diseased remains of carrots or turnips (36).          22    W      D, leaf spots, black rot (gummy stem blight), scab
              N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year                       (67; see appendix 3, p. 124); phytophthora blight (see
              and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).                      appendix 3).
 21    W      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year          22    X      D, blackrot (gummy stem blight), fusarium crown and
              and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).                      fruit rot, phytophthora blight (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
 21    X      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year          22    Y      D, phytophthora blight (see appendix 3, p. 124).
              and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
                                                                               22    AB     I, corn rootworm adults are attracted to cucurbits; they
 21    Y      N-, brassicas can follow cucurbits within the same year                       lay their eggs at the base of the plants, and the larvae
              and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).                      attack corn roots the following year (see table 3.5, p. 40).


114 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
 APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

Row   Col.   Notes                                                          Row   Col.   Notes
22    AD     I, corn rootworm adults are attracted to cucurbits; they       24    K      D, phytophthora crown and collar rot (see appendix 3,
             lay their eggs at the base of the plants, and the larvae                    p. 124).
             attack corn roots the following year (see table 3.5, p. 40).
                                                                            24    L      D, phytophthora blight (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
22    AJ     W-, intense cultivation of bean can help clean up weeds
                                                                            24    M      W, unmulched vine crops get weedy; therefore, do not
             following a weedy vine crop (83).
                                                                                         follow them with direct-seeded salad greens or carrots (83).
23    A      W-, mulched vine crops clean up weeds before hard-to-
                                                                            24    P      W, unmulched vine crops get weedy; therefore, do not
             weed crops (83).
                                                                                         follow them with direct-seeded salad greens or carrots (83).
23    F      W-, intense cultivation of bean can help clean up weeds                     N-, brassicas can follow vine crops within the same year
             following a weedy vine crop (83).                                           and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
23    H      W, unmulched vine crops get weedy; therefore, do not           24    Q      N-, brassicas can follow vine crops within the same year
             follow them with direct-seeded salad greens or carrots                      and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
             (83).
                                                                            24    R      N-, brassicas can follow vine crops within the same year
23    K      D, phytophthora crown and collar rot (see appendix 3,                       and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
             p. 124).
                                                                            24    S      N-, brassicas can follow vine crops within the same year
23    L      D, phytophthora blight (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).                        and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
23    M      W, unmulched vine crops get weedy; therefore, do not           24    V      D, black rot (gummy stem blight) (67; see appendix 3, p.
             follow them with direct-seeded salad greens or carrots                      124); phytophthora blight (see appendix 3).
             (83).
                                                                            24    W      D, leaf spots, black rot (gummy stem blight), scab
23    P      W, unmulched vine crops get weedy; therefore, do not                        (67; see appendix 3, p. 124); phytophthora blight (see
             follow them with direct-seeded salad greens or carrots                      appendix 3).
             (83). N-, brassicas can follow vine crops within the same
                                                                            24    X      XXXX
             year and vice versa without need for additional compost
             (83).                                                          24    Y      D, phytophthora blight (see appendix 3, p. 124).
23    Q      N-, brassicas can follow vine crops within the same year       24    AB     I, corn rootworm adults are attracted to cucurbits; they
             and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).                    lay their eggs at the base of the plants, and the larvae
                                                                                         attack corn roots the following year (see table 3.5, p. 40).
23    R      N-, brassicas can follow vine crops within the same year
             and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).       24    AD     I, corn rootworm adults are attracted to cucurbits; they
                                                                                         lay their eggs at the base of the plants, and the larvae
23    S      N-, brassicas can follow vine crops within the same year
                                                                                         attack corn roots the following year (see table 3.5, p. 40).
             and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
                                                                            24    AJ     W-, intense cultivation of bean can help clean up weeds
23    V      D, leaf spots, gummy stem blight, scab (67; see appendix
                                                                                         following a weedy vine crop (83).
             3, p. 124); phytophthora blight (see appendix 3).
                                                                            24    AV     C-, hairy vetch can be overseeded into winter squash in
23    W      XXXX
                                                                                         July to provide a winter cover crop after harvest (83).
23    X      D, blackrot (gummy stem blight), fusarium crown and
                                                                            25    A      W-, mulched vine crops clean up weeds before hard-to-
             fruit rot, phytophthora blight (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
                                                                                         weed crops (83).
23    Y      D, phytophthora blight (see appendix 3, p. 124).
                                                                            25    H      W, unmulched vine crops get weedy; therefore, do not
23    AB     I, corn rootworm adults are attracted to cucurbits; they                    follow them with direct-seeded salad greens or carrots (83).
             lay their eggs at the base of the plants, and the larvae
                                                                            25    K      D, phytophthora crown and collar rot (see appendix 3,
             attack corn roots the following year (see table 3.5, p. 40).
                                                                                         p. 124).
23    AD     I, corn rootworm adults are attracted to cucurbits; they
                                                                            25    L      D, phytophthora blight (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
             lay their eggs at the base of the plants, and the larvae
             attack corn roots the following year (see table 3.5, p. 40).   25    M      W, unmulched vine crops get weedy; therefore, do not
                                                                                         follow them with direct-seeded salad greens or carrots (83).
23    AJ     W-, intense cultivation of bean can help clean up weeds
             following a weedy vine crop (83).                              25    P      W, unmulched vine crops get weedy; therefore, do not
                                                                                         follow them with direct-seeded salad greens or carrots (83).
24    A      W-, mulched vine crops clean up weeds before hard-to-
                                                                                         N-, brassicas can follow vine crops within the same year
             weed crops (83).
                                                                                         and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
24    F      W-, intense cultivation of bean can help clean up weeds
                                                                            25    Q      N-, brassicas can follow vine crops within the same year
             following a weedy vine crop (83).
                                                                                         and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
24    H      W, unmulched vine crops get weedy; therefore, do not
                                                                            25    R      N-, brassicas can follow vine crops within the same year
             follow them with direct-seeded salad greens or carrots
                                                                                         and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).
             (83).



                                                                             APPENDIX 2 | Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities 115
   APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

 Row   Col.   Notes                                                          Row   Col.   Notes
 25    S      N-, brassicas can follow vine crops within the same year       28    X      D, fusarium fruit rot is more common on pumpkin
              and vice versa without need for additional compost (83).                    following corn (chapter 3, p. 21).
 25    V      D, phytophthora blight (see appendix 3, p. 124).               28    AA     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with beet to
                                                                                          decrease root rots (67).
 25    W      D, leaf spots, black rot (gummy stem blight), scab
              (67; see appendix 3, p. 124); phytophthora blight (see         28    AB     XXXX
              appendix 3).
                                                                             28    AD     I, corn rootworm (see table 3.5, p. 40).
 25    X      D, blackrot (gummy stem blight), fusarium crown and
                                                                             28    AE     D, scab (Gibberella zeae) on barley and spring wheat
              fruit rot, phytophthora blight (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
                                                                                          tends to be worse following corn even than following
 25    Y      XXXX                                                                        another spring grain, unless the corn stalks are removed
                                                                                          for silage or by clean tillage (10).
 25    AB     I, corn rootworm adults are attracted to cucurbits; they
              lay their eggs at the base of the plants, and the larvae       28    AG     D, fusarium can be a problem when wheat follows corn
              attack corn roots the following year (see table 3.5, p. 40).                (83).
 25    AD     I, corn rootworm adults are attracted to cucurbits; they       28    AJ     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with bean
              lay their eggs at the base of the plants, and the larvae                    to decrease root rots (67).
              attack corn roots the following year (see table 3.5, p. 40).
                                                                             29    I      D, verticillium wilt (36).
 26    B      W-, a short-season crop like lettuce or spinach allows
                                                                             29    J      D, verticillium wilt (36).
              good weed control and low weed seed production prior
              to slow-growing, long-season, hard-to-weed crops like          29    K      D, verticillium wilt (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
              onion and carrot (83).                                         29    AC     XXXX
 26    D      W-, a short-season crop like lettuce or spinach allows         30    F      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with bean
              good weed control and low weed seed production prior                        to decrease root rots (67).
              to slow-growing, long-season, hard-to-weed crops like
              onion and carrot (83).                                         30    I      C-, potato works well after corn because it tolerates corn
                                                                                          stover (82).
 26    H      C-, timing works well to plant lettuce or radish after pea
              or spinach within a year (82).                                 30    Q      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with
                                                                                          cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).
 26    M      W-, a short-season crop like lettuce or spinach allows
              good weed control and low weed seed production prior           30    R      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with
              to slow-growing, long-season, hard-to-weed crops like                       cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).
              onion and carrot (83).                                         30    S      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with
 26    T      C-, timing works well to plant lettuce or radish after pea                  cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).
              or spinach within a year (82).                                 30    X      D, fusarium fruit rot is more common on pumpkin
 26    Z      XXXX                                                                        following corn (chapter 3, p. 21).
 27    I      D, scab of beet is caused by several of the Actinomycete       30    AA     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with beet to
              species that cause common scab of potato (36).                              decrease root rots (67).
 27    Q      D, beet cyst nematode attacks both cabbage and beet            30    AB     I, corn rootworm (see table 3.5, p. 40).
              (10), and thus presumably also broccoli and cauliflower.       30    AD     XXXX
 27    R      D, beet cyst nematode attacks both cabbage and beet (10).      30    AE     D, scab (Gibberella zeae) on barley and spring wheat
 27    S      D, beet cyst nematode attacks both cabbage and beet                         tends to be worse following corn even than following
              (10), and thus presumably also kale and collards.                           another spring grain, unless the corn stalks are removed
                                                                                          for silage or by clean tillage (10).
 27    AA     XXXX
                                                                             30    AF     D, barley should not be grown after corn due to
 28    F      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with bean                     possibility of scab (119).
              to decrease root rots (67).
                                                                             30    AG     D, scab (Fusarium spp. and Gibberella spp.) can be a
 28    I      C-, potato works well after corn because it tolerates corn                  problem when wheat follows corn (83, 20). D-, foot rot is
              stover (82).                                                                negligible when wheat follows oat, corn, or beans (20);
 28    Q      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with                          take-all is better suppressed by corn than by other crops
              cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).                    like soybean and sunflower (65).
 28    R      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with             30    AJ     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with bean
              cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).                    to decrease root rots (67).
 28    S      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with
              cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).



116 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
 APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

Row   Col.   Notes                                                         Row   Col.   Notes
31    A      D-, small grains decrease nematode populations                31    AB     I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)
             (chapter 3, p. 21). W, broadleaf weeds have time to                        (see table 3.5, p. 40).
             set seeds in a grain crop before harvest (39, based on
                                                                           31    AD     I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)
             experience of Eric and Anne Nordell).
                                                                                        (see table 3.5, p. 40).
31    B      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain
                                                                           31    AE     XXXX
             crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in
             noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion     31    AG     D, incidence of foot rot of wheat caused by Fusarium
             and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne                       culmorum (but not by Helminthosporium sativum)
             Nordell). I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or                   declines more slowly if oat is part of the rotation (56).
             any grass precedes onions (83).                                            D-, foot rot is negligible when wheat follows oat, corn,
                                                                                        or bean (20). I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and
31    C      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain
                                                                                        Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).
             crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in
             noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion     31    AH     I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)
             and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne                       (see table 3.5, p. 40).
             Nordell). I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or      31    AJ     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with bean
             any grass precedes onions (83).                                            to decrease root rots (67).
31    D      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain          32    A      D-, small grains decrease nematode populations
             crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in                    (chapter 3, p. 21). W, broadleaf weeds have time to
             noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion                  set seeds in a grain crop before harvest (39, based on
             and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne                       experience of Eric and Anne Nordell).
             Nordell). I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or
             any grass precedes onions (83).                               32    B      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain
                                                                                        crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in
31    F      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with bean                    noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion
             to decrease root rots (67).                                                and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne
31    H      D-, rotation with small grains decreases root-knot                         Nordell). I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or
             nematode (Meloidogyne hapla) effects on lettuce (22).                      any grass precedes onions (83).
31    I      D-, use of 2 years of grass or 1 year of cereal in rotation   32    C      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain
             with potato helps reduce rhizoctonia canker (67). I,                       crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in
             wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)                           noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion
             (see table 3.5, p. 40).                                                    and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne
                                                                                        Nordell). I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or
31    M      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain
                                                                                        any grass precedes onions (83).
             crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem
             in noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like        32    D      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain
             onion and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and                      crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in
             Anne Nordell). I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and                        noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion
             Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).                                     and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne
                                                                                        Nordell). I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or
31    N      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain
                                                                                        any grass precedes onions (83).
             crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in
             noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion     32    F      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with bean
             and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne                       to decrease root rots (67).
             Nordell).                                                     32    G      D-, a preceding oat crop reduces aphanomyces
31    Q      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with                         (common) root rot (Aphanomyces euteiches) (54).
             cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).      32    H      D-, rotation with small grains decreases root-knot
31    R      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with                         nematode (Meloidogyne hapla) effects on lettuce (22).
             cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).      32    I      D-, use of 2 years of grass or 1 year of cereal in rotation
31    S      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with                         with potato helps reduce rhizoctonia canker (67). I,
             cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).                   wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)
                                                                                        (see table 3.5, p. 40).
31    V      I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)
             (see table 3.5, p. 40).                                       32    M      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain
                                                                                        crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem
31    W      I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)
                                                                                        in noncompetitive or difficult to cultivate crops like
             (see table 3.5, p. 40).
                                                                                        onion and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and
31    AA     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with beet                    Anne Nordell). I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and
             to decrease root rots (67). I, wireworms (Melanotus                        Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).
             communis and Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).



                                                                            APPENDIX 2 | Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities 117
   APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

 Row   Col.   Notes                                                           Row   Col.   Notes
 32    N      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain            33    H      D-, rotation with small grains decreases root-knot
              crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in                      nematode (Meloidogyne hapla) effects on lettuce (22).
              noncompetitive or difficult to cultivate crops like onion
                                                                              33    I      D-, use of 2 years of grass or 1 year of cereal in rotation
              and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne
                                                                                           with potato helps reduce rhizoctonia canker (67). I,
              Nordell).
                                                                                           wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)
 32    Q      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with                           (see table 3.5, p. 40).
              cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).
                                                                              33    M      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain
 32    R      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with                           crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem
              cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).                     in noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like
                                                                                           onion and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and
 32    S      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with
                                                                                           Anne Nordell). I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and
              cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).
                                                                                           Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).
 32    V      I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)
                                                                              33    N      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain
              (see table 3.5, p. 40).
                                                                                           crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in
 32    W      I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)                          noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion
              (see table 3.5, p. 40).                                                      and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne
 32    AA     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with beet                      Nordell).
              to decrease root rots (67). I, wireworms (Melanotus             33    Q      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with
              communis and Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).                          cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).
 32    AB     I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)             33    R      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with
              (see table 3.5, p. 40).                                                      cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).
 32    AD     I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)             33    S      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with
              (see table 3.5, p. 40).                                                      cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).
 32    AF     XXXX                                                            33    V      I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)
 32    AG     D, barley is a good host for take-all, even though it is less                (see table 3.5, p. 40).
              affected by the disease than wheat (52); foot rot is high-      33    W      I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)
              est when following barley (20). I, wireworms (Melanotus                      (see table 3.5, p. 40).
              communis and Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).
                                                                              33    AA     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with beet
 32    AH     D, barley is a host for ergot (119). I, wireworms (Melano-                   to decrease root rots (67). I, wireworms (Melanotus
              tus communis and Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).                      communis and Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).
 32    AJ     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with bean         33    AB     I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)
              to decrease root rots (67).                                                  (see table 3.5, p. 40).
 33    A      D-, small grains decrease nematode populations                  33    AD     D, seedling root rots of corn are more common follow-
              (chapter 3, p. 21).                                                          ing wheat than following oat (20). I, wireworms (Melano-
 33    B      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain                         tus communis and Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).
              crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in         33    AE     I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)
              noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion                    (see table 3.5, p. 40).
              and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne
                                                                              33    AF     D, To avoid leaf diseases, avoid planting barley after
              Nordell). I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or
                                                                                           wheat (107); barley should not be planted after wheat
              any grass precedes onions (83).
                                                                                           due to leaf diseases and root rot (119).
 33    C      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain
                                                                              33    AG     XXXX
              crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in
              noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion       33    AH     D, wheat is a host for ergot (119). I, wireworms Melano-
              and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne                         tus communis and Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).
              Nordell). I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or
                                                                              33    AJ     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with bean
              any grass precedes onions (83).
                                                                                           to decrease root rots (67).
 33    D      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain
                                                                              34    A      D-, small grains decrease nematode populations
              crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in
                                                                                           (chapter 3, p. 21).
              noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion
              and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne            34    B      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain
              Nordell). I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or                     crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in
              any grass precedes onions (83).                                              noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion
                                                                                           and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne
 33    F      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with bean
                                                                                           Nordell). I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or
              to decrease root rots (67).
                                                                                           any grass precedes onions (83).


118 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
 APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

Row   Col.   Notes                                                         Row   Col.   Notes
34    C      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain          34    AL     D, avoid planting crops that are hosts to ergot, such as
             crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in                    forage grasses, before and after rye in the rotation (119).
             noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion
                                                                           35    F      D, common bacterial blight (Xanthomonas campestris;
             and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne
                                                                                        appendix 3, p. 124); soybean cyst nematode (28).
             Nordell). I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or
             any grass precedes onions (83).                               35    I      D-, soybean before potato prevents scab (82).
34    D      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain          35    AD     D-, a previous crop of soybean reduces red root rot of
             crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in                    corn (Phoma terrestris + Pythium spp. and Fusarium spp.)
             noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion                  (123).
             and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne          35    AI     XXXX
             Nordell). I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or
             any grass precedes onions (83).                               35    AJ     D, common bacterial blight (Xanthomonas campestris;
                                                                                        appendix 3, p. 124); soybean cyst nematode (28).
34    F      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with beans
             to decrease root rots (67).                                   35    AY     D, following soybean with rape or canola fosters buildup
                                                                                        of Sclerotinia (119).
34    H      D-, rotation with small grains decreases root-knot
             nematode (Meloidogyne hapla) effects on lettuce (22).         36    F      D, common bacterial blight (Xanthomonas campestris;
                                                                                        appendix 3, p. 124); soybean cyst nematode (28).
34    I      D-, use of 2 years of grass or 1 year of cereal in rotation
             with potato helps reduce rhizoctonia canker (67). I,          36    H      D, sclerotinia drop (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
             wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)              36    I      D, sclerotinia stalk rot (67; see appendix 3, p. 124).
             (see table 3.5, p. 40).
                                                                           36    AG     D-, foot rot is negligible when wheat follows oat, corn,
34    M      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain                       or beans (20).
             crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem
             in noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like        36    AI     D, common bacterial blight (Xanthomonas campestris;
             onion and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and                      appendix 3, p. 124); soybean cyst nematode increases to
             Anne Nordell). I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and                        high density on bean, though the bean crop is scarcely
             Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).                                     affected (28, 41).

34    N      W, broadleaf weeds have time to set seeds in a grain          36    AJ     XXXX
             crop before harvest, which is particularly a problem in       36    AW     D, field pea and bell bean should not be planted after
             noncompetitive or difficult-to-cultivate crops like onion                  bean due to Fusarium, Pythium, and Sclerotinia (119).
             and carrot (39, based on experience of Eric and Anne
             Nordell).                                                     36    AX     D, field pea and bell bean should not be planted after
                                                                                        bean due to Fusarium, Pythium, and Sclerotinia (119).
34    Q      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with
             cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).      37    I      D-, alfalfa decreases fusarium wilt (20).

34    R      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with            37    M      D, carrot root dieback can be severe after alfalfa; alfalfa
             cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).                   is a host for Pythium violae, which causes cavity spot (see
                                                                                        chapter 3, p. 21).
34    S      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with
             cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).      37    AJ     N-, S-, dry beans do well after sod crops due to good
                                                                                        tilth and nutrition (83).
34    V      I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)
             (see table 3.5, p. 40).                                       37    AK     XXXX

34    W      I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)           37    AW     D, field pea and bell bean should not be planted after
             (see table 3.5, p. 40).                                                    alfalfa due to Fusarium and Pythium (119).

34    AA     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with beet       37    AX     D, field pea and bell bean should not be planted after
             to decrease root rots (67). I, wireworms (Melanotus                        alfalfa due to Fusarium and Pythium (119).
             communis and Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).           38    B      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or any
34    AB     I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)                        grass precedes onions (83).
             (see table 3.5, p. 40).                                       38    C      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or any
34    AD     I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)                        grass precedes onions (83).
             (see table 3.5, p. 40).                                       38    D      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or any
34    AE     I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)                        grass precedes onions (83).
             (see table 3.5, p. 40).                                       38    I      D-, green manure of rye or other grass reduces common
34    AH     XXXX                                                                       scab and rhizoctonia canker (black scurf ) (36); also, use
                                                                                        of 2 years of grass or 1 year of cereal in rotation with
34    AJ     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with bean                    potato helps reduce rhizoctonia canker (67).
             to decrease root rots (67).


                                                                            APPENDIX 2 | Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities 119
   APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

 Row   Col.   Notes                                                         Row   Col.   Notes
 38    M      W, perennial grasses and weeds from plowed-down sod           39    B      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain precedes
              make weeding carrots difficult (82). I, wireworms (Mela-                   onions (82, 83).
              notus communis and Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).
                                                                            39    C      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain precedes
 38    V      I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)                        onions (82, 83).
              (see table 3.5, p. 40).
                                                                            39    D      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or any
 38    W      I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)                        grass precedes onions (83).
              (see table 3.5, p. 40).
                                                                            39    F      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with beans
 38    AA     I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)                        to decrease root rots (67).
              (see table 3.5, p. 40).
                                                                            39    G      D-, rye suppresses thielaviopsis (black) root rot
 38    AB     D-, N-, corn does well after sod; it is a heavy feeder and                 (Thielaviopsis basicola) (54).
              can use the high N available, and diseases are not a
                                                                            39    H      C, avoid direct seeding of small-seeded crops after a rye
              problem (82). I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and
                                                                                         cover crop due to interference from the straw (82).
              Limonius spp.) and white grubs (Phyllophaga spp.) (see
              table 3.5, p. 40).                                            39    I      D-, green manure of rye or other grass reduces common
                                                                                         scab and rhizoctonia canker (black scurf ) (20, 36).
 38    AC     I, white grubs (Phyllophaga spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).
                                                                            39    M      C, avoid direct seeding small-seeded crops after a rye
 38    AD     D-, N-, corn does well after sod; it is a heavy feeder and
                                                                                         cover crop due to interference from the straw (82).
              can use the high N available, and diseases are not a
              problem (82). I, wireworms (Melanotus communis and            39    N      C, avoid direct seeding small-seeded crops after a rye
              Limonius spp.) and white grubs (Phyllophaga spp.) (see                     cover crop due to interference from the straw (82).
              table 3.5, p. 40).                                            39    P      C, avoid direct seeding small-seeded crops after a rye
 38    AE     D, “If scald is a problem, barley should not be grown                      cover crop due to interference from the straw (82).
              after bromegrass” (119). I, wireworms (Melanotus              39    Q      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with
              communis and Limonius spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).                        cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).
 38    AG     D, smooth brome should not be used in rotation                39    R      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with
              with wheat if take-all is a problem (52). I, wireworms                     cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).
              (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.) and white
              grubs (Phyllophaga spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).              39    S      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with
                                                                                         cabbage and related species to decrease white mold (67).
 38    AH     D, avoid planting crops that are hosts to ergot, such as
              forage grasses, before and after rye in the rotation (119).   39    AA     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with beet to
              I, wireworms` (Melanotus communis and Limonius spp.)                       decrease root rots (67).
              and white grubs (Phyllophaga spp.) (see table 3.5, p. 40).    39    AF     D, to avoid leaf diseases, avoid planting barley after
 38    AJ     N-, S-, dry beans do well after sod crops due to good                      wheat (107).
              tilth and nutrition (83).                                     39    AJ     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with bean
 38    AL     XXXX                                                                       to decrease root rots (67).
 38    AM     C-, rye and hairy vetch establish well in plowed sod and      39    AM     XXXX
              make a good transition from grass sod to vegetables           40    A      D-, unlike most crops, an oat cover crop decreases
              (81).                                                                      density of lesion nematodes (Pratylenchus spp.) (41).
 38    AV     C-, rye and hairy vetch establish well in plowed sod and                   I-, “High-biomass cover crops such as barley or rye
              make a good transition from grass sod to vegetables                        increased population of centipedes, predator mites,
              (81).                                                                      and other important predators” (107). N, incorporating
                                                                                         annual ryegrass can tie up N in microbial tissues, thereby
 39    A      W-, C, decomposing rye releases allelopathic toxins that                   making it unavailable to succeeding crops. Problems
              suppress weeds but may also harm crops. Problems                           can be avoided by incorporating residue a few weeks
              can be avoided by incorporating residue 3 weeks                            before planting (107). S, the lag between incorporation
              before planting (95). I-, “High-biomass cover crops such                   and planting, however, leaves the soil open to erosion.
              as barley or rye increased population of centipedes,                       C-, “Winter killed cover crops like field pea and oats
              predator mites, and other important predators” (107).                      made the most sense before early planted vegetables,
              N, incorporation of large amounts of grain straw can                       allowing us to work the ground early in the spring” (39,
              tie up nitrogen in microbial tissues, thereby making it                    quoting Eric and Anne Nordell).
              unavailable to succeeding crops. S, the lag between
              incorporation and planting, however, leaves the               40    B      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or any
              soil open to erosion. C-, for maximum dry matter                           grass precedes onions (83).
              accumulation, use before late spring or early summer          40    C      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or any
              crops (81).                                                                grass precedes onions (83).



120 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
 APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

Row   Col.   Notes                                                          Row   Col.   Notes
40    D      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or any             41    AO     XXXX
             grass precedes onions (83).
                                                                            42    A      D-, sorghum-sudangrass cover crop reduces southern
40    F      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with bean                     root-knot nematode (Meloidogyne incognita)
             to decrease root rots (67).                                                 populations in subsequent vegetable crops (30).
40    I      D-, use of 2 years of grass or 1 year of cereal in rotation    42    B      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or any
             with potato helps reduce rhizoctonia canker (67).                           grass precedes onions (83).
40    Q      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with             42    C      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or any
             cabbage and related species to decrease white mold                          grass precedes onions (83).
             (67). W-, S-, oat cover crop (often with field pea) controls
                                                                            42    D      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or any
             weeds and improves soil structure before summer-
                                                                                         grass precedes onions (83).
             transplanted brassicas (83).
                                                                            42    I      D-, use of 2 years of grass or 1 year of cereal in rotation
40    R      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with
                                                                                         with potato helps reduce rhizoctonia canker (67).
             cabbage and related species to decrease white mold
             (67). W-, S-, oat cover crop (often with field pea) controls   42    AP     XXXX
             weeds and improves soil structure before summer-               43    I      D-, severity of verticillium wilt was lower following
             transplanted brassicas (83).                                                buckwheat green manure than following canola or a
40    S      D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with                          fallow period (see chapter 3, p. 21). S-, buckwheat leaves
             cabbage and related species to decrease white mold                          the soil in a good state of tilth for potato (83).
             (67). W-, S-, oat cover crop (often with field pea) controls   43    Q      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,
             weeds and improves soil structure before summer-                            cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see
             transplanted brassicas (83).                                                chapter 3, p. 21).
40    AA     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with beet to     43    R      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,
             decrease root rots (67).                                                    cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see
40    AJ     D-, use grain crops or sweet corn in rotation with beans                    chapter 3, p. 21).
             to decrease root rots (67).                                    43    S      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,
40    AN     XXXX                                                                        cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see
                                                                                         chapter 3, p. 21).
41    A      N, incorporating annual ryegrass can tie up N in
             microbial tissues, thereby making it unavailable               43    T      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,
             to succeeding crops. Problems can be avoided by                             cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see
             incorporating residue a few weeks before planting (107).                    chapter 3, p. 21).
             S, the lag between incorporation and planting, however,        43    U      D-, clubroot declines more quickly when tomato,
             leaves the soil open to erosion.                                            cucumber, snap bean, or buckwheat is grown (see
41    B      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or any                          chapter 3, p. 21).
             grass precedes onions (83).                                    43    AQ     XXXX
41    C      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or any             44    A      I, “Grubs, wireworms, maggots, and slugs were also a
             grass precedes onions (83).                                                 nuisance after even one year of clover sod” (39, quoting
41    D      I, onion thrips may be a problem when grain or any                          Eric and Anne Nordell). N-, nitrogen-fixing cover crop
             grass precedes onions (83).                                                 (107).
41    I      D-, use of 2 years of grass or 1 year of cereal in rotation    44    H      I, clovers before lettuce increases tarnished plant bug
             with potato helps reduce rhizoctonia canker (67).                           attack (82).
41    P      D-, ryegrass reduces clubroot infection rates more than        44    AR     XXXX
             other rotation species (20).                                   45    A      I, “Grubs, wireworms, maggots, and slugs were also a
41    Q      D-, ryegrass reduces clubroot infection rates more than                     nuisance after even one year of clover sod” (39, quoting
             other rotation species (20).                                                Eric and Anne Nordell). N-, nitrogen-fixing cover crop
                                                                                         (107).
41    R      D-, ryegrass reduces clubroot infection rates more than
             other rotation species (20).                                   45    G      D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably
                                                                                         including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
41    S      D-, ryegrass reduces clubroot infection rates more than
                                                                                         related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a
             other rotation species (20).
                                                                                         variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
41    T      D-, ryegrass reduces clubroot infection rates more than                     other plants (36).
             other rotation species (20).
                                                                            45    H      D, clover rot fungus (Sclerotinia trifoliorum) occasionally
41    U      D-, ryegrass reduces clubroot infection rates more than                     attacks lettuce (36). I, clover before lettuce increases
             other rotation species (20).                                                tarnished plant bug attack (82).


                                                                             APPENDIX 2 | Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities 121
   APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

 Row   Col.   Notes                                                        Row   Col.   Notes
 45    P      C-, fall-sown red clover provides a drought-tolerant         48    A      D, hairy vetch is a good host for northern root-knot
              cover crop the next summer prior to fall-sown brassicas                   nematode (Meloidogyne hapla) (113). N-, nitrogen-
              (83).                                                                     fixing cover crop (107). C-, use of hairy vetch (often
                                                                                        with rye) before late-planted crops allows maximum
 45    Q      C-, fall-sown red clover provides a drought-tolerant
                                                                                        accumulation of dry matter and nitrogen (81).
              cover crop the next summer prior to fall-sown brassicas
              (83).                                                        48    G      D, avoid hairy vetch in rotation with pea due to black
                                                                                        stem fungus (Ascochyta pinodella) (20).
 45    S      C-, fall-sown red clover provides a drought-tolerant
              cover crop the next summer prior to fall-sown brassicas      48    V      N-, cucurbits have a high nitrogen need that vetch can
              (83).                                                                     supply (83).
 45    AI     D, “Never plant dry beans or soybeans after clover           48    W      D-, hairy vetch residue incorporated into the soil
              unless the cover has been thoroughly incorporated by                      reduces fusarium wilt in watermelon. N-, cucurbits have
              plowing” (107).                                                           a high nitrogen need that vetch can supply (83).
 45    AJ     D, “Never plant dry beans or soybeans after clover           48    X      N-, cucurbits have a high nitrogen need that vetch can
              unless the cover has been thoroughly incorporated by                      supply (83).
              plowing” (107).
                                                                           48    Y      N-, cucurbits have a high nitrogen need that vetch can
 45    AS     XXXX                                                                      supply (83).
 45    AW     D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably             48    AM     W, hairy vetch can be a severe weed in all winter grains,
              including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely                       decreasing both yield and quality. Dormant seeds in
              related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a                  the cover-crop sowing may persist in the soil for several
              variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly                    years and infest subsequent winter grain crops even if
              other plants (36).                                                        the cover crop is not allowed to seed (59).
 45    AX     D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably             48    AV     XXXX
              including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
                                                                           49    A      N-, nitrogen-fixing cover crop (107). C-, “Winter killed
              related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a
                                                                                        cover crops like field pea and oats made the most sense
              variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
                                                                                        before early planted vegetables, allowing us to work the
              other plants (36).
                                                                                        ground early in the spring” (39, quoting Eric and Anne
 46    A      N-, nitrogen-fixing cover crop (107).                                     Nordell).
 46    H      I, clover before lettuce increases tarnished plant bug       49    G      D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably
              attack (82).                                                              including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
                                                                                        related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a
 46    AT     XXXX
                                                                                        variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
 47    A      N-, nitrogen-fixing cover crop (107).                                     other plants (36).
 47    F      D, white sweet clover is an important host in which          49    H      D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably
              yellow bean mosaic virus 2 overwinters. It can infect also                including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
              broad bean (and presumably bell bean), soybean, and                       related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a
              alsike and other clovers (36).                                            variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
 47    I      D, sweet clover green manure is more conducive to scab                    other plants (36).
              development than alfalfa or rye (20).                        49    Q      N-, W-, a field pea cover crop (often with oat) controls
 47    AI     D, white sweet clover is an important host in which                       weeds and provides nitrogen for summer-transplanted
              yellow bean mosaic virus 2 overwinters. It can infect also                brassicas (83).
              broad bean (and presumably bell bean), soybean, and          49    R      N-, W-, a field pea cover crop (often with oat) controls
              alsike and other clovers (36).                                            weeds and provides nitrogen for summer-transplanted
 47    AM     C-, a winter grain can be overseeded into a previously                    brassicas (83).
              established hairy vetch cover crop to create a mixed         49    S      N-, W-, a field pea cover crop (often with oat) controls
              grass–legume winter cover (83).                                           weeds and provides nitrogen for summer-transplanted
 47    AS     D, white sweet clover is an important host in which                       brassicas (83).
              yellow bean mosaic virus 2 overwinters. It can infect also   49    AS     D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably
              broad bean (and presumably bell bean), soybean, and                       including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
              alsike and other clovers (36).                                            related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a
 47    AU     XXXX                                                                      variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
                                                                                        other plants (36).
 47    AX     D, white sweet clover is an important host in which
              yellow bean mosaic virus 2 overwinters. It can infect also   49    AW     XXXX
              broad bean (and presumably bell bean), soybean, and
              alsike and other clovers (36).


122 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
 APPENDIX 2 Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities (continued)

Row   Col.   Notes                                                        Row   Col.   Notes
49    AX     D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably             51    S      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
             including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely                       including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
             related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a                  Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
             variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
                                                                          51    T      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
             other plants (36).
                                                                                       including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
50    A      N-, nitrogen-fixing cover crop.                                           Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
50    G      D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably             51    U      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
             including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely                       including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
             related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a                  Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
             variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
                                                                          51    AY     XXXX
             other plants (36).
                                                                          51    AZ     D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
50    H      D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably
                                                                                       including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
             including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
                                                                                       Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
             related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a
             variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly       52    A      D-, incorporated mustard family cover crops suppress a
             other plants (36).                                                        variety of soilborne diseases (see chapter 3, p. 21).
50    P      N-, brassicas do well after incorporating bell bean due to   52    I      D-, plowed-down brassica cover crops act as a fumigant
             abundant N supply (83).                                                   against potato diseases (83).
50    Q      N-, brassicas do well after incorporating bell bean due to   52    P      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
             abundant N supply (83).                                                   including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
                                                                                       Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
50    R      N-, brassicas do well after incorporating bell beans due
             to abundant N supply (83).                                   52    Q      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
                                                                                       including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
50    S      N-, brassicas do well after incorporating bell bean due to
                                                                                       Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
             abundant N supply (83).
                                                                          52    R      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
50    T      N-, brassicas do well after incorporating bell bean due to
                                                                                       including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
             abundant N supply (83).
                                                                                       Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
50    U      N-, brassicas do well after incorporating bell bean due to
                                                                          52    S      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
             abundant N supply (83).
                                                                                       including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
50    AS     D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably                          Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
             including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
                                                                          52    T      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
             related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a
                                                                                       including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
             variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly
                                                                                       Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
             other plants (36).
                                                                          52    U      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
50    AW     D, sclerotinia disease of broad bean (presumably
                                                                                       including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
             including bell bean) and red clover rot are closely
                                                                                       Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
             related (varieties of S. trifoliorum); each can attack a
             variety of crops, including pea, lettuce, and possibly       52    AI     D-, oilseed radish can decrease nematode populations
             other plants (36).                                                        in soybean (119).
50    AX     XXXX                                                         52    AY     D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
                                                                                       including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
51    A      D-, incorporated mustard family cover crops suppress a
                                                                                       Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
             variety of soilborne diseases (see chapter 3, p. 21).
                                                                          52    AZ     XXXX
51    I      D-, plowed-down brassica cover crops act as a fumigant
             against potato diseases (83).
51    P      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
             including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
             Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
51    Q      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
             including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
             Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).
51    R      D, clubroot attacks many crops in the mustard family,
             including cabbage and its relatives, mustard, radish,
             Chinese cabbage, turnip, canola, and many weeds (36).



                                                                           APPENDIX 2 | Crop Sequence Problems and Opportunities 123
   APPENDIX 3 Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States
                         Compiled by Margaret Tuttle McGrath

                                                                             Wind-
                                                     Rotation    Seed        blown       Insect
 Disease                     Pathogen Name           (years)1    Borne      Spores2     Vectored    Weed Hosts
 VEGETABLE CROPS
 Asparagus
 Fusarium crown rot          Fusarium spp.           Y (long)   Y (crown)      N           N        wide host range3
 Fusarium root rot           Fusarium spp.           Y (long)   Y (crown)      N           N        wide host range3
 Phytophthora spear rot      Phytophthora spp.          N        Maybe         N           N        common purslane,
                                                                                                    horsenettle, velvetleaf,
                                                                                                    eastern black nightshade
                                                                                                    (P. capsici)
 Rust                        Puccinia asparagi         Y (3)       N           Y           N        no records located
 Bean, snap and dry
 Anthracnose                 Colletotrichum            Y (3)       Y        Y (local,      N        no records located
                             lindemuthianum                                   rain)
 Bacterial brown spot        Pseudomonas               Y (2)       Y          NA           N        wide host range
                             syringae pv. syringae
 Bean common mosaic          Bean common                NA         Y          NA        Y (aphid)   common chickweed,
 virus (BCMV)                mosaic virus (BCMV)                                                    common lambsquarters,
                                                                                                    black medic, Canada thistle
 Bean rust                   Uromyces                  Y (3)       N           Y           N        no records located
                             appendiculatus
 Bean yellow mosaic virus    Bean yellow mosaic         NA         N          NA        Y (aphid)   many, mostly legumes 7
 (BYMV)                      virus (BYMV)
 Botrytis gray mold          Botrytis cinerea           Y          N           Y           N        common sunflower
 Clover yellow vein virus    Clover yellow vein         NA         N          NA           Y        common lambsquarters,
 (CYVV)                      virus (CYVV)                                                           black medic, clover, and
                                                                                                    possibly other perennial
                                                                                                    weeds
 Common bacterial blight     Xanthomonas              Y (2-3)      Y          NA           N        mustard, shepherd's purse,
                             campestris                                                             some other weeds in the
                                                                                                    mustard family, soybean
 Cucumber mosaic virus       Cucumber mosaic            NA         Y          NA        Y (aphid)   wide host range8
 (CMV)                       virus (CMV)
 Halo blight                 Pseudomonas               Y (3)       Y          NA           N        wide host range
                             syringae pv.
                             phaseolicola
 Root rot, damping-off       Pythium, Rhizoctonia,    Y (3-4)      Y           N           N        wide host range3,4,5
                             Thielaviopsis,
                             Fusarium, and
                             Pratylenchus spp.
 White mold                  Sclerotinia               Y (5)       N        Y (local)      N        wide host range6
                             sclerotiorum
 Bean, lima
 Downy mildew                Phytophthora              Y (2)       Y           Y           N        no records located
                             phaseoli
 Pod blight                  Phytophthora capsici     Y (>3)       N        Y (local,      N        common purslane,
                                                                              rain)                 eastern black nightshade,
                                                                                                    horsenettle, velvetleaf



124 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
  APPENDIX 3 Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States (continued)

                                                                                 Wind-
                                                      Rotation       Seed        blown       Insect
Disease                    Pathogen Name              (years)1       Borne      Spores2     Vectored    Weed Hosts
Root-knot nematodes        Meloidogyne hapla,          Y (long);       N           NA          N        wide host range9
                           M. incognita                 small
                                                        grains
White mold                 Sclerotinia                   Y (5)         N        Y (local)      N        wide host range6
                           sclerotiorum
Beet
Cercospora leaf spot       Cercospora beticola           Y (3)         Y        Y (local)      N        several10
Common scab                Streptomyces spp.            Y (3-4)        N           N           N        no records located
Phoma leaf spot            Phoma betae                   Y (3)         Y        Y (local,      N        no records located
                                                                                  rain)
Pocket rot                 Rhizoctonia solani             Y            Y           N           N        wide host range5
Seed rot, damping-off,     Pythium ultimum,             Y (3-4)        Y           N           N        wide host range4,5
root rot                   Rhizoctonia solani
Sugar beet cyst nematode   Heterodera schachtii         Y (4-5)        N           NA          N        field pennycress, tumble
                                                                                                        pigweed, common
                                                                                                        lambsquarters, hairy
                                                                                                        galinsoga
Cabbage, broccoli, cauliflower, and Brussels sprouts
Alternaria leaf spot       Alternaria spp.               Y (3)         Y        Y (local)      N        field pepperweed,
                                                                                                        Virginia pepperweed, field
                                                                                                        pennycress
Black leg, seed decay      Phoma lingam                  Y (4)         Y        Y (local)      N        weeds in the mustard family
Black rot                  Xanthomonas                   Y (3)         Y           NA          N        mustard, shepherd's purse,
                           campestris pv.                                                               some other weeds in the
                           campestris                                                                   mustard family
Clubroot                   Plasmodiophora                Y (7)         N           NA          N        several11
                           brassicae
Downy mildew               Peronospora                   Y (3)         N           Y           N        wild mustard, yellow rocket,
                           parasitica                                                                   hedge mustard, shepherd's
                                                                                                        purse, marsh yellowcress,
                                                                                                        field pennycress suspected;
                                                                                                        actual hosts might be
                                                                                                        affected by strain specificity
Fusarium yellows           Fusarium oxysporum            Y (7)         N           N           N        wide host range3
Head rot of broccoli       Pseudomonas spp.              Y (2)         N           NA          N        wide host range
Root-knot nematodes        Meloidogyne hapla,          Y (long);       N           NA          N        wide host range9
                           M. incognita                 small
                                                        grains
Root rot                   Pythium ultimum,              Y (3)         Y           N           N        wide host range4,5
                           Rhizoctonia solani
White mold                 Sclerotinia                   Y (5)         N        Y (local)      N        wide host range6
                           sclerotiorum
Wirestem                   Rhizoctonia solani           Y (4-5)        Y           N           N        wide host range5




                                             APPENDIX 3 | Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States 125
   APPENDIX 3 Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States (continued)


                                                                          Wind-
                                                    Rotation     Seed     blown       Insect
Disease                      Pathogen Name          (years)1     Borne   Spores2     Vectored     Weed Hosts
Carrot
Alternaria leaf blight       Alternaria dauci        Y (2-3)      Y      Y (local)       N        no records located
Aster yellows                Aster yellows              NA        N        NA              Y      wide host range12
                             phytoplasma                                             (leafhopper)
Bacterial leaf blight        Xanthomonas             Y (2-3)      Y        NA            N        mustard, shepherd's purse,
                             campestris pv.                                                       some other weeds in the
                             carotae                                                              mustard family
Cavity spot                  Pythium spp.            Y (3-4)      Y         N            N        several weed hosts4
Cercospora leaf spot         Cercospora carotae      Y (2-3)      Y      Y (local)       N        no records located
Common scab                  Streptomyces spp.       Y (3-4)      N         N            N        no records located
Crater rot, foliar blight    Rhizoctonia solani      Y (4-5)      Y         N            N        wide host range5
Damping-off, seed decay      Pythium spp.,              N         N         N            N        wide host range4,5
                             Rhizoctonia spp.
Root-knot nematodes          Meloidogyne hapla,     Y (long);     N        NA            N        wide host range9
                             M. incognita, others    small
                                                     grains
White mold, cottony rot      Sclerotinia              Y (5)       N      Y (local)       N        wide host range6
                             sclerotiorum
Celery
Aster yellows                Aster yellows              NA        N        NA              Y      wide host range12
                             phytoplasma                                             (leafhopper)
Bacterial leaf spot          Pseudomonas             Y (2-3)      Y        NA            N        wide host range
                             syringae pv. apii
Early blight, cercospora     Cercospora apii            Y         Y      Y (local)       N        no records located
leaf spot
Late blight, septoria leaf   Septoria apiicola        Y (2)       Y      Y (local)       N        no records located
spot
Corn, sweet
Anthracnose                  Colletotrichum             Y         N      Y (local,       N        several grasses13
                             graminicola                                   rain)
Barley yellow dwarf          Barley yellow dwarf        NA        —        NA         Y (aphid)   witchgrass, Italian ryegrass,
luteovirus (BYDV-PAV)        luteovirus (BYDV-                                                    annual bluegrass
                             PAV)
Common rust                  Puccinia sorghi            NA        N         Y            N        yellow woodsorrel
Common smut                  Ustilago maydis            Y         Y      Y (local)         Y      no records located
                                                                                     (leafhopper)
Maize dwarf mosaic virus     Maize dwarf mosaic         NA        N        NA         Y (aphid)   witchgrass, johnsongrass,
(MDMV)                       virus (MDMV)                                                         barnyardgrass
Northern corn leaf blight    Exserohilum turcicum   Y (1, 2 w/    N      Y (local)       N        green foxtail, wild-proso
                                                     no-till)                                     millet
Seed rots                    Fusarium spp.,             N         N         N            Y        wide host range3
                             Diplodia spp., etc
Stewart's wilt               Erwinia stewartii          NA        Y        NA         Y (flea     no records located
                                                                                      beetle)




126 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
  APPENDIX 3 Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States (continued)

                                                                                Wind-
                                                     Rotation      Seed         blown       Insect
Disease                    Pathogen Name             (years)1      Borne       Spores2     Vectored    Weed Hosts
Cucurbits (cucumber, melon, pumpkin, squash, watermelon)
Alternaria leaf blight     Alternaria                  Y (2+)         Y        Y (local)       N       Virginia copperleaf is a host
                           cucumerina                                                                  for Alternaria spp.
Angular leaf spot          Pseudomonas                 Y (2+)         Y          NA            N       wide host range
                           syringae
Anthracnose                Colletotrichum              Y (2)          Y        Y (local,       Y       no records located
                           orbiculare                                            rain)
Bacterial fruit blotch     Xanthomonas                Y (2-3)         Y          NA            N       mustard, shepherd's purse,
                           campestris                                                                  some other weeds in the
                                                                                                       mustard family
Bacterial leaf spot        Acidovorax avenae           Y ( 3)         Y          NA         Y? (bee)   no records located
                           subsp. citrulli
Bacterial wilt             Erwinia tracheiphila         NA            N          NA            Y     no records located
                                                                                           (cucumber
                                                                                             beetle)
Belly rot                  Rhizoctonia solani         Y (long)        N           N            N       wide host range5
Black rot, gummy stem      Didymella bryoniae          Y (2)          Y        Y (local)       N       no records located
blight
Choanephora blossom        Choanephora                 Y (2)          N        Y (local)       N       redroot pigweed
blight or fruit rot        cucurbitarum
Cottony leak               Pythium spp.                  N            N           N            N       several weed hosts4
Cucumber mosaic virus      Cucumber mosaic              NA            N          NA        Y (aphid)   wide host range8
(CMV)                      virus (CMV)
Damping-off, root rot      Pythium spp.,                 N            N           N            N       common purslane,
                           Phytophthora spp.                                                           horsenettle, velvetleaf
                                                                                                       (P. capsici); eastern black
                                                                                                       nightshade (P. capsici and P.
                                                                                                       infestans)4
Downy mildew               Pseudoperonospora            NA            N           Y            N       no records located
                           cubensis
Fusarium crown and root    Fusarium solani f. sp.      Y (5)          Y           N            N       no records located
rot                        cucurbitae
Fusarium wilt (cucumber)   Fusarium oxysporum         Y (5-7)         Y           N            N       no records located
                           f. sp. cucumerinum
Fusarium wilt (melon)      Fusarium oxysporum         Y (5-7)         Y           N            N       no records located
                           f. sp. melonis
Fusarium wilt              Fusarium oxysporum         Y (5-7)         Y           N            N       no records located
(watermelon)               f. sp. niveum
Gummy stem blight (aka     Didymella bryoniae          Y (2)          Y        Y (local)       N       no records located
black rot)
Papaya ring spot virus     Papaya ring spot             NA            N          NA        Y (aphid)   burcucumber
(PRSV)                     virus (PRSV)
Phytophthora blight        Phytophthora capsici        Y (>3)         N        Y (local,       N       common purslane,
                                                                                 rain)                 eastern black nightshade,
                                                                                                       horsenettle, velvetleaf
Powdery mildew             Podosphaera xanthii           N            N           Y            N       no records located




                                            APPENDIX 3 | Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States 127
   APPENDIX 3 Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States (continued)

                                                                           Wind-
                                                   Rotation       Seed     blown       Insect
 Disease                   Pathogen Name           (years)1       Borne   Spores2     Vectored     Weed Hosts
 Root-knot nematodes       Meloidogyne hapla,       Y (long);      N        NA            N        wide host range9
                           M. incognita            small grains
 Scab                      Cladosporium              Y (2+)        Y      Y (local)       N        common sunflower
                           cucumerinum
 Septoria leaf spot        Septoria                  Y (2+)        N      Y (local)       N        no records located
                           cucurbitacearum
 Southern blight           Sclerotium rolfsii       Y (long);      N         N            N        no records located
                                                   corn, small
                                                     grains,
                                                      grass
 Ulocladium leaf spot      Ulocladium                 Y (2)        N      Y (local)       N        no records located
                           cucurbitae
 Verticillium wilt         Verticillium dahliae       Y (5)        Y         N            N        velvetleaf, common
                                                                                                   sunflower, field pennycress
 Watermelon mosaic virus   Watermelon mosaic            NA         N        NA         Y (aphid)   common lambsquarters,
 (WMV)                     virus (WMV)                                                             burcucumber, jimsonweed,
                                                                                                   eastern black nightshade,
                                                                                                   shepherd's purse
 White mold                Sclerotinia                Y (5)        N      Y (local)       N        wide host range6
                           sclerotiorum
 Zucchini yellow mosaic    Zucchini yellow              NA         N        NA         Y (aphid)   no records located
 virus (ZYMV)              mosaic virus (ZYMV)
 Eggplant
 Anthracnose               Colletotrichum               Y          Y      Y (local,       N        eastern black nightshade,
                           coccodes                                         rain)                  velvetleaf
 Alternaria early blight   Alternaria solani, A.     Y (2-3)              Y (local)       N        jimsonweed, redroot
                           alternata                                                               pigweed, eastern black
                                                                                                   nightshade (A. solani)
 Phytophthora crown or     Phytophthora capsici      Y (>3)        N      Y (local,       N        field pepperweed,
 collar rot                                                                 rain)                  Virginia pepperweed, field
                                                                                                   pennycress
 Phomopsis                 Phomopsis vexans          Y (2-3)       N      Y (local)       N        no records located
 Root-knot nematodes       Meloidogyne hapla,       Y (long);      N        NA            N        wide host range9
                           M. incognita              small
                                                     grains
 Verticillium wilt         Verticillium albo-        Y (4-5)       Y         N            N        wide host range14
                           atrum, V. dahliae
 Lettuce
 Anthracnose               Microdochium               Y (1)        Y      Y (local,       N        prickly lettuce
                           panattonianum                                    rain)
 Aster yellows             Aster yellows                NA         N        NA              Y      wide host range12
                           phytoplasma                                                (leafhopper)
 Botrytis gray mold-post   Botrytis cinerea             Y          N         Y            N        common sunflower
 harvest
 Bottom rot                Rhizoctonia solani         Y (3)        N         N            N        wide host range5
 Broadbean wilt virus      Broadbean wilt virus         NA         N        NA         Y (aphid)   no records located
 (BBWV)                    (BBWV)


128 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
  APPENDIX 3 Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States (continued)

                                                                                     Wind-
                                                          Rotation      Seed         blown       Insect
Disease                       Pathogen Name               (years)1      Borne       Spores2     Vectored    Weed Hosts
Cucumber mosaic virus         Cucumber mosaic                NA            N          NA        Y (aphid)   wide host range8
(CMV)                         virus (CMV)
Damping-off                   Pythium spp.                    N            Y           N           N        several weed hosts4
Downy mildew                  Bremia lactucae              Y (2-3)         N           Y           N        perennial sowthistle, annual
                                                                                                            sowthistle, prickly lettuce
Drop                          Sclerotinia                   Y (3)          N        Y (local)      N        wide host range6
                              sclerotiorum, S. minor
Lettuce mosaic virus          Lettuce mosaic virus           NA            Y          NA           Y        common groundsel,
(LMV)                         (LMV)                                                                         common lambsquarters,
                                                                                                            annual sowthistle
Root-knot nematodes           Meloidogyne hapla,          Y (long);        N          NA           N        wide host range9
                              M. incognita                 small
                                                           grains
Onion
Bacterial canker, sour skin   Burkholderia cepacia            N            N          NA           N        no records located
Bacterial soft rot            Erwinia carotovora              N            N          NA           N        no records located
                              subs. carotovora
Botrytis leaf blight          Botrytis squamosa            Y (3-4)         N           Y           N        no records located
Botrytis net rot              Botrytis allii               Y (2-3)         Y           Y           N        no records located
Damping-off                   Pythium spp.,                   Y             Y          N           N        wide host range3,4
                              Fusarium spp.              (Fusarium;    (Fusarium)
                                                            small
                                                           grains)
Downy mildew                  Peronospora                  Y (3-4)         Y           Y           N        no records located
                              destructor
Fusarium basal rot            Fusarium oxysporum            Y (4)          N           N           N        no records located
                              f. sp. cepae
Lesion nematodes              Pratylenchus spp.            Y (long)        Y          NA           N        wide host range
Onion yellow dwarf virus      Onion yellow dwarf              Y            Y          NA        Y (aphid)   no records located
(OYDV)                        virus (OYDV)
Pink rot                      Phoma terrestris             Y (3-6)         N        Y (local)      N        barnyardgrass, green foxtail,
                                                                                                            shattercane, witchgrass, field
                                                                                                            pepperweed, horsenettle
Purple blotch                 Alternaria porri             Y (long)        Y        Y (local)      N        Virginia copperleaf is a host
                                                                                                            for Alternaria spp.
Root-knot nematodes           Meloidogyne hapla,          Y (long);        Y          NA           N        wide host range9
                              M. incognita                 small
                                                           grains
Slippery skin                 Pseudomonas gladioli            Y            N          NA           N        wide host range
                              pv. allicola
Smut                          Urocystis colchici              Y            Y        Y (local)      N        no records located
Stalk rot                     Stemphylium                  Y (long)        Y        Y (local)      N        green foxtail
                              botryosum
Stemphylium leaf blight       Stemphylium                  Y (long)        Y        Y (local)      N        no records located
                              vesicarium
White rot                     Sclerotinia cepivorum           N            N           N           N        no records located



                                                 APPENDIX 3 | Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States 129
   APPENDIX 3 Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States (continued)

                                                                         Wind-
                                                    Rotation    Seed     blown       Insect
 Disease                     Pathogen Name          (years)1    Borne   Spores2     Vectored      Weed Hosts
 Parsnip
 Aster yellows               Aster yellows              NA       N        NA              Y      wide host range12
                             phytoplasma                                            (leafhopper)
 Bacterial blight            Pseudomonas                Y        N        NA             N        wide host range
                             marginalis, P.
                             viridiflava
 Pea
 Ascochyta leaf spot         Ascochyta pisi           Y (3)      Y      Y (local)        N        no records located
 Bacterial blight            Pseudomonas                NA       Y        NA             N        wide host range
                             syringae pv. pisi
 Fusarium wilt               Fusarium oxysporum     Y (long)     N         N             N        no records located
                             f. sp. pisi
 Seed decay and root rot     Pythium ultimum         Y (3-4)     Y         N             N        wild-proso millet,
                                                                                                  shattercane, barnyardgrass,
                                                                                                  quackgrass
 White mold                  Sclerotinia              Y (5)      N      Y (local)        N        wide host range6
                             sclerotiorum
 Pepper
 Anthracnose fruit rot       Colletotrichum           Y (2)      Y      Y (local,        N        velvetleaf
                             gloeosporioides                              rain)
 Bacterial leaf spot         Xanthomonas                Y        Y        NA             N        mustard, shepherd's purse,
                             campestris pv.                                                       some other weeds in the
                             vesicatoria                                                          mustard family
 Bacterial soft rot          Erwinia carotovora         N        N        NA             Y        no records located
 Cucumber mosaic virus       Cucumber mosaic            NA       N        NA         Y (aphid)    wide host range8
 (CMV)                       virus (CMV)
 Damping-off                 Phytophthora               N        N         N             N        common purslane,
                             spp., Pythium spp.,                                                  horsenettle, velvetleaf
                             Rhizoctonia solani                                                   (P. capsici); eastern black
                                                                                                  nightshade (P. capsici and P.
                                                                                                  infestans)4,5
 Phytophthora blight         Phytophthora capsici    Y (>3)      Y      Y (local,        N        field pepperweed,
                                                                          rain)                   Virginia pepperweed, field
                                                                                                  pennycress
 Root-knot nematodes         Meloidogyne hapla,     Y (long);    N        NA             Y        wide host range9
                             M. incognita            small
                                                     grains
 Southern blight             Sclerotium rolfsii     Y (long)     N         N             N        no records located
 Tomato spotted wilt virus   Tomato spotted wilt        NA       N        NA         Y (thrips)   wide host range15
 (TSWV)                      virus (TSWV)
 Verticillium wilt           Verticillium albo-     Y (long)     N         N             N        wide host range14
                             atrum, V. dahliae




130 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
  APPENDIX 3 Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States (continued)

                                                                              Wind-
                                                   Rotation      Seed         blown       Insect
Disease                  Pathogen Name             (years)1      Borne       Spores2     Vectored    Weed Hosts
Potato
Bacterial ring rot       Clavibacter                   NA        Y (seed       NA           N        no records located
                         michiganensis subsp.     (regulated;    tubers)
                         sepedonicum                    0
                                                   tolerance)
Bacterial soft rot       Erwinia spp.                  N            N          NA           N        no records located
Black dot root rot       Colletotrichum              Y (2)       Y (seed        N           N        eastern black nightshade,
                         coccodes                                tubers)                             velvetleaf
Botrytis vine rot        Botrytis cinerea              N            N           Y           N        common sunflower
Canker and black scurf   Rhizoctonia solani         Y (3-4)      Y (seed        N           N        wide host range5
                                                                 tubers)
Common scab              Streptomyces spp.          Y (3-4)         N           N           N        no records located
Early blight             Alternaria solani, A.       Y (2)          N        Y (local)      N        redroot pigweed, eastern
                         tomatophila                                                                 black nightshade,
                                                                                                     jimsonweed (A. solani),
                                                                                                     Virginia copperleaf (A. sp.)
Fusarium dry rot         Fusarium solani, F.        Y (long)     Y (seed        N           N        green foxtail (F. solani)
                         sambucinum                              tubers)
Fusarium wilt            Fusarium spp.              Y (long)     Y (seed        N           N        wide host range3
                                                                 tubers)
Golden nematode,         Globodera                  Y (5-9)      Y (seed       NA           N        no records located
Potato cyst nematode     rostochiensis                           tubers)
(quarantined, NY only)
Late blight              Phytophthora                  N         Y (seed        Y           N        eastern black nightshade
                         infestans                               tubers)
Leak                     Pythium spp.               N (>4 if        N           N           N        several weed hosts4
                                                    severe)
Lesion nematodes         Pratylenchus spp.          Y (long)        Y          NA           N        wide host range
Pink rot                 Phytophthora               N (>4 if     Y (seed        N           N        no records located
                         erythroseptica             severe)      tubers)
Powdery scab             Spongospora                Y (3-10)     Y (seed        N           N        no records located
                         subterranea                             tubers)
Root-knot nematodes      Meloidogyne hapla,        Y (long);        N          NA           N        wide host range9
                         M. incognita               small
                                                    grains
Silver scurf             Helminthosporium           Y (>3?)      Y (seed        N           N        no records located
                         solani                                  tubers)
Verticillium wilt        Verticillium albo-         Y (long)        N           N           N        wide host range14
                         atrum, V. dahliae
White mold               Sclerotinia                 Y (5)          N        Y (local)      N        wide host range6
                         sclerotiorum
Spinach
Anthracnose              Colletotrichum              Y (3+)         Y        Y (local,      N        no records located
                         spinaciae                                             rain)
Cucumber mosaic virus    Cucumber mosaic              NA            N          NA        Y (aphid)   wide host range8
(CMV)                    virus (CMV)



                                          APPENDIX 3 | Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States 131
   APPENDIX 3 Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States (continued)

                                                                               Wind-
                                                        Rotation    Seed       blown       Insect
 Disease                       Pathogen Name            (years)1    Borne     Spores2     Vectored    Weed Hosts
 Damping-off and seed rot      Pythium spp.                N          N          N           N        several weed hosts4
 Downy mildew, blue mold       Peronospora effusa         Y (2)       Y          Y           N        winter spinach, common
                                                                                                      lambsquarters
 White rust                    Albugo occidentalis        Y (3)       N       Y (local)      N        no records located
 Sweet Potato
 Black rot                     Ceratocystis fimbriata    Y (3-4)    Y (seed      N           N        no records located
                                                                     roots)
 Fusarium wilt                 Fusarium oxysporum          Y        Y (seed      N           N        no records located
                               f. sp. batatas                        roots)
 Pox, soil rot                 Streptomyces               Y (5)     Y (seed      N           N        no records located
                               ipomoea                               roots)
 Root-knot nematodes           Meloidogyne hapla,       Y (long);   Y (seed     NA           N        wide host range9
                               M. incognita              small       roots)
                                                         grains
 Sclerotial blight, southern   Sclerotium rolfsii        Y (3-4)    Y (seed      N           N        no records located
 blight, circular spot                                               roots)
 Scurf                         Monilochaetes             Y (2-4)    Y (seed      N           N        no records located
                               infuscans                             roots)
 Soft rot, rhizopus soft rot   Rhizopus stolonifer         N          N          N           N        no records located
 Surface rot, fusarium         Fusarium oxysporum          N          N          N           N        wide host range3
 surface rot
 Sweet potato feathery         Sweet potato               NA        Y (seed     NA        Y (aphid)   no records located
 mottle virus (SPFMV)          feathery mottle virus                 roots)
                               (SPFMV)
 Tomato
 Anthracnose                   Colletotrichum            Y (3+)       Y       Y (local,      N        eastern black nightshade,
                               coccodes                                         rain)                 velvetleaf
 Bacterial canker              Clavibacter                 Y          Y         NA           N        no records located
                               michiganensis subsp.
                               michiganensis
 Bacterial soft rot            Erwinia carotovora          N          N         NA           N        no records located
                               subsp. carotovora
 Bacterial speck               Pseudomonas                Y (2)       Y         NA           N        no records located
                               syringae pv. tomato
 Bacterial spot                Xanthomonas               Y (1-3)      Y         NA           N        mustard, sheperd's purse,
                               campestris pv.                                                         some other weeds in the
                               vesicatoria                                                            mustard family
 Botrytis gray mold            Botrytis cineria            N          N          Y           N        common sunflower
 Buckeye fruit rot             Phytophthora              Y (3+)       N       Y (local,      N        common purslane,
                               parasitica, P. capsici                           rain)                 horsenettle, velvetleaf (P.
                                                                                                      capsici)
 Cucumber mosaic virus         Cucumber mosaic            NA          N         NA        Y (aphid)   wide host range8
 (CMV)                         virus (CMV)
 Damping-off                   Pythium spp.,               N          N          N           N        wide host range4,5
                               Rhizoctonia spp.




132 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
  APPENDIX 3 Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States (continued)

                                                                                  Wind-
                                                       Rotation      Seed         blown       Insect
Disease                     Pathogen Name              (years)1      Borne       Spores2     Vectored     Weed Hosts
Double virus streak         Tomato mosaic virus           NA            Y          NA        Y (aphid)    no records located
                            (TMV) and potato
                            virus X (PVX)
Early blight                Alternaria                  Y (long)        Y        Y (local)       N        redroot pigweed, eastern
                            tomatophila, A. solani                                                        black nightshade,
                                                                                                          jimsonweed (A. solani),
                                                                                                          Virginia copperleaf (A. sp.)
Fusarium                    Fusarium oxysporum          Y (5-7)         Y           N            N        no records located
                            f. sp. lycopersici
Late blight                 Phytophthora                   N            Y           Y            N        eastern black nightshade
                            infestans
Leaf mold                   Fulvia fulva                 Y (3+)         Y           Y            N        no records located
Phytophthora root rot       Phytophthora                 Y (3+)         N           N            N        common purslane,
                            parasitica, P. capsici                                                        horsenettle, velvetleaf (P.
                                                                                                          capsici)
Septoria leaf spot          Septoria lycopersici         Y (3)          Y        Y (local)       N        horsenettle, jimsonweed
Southern blight             Sclerotium rolfsii         Y (long);        N           N            N        no records located
                                                         corn,
                                                        cereal,
                                                         grass
Tomato mosaic virus         Tomato mosaic virus           NA            N          NA        Y (aphid)    no records located
(TMV)                       (TMV)
Tomato spotted wilt virus   Tomato spotted wilt           NA            N          NA        Y (thrips)   wide host range15
(TSWV)                      virus (TSWV)
Verticillium wilt           Verticillium albo-             Y            N           N            N        wide host range14
                            atrum, V. dahliae
White mold, timber rot      Sclerotinia                    N            N        Y (local)       N        wide host range6
                            sclerotiorum
Turnip, rutabaga and radish
Alternaria leaf spot, brown Alternaria spp.              Y (2+)         Y        Y (local)       N        field pepperweed,
spot                                                                                                      Virginia pepperweed, field
                                                                                                          pennycress
Black rot                   Xanthomonas                  Y (3)          Y          NA            N        mustard, shepherd's purse,
                            campestris pv.                                                                some other weeds in the
                            campestris                                                                    mustard family
Blackleg                    Phoma lingam                 Y (4)          Y        Y (local,       N        wild radish
                                                                                   rain)
Clubroot                    Plasmodiophora               Y (7)          N          NA            N        wide host range11
                            brassicae
Common scab                 Streptomyces spp.           Y (3-4)         N           N            N        no records located
Damping-off                 Pythium spp.,                  N            N           N            N        wide host range4,5
                            Rhizoctonia spp.,
                            others
Downy mildew                Peronospora                  Y (3)          N           Y            N        wild mustard, yellow rocket,
                            parasitica                                                                    hedge mustard, shepherd's
                                                                                                          purse, marsh yellowcress,
                                                                                                          field pennycress
Wirestem                    Rhizoctonia solani          Y (4-5)         Y           N            N        wide host range5


                                              APPENDIX 3 | Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States 133
   APPENDIX 3 Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States (continued)

                                                                                 Wind-
                                                          Rotation      Seed     blown       Insect
 Disease                        Pathogen Name             (years)1      Borne   Spores2     Vectored      Weed Hosts
 FIELD CROPS
 Alfalfa
 Anthracnose                    Colletotrichum trifolii     Y (2-3)      Y      Y (local,       N         no records located
                                                                                  rain)
 Aphanomyces root rot           Aphanomyces                 Y (2-3)      N         N            N         legumes
                                euteiches
 Bacterial wilt                 Clavibacter                   N          Y        NA            N         no records located
                                michiganensis subsp.
                                insidiosus
 Brown root rot                 Phoma sclerotioides       Y (3); non-    Y         N            N         wide host range
                                                           legumes
 Crown and root rot             Fusarium spp.,             Y (long)      Y         N            N         wide host range3,4,5
 complex                        Phoma medicaginis,
                                Pythium spp.,
                                Rhizoctonia solani
 Fusarium wilt                  Fusarium oxysporum         Y (long)      Y         N            N         no records located
                                f. sp. medicaginis
 Lepto leaf spot                Leptosphaerulina              N          N      Y (local)       N         medics, soybean
                                trifolii
 Lesion nematodes               Pratylenchus spp.             N          N        NA            N         wide host range
 Phytophthora root rot          Phytophthora               Y (very       N         N            N         no records located
                                medicaginis, P.             long)
                                megasperma f. sp.
                                medicaginis
 Sclerotinia crown and          Sclerotinia                 Y (3-4)      Y      Y (local)       N         wide host range6
 stem blight                    trifoliorum, S.
                                sclerotiorum
 Spring black stem and leaf     Phoma medicaginis           Y (2-3)      Y      Y (local,       N         legumes
 spot                                                                             rain)
 Summer black stem and          Cercospora                  Y (2-3)      Y      Y (local,       N         legumes
 leaf spot                      medicaginis                                       rain)
 Verticillium wilt              Verticillium                 Y (3)       Y         N        Y (several)   wide host range14
                                albo-atrum
 Corn
 Anthracnose leaf blight        Colletotrichum               Y (2)       N      Y (local,       N         several grasses13
 and stalk rot                  graminicola                                       rain)
 Barley yellow dwarf virus      Barley yellow dwarf          NA          N        NA         Y (aphid)    witchgrass, Italian ryegrass,
                                luteovirus                                                                annual bluegrass
                                (BYDV-PAV)
 Common rust                    Puccinia sorghi               N          N         Y            N         yellow woodsorrel
 Common smut                    Ustilago maydis            Y (long)      Y      Y (local)         Y      no records located
                                                                                            (leafhopper)
 Diplodia ear rot, stalk rot,   Stenocarpella maydis        Y (2-3);     N         Y            N         no records located
 seed rot and seedling          (Diplodia maydis)          worst in
 blight                                                     no-till
                                                          continuous
                                                             corn



134 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
  APPENDIX 3 Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States (continued)

                                                                                 Wind-
                                                      Rotation       Seed        blown       Insect
Disease                      Pathogen Name            (years)1       Borne      Spores2     Vectored     Weed Hosts
Diplodia leaf spot,          Stenocarpella             Y (2-3)         N           Y            N        no records located
Diplodia leaf streak         macrospora (Diplodia
                             macrospora)
Eyespot                      Aureobasidium zeae        Y; worst        N        Y (local,       N        no records located
                                                       in no-till                 rain)
                                                      continuous
                                                         corn
Fusarium stalk and ear rot   Fusarium moniliforme     Y; worst         Y        Y (local)       Y       grasses
                                                      in no-till                            (European
                                                     continuous                             corn borer,
                                                        corn                                ear worm)
Gibberella stalk and ear     Fusarium spp.             Y (2-3);        Y        Y (local)       N        wide host range3
rot16                                                 worst in
                                                       no-till
                                                     continuous
                                                        corn
Gray leaf spot, Cercospora   Cercospora sorghi         Y (1-2);        N        Y (local)       N        a few grasses
leaf spot                                             worst in
                                                       no-till
                                                     continuous
                                                        corn
Leaf blight                  Erwinia stewartii            N            Y           NA       Y (corn flea a few grasses
                                                                                              beetle)
Lesion nematodes             Pratylenchus spp.            N            N           NA           N        wide host range
Maize dwarf mosaic virus     Maize dwarf mosaic           N            N           NA        Y (aphid)   witchgrass, johnsongrass,
(MDMV)                       virus (MDMV)                                                                barnyardgrass, goosegrass
Northern corn leaf blight    Exserohilum turcicum      Y (2-3)         N           Y            N        johnsongrass, green foxtail,
                                                                                                         wild-proso millet
Seed rots                    Fusarium spp.,               N            N           N            Y        wide host range3
                             Diplodia spp., etc
Soybean
Asian soybean rust           Pakospora pachyrhizi        NA            N           Y            N        kudzu, clover, lupin
Brown spot                   Septoria glycines            Y            Y           Y            N        no records located
Brown stem rot               Phialophora gregata       Y (2-3)         N           N            N        unknown; likely
                             (Cephalosporium
                             gregatum)
Damping-off, stem rot        Rhizoctonia spp.,         Y (long)        N           N            N        wide host range3,4,5
                             Fusarium spp.,
                             Phytophthora sojae,
                             Pythium spp.
Diaporthe stem canker        Diaporthe                    Y            Y        Y (local,       N        no records located
                             phaseolorum                                          rain)
                             (Phomopsis phaseoli)
Green stem/soybean           Bean pod mottle             NA          Y (low        NA        Y (bean     no records located
viruses                      virus                                   levels)                   leaf
                                                                                             beetle)
Phomoposis seed rot          Phomopsis spp.               Y            Y        Y (local,       N        velvetleaf
                                                                                  rain)



                                             APPENDIX 3 | Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States 135
   APPENDIX 3 Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States (continued)

                                                                               Wind-
                                                    Rotation      Seed         blown       Insect
 Disease                   Pathogen Name            (years)1      Borne       Spores2     Vectored    Weed Hosts
 Phytophthora root rot     Phytophthora sojae       Y (long)        N            N            N       unknown; likely
 Sclerotinia white mold,   Sclerotinia              Y (long)        Y         Y (local)       N       wide host range6
 sclerotinia stem rot      sclerotiorum
 Soybean cyst nematode     Heterodera glycines       Y (3+)      Y (in soil     NA            N       many
                                                                with seed)
 Sudden death syndrome     Fusarium solani f. sp.     Y (3)         N            N            N       no records located
                           glycines
 Wheat
 Barley yellow dwarf       Barley yellow dwarf          NA          N           NA        Y (aphid)   witchgrass, Italian ryegrass,
 luteovirus (BYDV-PAV)     luteovirus (BYDV-                                                          annual bluegrass etc. (about
                           PAV)                                                                       105 grass species)
 Cephalosporium stripe     Hymenula cerealis         Y (2-3)        N            N            N       perennial grasses
                           (Cephalosporium
                           gramineum)
 Common bunt, stinking     Tilletia tritici             NA          Y           NA            N       no records located
 smut
 Common root rot           Bipolaris sorokiniana     Y (3-6);       Y            Y            N       grasses
                           (Cochliobolus sativus)   avoid oat
 Eyespot foot rot          Pseudocercosporella       Y (2+)         N         Y (local,       N       likely grass weeds (esp.
                           herpotrichoides                                      rain)                 quackgrass)
 Foot rot                  Fusarium spp.             Y (2-3)        Y         Y (local,       N       wide host range3
                                                                                rain)
 Fusarium scab, head       Fusarium spp.             Y (2-3)       NA         Y (local,       N       wide host range3
 blight16                                                                       rain)
 Leaf rust, brown rust     Puccinia triticina           Y           N            Y            N       no records located
 Lesion nematodes          Pratylenchus spp.         Y (2-3)        N           NA           NA       wide host range
 Loose smut                Ustilago tritici             NA          Y         Y (local)       N       no records located
 Powdery mildew            Blumeria gramini          Y (1-2)        N            Y            N       annual bluegrass
                           (Erysiphe graminis f.
                           sp. tritici)
 Septoria leaf blotch      Septoria tritici          Y (1-2)        N         Y (local,       N       a few grasses
                           (Mycosphaerella                                      rain)
                           graminicola)
 Stagonospora leaf and     Stagonospora              Y (1-2)        Y         Y (local,       N       annual bluegrass
 glume blotch              nodorum                                              rain)
 Take-all                  Gaeumannomyces            Y (2-3);       N           NA            N       annual bluegrass,
                           graminis var. tritici      avoid                                           quackgrass
                                                     barley
 Tan spot                  Pyrenophora tritici-      Y (2-3)        Y            Y            N       a few grasses
                           repentis
 Wheat spindle streak      Wheat spindle streak      Y (3 or        N           NA             N     unknown; likely
 mosaic                    mosaic bymovirus          more)                                (soilborne
                           (WSSM)                                                         protozoan)




136 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
      APPENDIX 3 Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States (continued)


Notes

Y indicates yes and N indicates no. For example, in the column labeled “Seed Borne” Y indicates that the pathogen is seed borne and N
indicates it is not seed borne.
1
     Y=Yes, the disease can be managed by rotation. The number in parentheses is the minimum rotation return time needed for successful
     management of the disease (see sidebars 5.4 and 5.5, p. page 70–page 71). Long means more than just a few years. N=No, the
     disease cannot be managed through rotation because the pathogen survives too well in the soil or wind disperses the spores too widely.
     NA=not applicable as the pathogen does not survive in the soil.
2
     Y=Spores are dispersed by wind, commonly for several miles. Local=Spores are wind dispersed for short distances, rarely moving
     farther than adjacent fields. Rain=Spores are dispersed by splashing water and can be moved out of a field by wind during a rainstorm.
     N=Spores are not dispersed by wind. NA=Not applicable, as pathogen does not produce spores.
3
     Many common weeds host Fusarium species, including barnyardgrass, witchgrass, green foxtail, shattercane, annual bluegrass, wild-
     proso millet, corn cockle, common sunflower, perennial sowthistle, redroot pigweed, common purslane, and ivyleaf morningglory.
4
     Several common weeds host Pythium species, including wild-proso millet, shattercane, barnyardgrass, quackgrass (P. ultimum) and
     yellow foxtail (P. graminicola).
5
     Many common weeds host Rhizoctonia solani, including green foxtail, perennial sowthistle, tumble pigweed, redroot pigweed, prostrate
     pigweed, common ragweed, barnyardgrass, large crabgrass, goosegrass, kochia, common lambsquarters, eastern black nightshade,
     common purslane, prickly lettuce, annual bluegrass, wild mustard, shepherd’s purse, Italian ryegrass, field bindweed, mouseear
     chickweed, field horsetail, Venice mallow, black medic, common milkweed, corn chamomile, wild buckwheat, and witchgrass.
6
     Many common weeds host Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, including common lambsquarters, prickly lettuce, wild mustard, eastern black
     nightshade, field pennycress, redroot pigweed, wild radish, common ragweed, shattercane, annual sowthistle, common sunflower,
     common chickweed, green foxtail, and Canada thistle. S. minor on lettuce is also hosted by yellow nutsedge.
7
     Bean yellow mosaic virus has both cultivated and wild host reservoirs. It can infect most species of the legume family, including
     herbaceous plants such as sicklepod and other Cassia species, chickpea, crotalaria, soybean, vetchling, sweet pea, lentil, lupine, alfalfa,
     medics, sweet clover, common bean, pea, clover, fenugreek, vetch, broad bean, and cowpea. It can also infect woody members of the
     family (pigeon pea, yellowwood, and black locust) and nonlegume species (lambsquarters, freesia, and gladiolus).
8
     Many common weeds host CMV, including common chickweed, corn cockle, hairy galinsoga, common groundsel, horsenettle,
     jimsonweed, common lambsquarters, prickly lettuce, wild mustard, eastern black nightshade, field pennycress, redroot pigweed,
     common purslane, wild radish, annual sowthistle, Canada thistle, common milkweed, common ragweed, shepherd’s purse, prostrate
     pigweed, pitted morningglory, tall morningglory, corn speedwell, hedge bindweed, burcucumber, white campion, and marsh yel-
     lowcress.
9
     Many common weeds host the nematodes Meloidogyne incognita and M. hapla, including common lambsquarters, black medic,
     field pepperweed, tumble pigweed, velvetleaf, Canada thistle, shepherd’s purse, field pennycress, wild buckwheat, prickly lettuce,
     wild mustard, yellow rocket, common groundsel, redroot pigweed, large crabgrass, purslane speedwell, hairy galinsoga, prostrate
     knotweed, and yellow nutsedge.
10
     Several weeds host Cercospora beticola, including redroot pigweed, common lambsquarters, roundleaf mallow, white sweetclover,
     and wild buckwheat.
11
     Several weeds host Plasmodiophora brassicae, including wild mustard, common lambsquarters, field pennycress, Virginia pepperweed,
      shepherd’s purse, yellow woodsorrel, field pepperweed, and wild radish.
12
     Several species of leafhopper transmit aster yellows. It has many weed hosts, including dandelion, plantain, Russian thistle, perennial
     sowthistle, common purslane, shepherd’s purse, Canada thistle, common ragweed, and wild lettuce. There are also ornamental hosts.
     More than 300 species are susceptible.
13
     Many common grasses host Colletotrichum graminicola, including barnyardgrass, quackgrass, witchgrass, johnsongrass, wild-proso
     millet, large crabgrass, goosegrass, and Italian ryegrass.
14
     Many weeds host Verticillium albo-atrum, including eastern black nightshade, common purslane, redroot pigweed, horsenettle,
     common lambsquarters, common cocklebur, common groundsel, and prickly sida. Hosts of V. dahliae include velvetleaf, common
     sunflower, and field pennycress.
15
     Many common weeds host the tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV), including annual sowthistle, eastern black nightshade, redroot
     pigweed, shepherd’s purse, field bindweed, prickly lettuce, prostrate pigweed, common purslane, common chickweed, jimsonweed,
     and wild buckwheat.
16
     The same pathogen causes fusarium scab (head blight) of wheat and gibberella stalk rot of corn.					



                                                 APPENDIX 3 | Sources of Inoculum for Crop Diseases in the Northeastern United States 137
   APPENDIX 4 Characteristics of Common Agricultural Weeds Relevant to Crop Rotation
                        Compiled by Charles L. Mohler
                                                                                     Seed
 Weed                    Weed                                                       weight      Season of              Seedbank
 common name             scientific name        Family         Life history         (mg)1,2     emergence              longevity3

 Barnyardgrass          Echinochloa crus-       Grass          summer annual           1.7      spring to summer       3–8 yrs
                        galli (L.) Beauv.
 Bedstraw,              Galium aparine L.       Madder         summer or winter        7.2      fall, spring, winter   1–5 yrs
 catchweed                                                     annual
 (cleavers)
 Bedstraw, smooth       Galium mollugo L.       Madder         perennial            0.4–0.6,    seeds; early to late   usu. 3–12 mos
                                                                                      0.7       spring, fall in warm
                                                                                                regions. Shoots:
                                                                                                early spring
 Bindweed, field        Convolvulus arvensis    Morningglory   perennial               10       fall, spring           >20 yrs
                        L.                                     spreading by deep,
                                                               creeping fleshy
                                                               roots
 Bindweed, hedge        Calystegia sepium (L.) Morningglory    perennial               40       spring, fall           >20 yrs
                        R. Br.                                 spreading by deep,
                                                               creeping fleshy
                                                               roots
 Bluegrass, annual      Poa annua L.            Grass          annual or short-       0.26      spring, late summer up to 4 yrs
                                                               lived perennial                  to early fall
 Buckwheat, wild        Polygonum               Buckwheat      summer annual            6       spring, some in        up to 5 yrs
                        convolvulus L.                                                          summer and fall
 Burcucumber            Sicyos angulatus L.     Cucurbit       summer annual           81       mid spring to early    NA
                                                                                                summer
 Campion, white         Silene alba (Mill.)     Pink           winter or summer       0.74      mid to late spring,    5–20 yrs
                        E.H.L. Krause                          annual, biennial                 late summer
                                                               or short-lived
                                                               perennial
 Chamomile, corn        Anthemis arvensis L.    Lettuce        annual or biennial    0.5, 1.2   fall, spring           5–20 yrs
 Chamomile,             Anthemis cotula L.      Lettuce        winter or summer        0.4      fall, spring           >20 yrs
 mayweed                                                       annual
 Chickweed,             Stellaria media (L.)    Pink           winter or summer       0.35,     fall, spring           20–60 yrs
 common                 Vill.                                  annual                 0.67
 Chickweed,             Cerastium vulgatum      Pink           perennial              0.13      late summer to fall,   NA
 mouseear               L.                                                                      spring
 Cockle, corn           Agrostemma githago      Pink           winter annual         12, 15     fall, spring           usu. <3 mos
                        L.
 Cocklebur,             Xanthium                Lettuce        summer annual        small, 39; spring to summer        up to 2.5 yrs
 common4                strumarium L.                                               large, 54
 Copperleaf, Virginia   Acalypha virginica L.   Spurge         summer annual          0.73      late spring            NA
 Crabgrass, large       Digitaria sanguinalis   Grass          summer annual          0.52      spring                 several yrs
                        (L.) Scop.
 Dandelion              Taraxacum officinale    Lettuce        perennial               0.6      spring                 1–5 yrs
                        Weber in Wiggers
 Foxtail, giant         Setaria faberi Herrm.   Grass          summer annual           1.3      late spring to         <5 yrs
                                                                                                midsummer
 Foxtail, green         Setaria viridis (L.)    Grass          summer annual           11       throughout             up to 21 yrs
                        Beauv.                                                                  growing season



138 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
  APPENDIX 4 Characteristics of Common Agricultural Weeds Relevant to Crop Rotation (continued)


                                                                                    Seed
Weed                  Weed                                                         weight     Season of            Seedbank
common name           scientific name         Family         Life history          (mg)1,2    emergence            longevity3
Foxtail, yellow      Setaria glauca (L.)      Grass          summer annual         2.5, 3.4   spring, some         up to 13 yrs
                     Beauv.                                                                   during summer
Galinsoga, hairy     Galinsoga ciliata        Lettuce        summer annual          0.18      spring, also         a few yrs
                     (Raf.) Blake                                                             summer and fall
Galinsoga,           Galinsoga parviflora     Lettuce        summer annual          0.17      spring, also         a few yrs
smallflower          Cav.                                                                     summer and fall
Goosegrass           Eleusine indica (L.)     Grass          summer annual          0.51      early to             <5 yrs
                     Gaertn.                                                                  midsummer
Groundcherry,        Physalis subglabrata     Nightshade     perennial               1.5      spring to summer     NA
smooth               Mackenz. & Bush                         spreading by deep
                                                             rhizomes
Groundsel,           Senecio vulgaris L.      Lettuce        summer or winter       0.18,     fall, spring, summer, 1–5 yrs
common                                                       annual                 0.22      winter
Henbit               Lamium                   Mint           winter annual          0.53      fall, spring         >4 yrs
                     amplexicaule L.
Horsenettle          Solanum carolinense      Nightshade     perennial             1.1–1.9    spring               up to 7 yrs
                     L.                                      spreading by deep,
                                                             creeping roots
Horsetail, field     Equisetum arvense L.     Horsetail      perennial               tiny     spring               spores short-
                                                             spreading by           spore                          lived
                                                             rhizomes
Jimsonweed           Datura stramonium        Nightshade     summer annual         5.6, 7.8   spring               >20 yrs
                     L.
Johnsongrass         Sorghum halpense         Grass          perennial               6.2      spring               up to 7 yrs
                     (L.) Pers.                              spreading by
                                                             shallow rhizomes
Knotweed,            Polygonum aviculare      Buckwheat      summer annual           1.7      spring               NA
prostrate            L.
Kochia               Kochia scoparia (L.)     Beet           summer annual          0.54      spring               <2 yrs
                     Schrad.
Lambsquarters,       Chenopodium album        Beet           summer annual           0.7      spring to summer     >20 yrs
common               L.
Lettuce, prickly     Lactuca serriola L.      Lettuce        summer or winter       0.45      fall, spring         1–5 yrs
                                                             annual or biennial
Mallow, Venice       Hibiscus trionum L.      Mallow         summer annual           3.3      summer               NA
Medic, black         Medicago lupulina L.     Legume         winter or summer      1.2–2.5    fall, spring         1–5, 5–20 yrs
                                                             annual
Milkweed, common     Asclepias syriaca L.     Milkweed       perennial              0.43–     spring               up to 9 yrs
                                                             spreading by deep,     0.73
                                                             creeping roots
Millet, wild-proso   Panicum miliaceum L. Grass              summer annual           14       spring through       >5 yrs
                                                                                              summer
Morningglory,        Ipomoea hederacea        Morningglory   summer annual         30, 32,    early summer         prob. many yrs
ivyleaf              (L.) Jacq.                                                      35
Morningglory,        Ipomoea lacunosa L.      Morningglory   summer annual           27       early summer         >39 yrs
pitted




                                            APPENDIX 4 | Characteristics of Common Agricultural Weeds Relevant to Crop Rotation 139
   APPENDIX 4 Characteristics of Common Agricultural Weeds Relevant to Crop Rotation (continued)


                                                                                 Seed
 Weed                  Weed                                                     weight     Season of              Seedbank
 common name           scientific name        Family         Life history       (mg)1,2    emergence              longevity3
 Morningglory, tall   Ipomoea purpurea        Morningglory   summer annual        25       early summer           prob. many yrs
                      (L.) Roth
 Mustard, hedge       Sisymbrium officinale   Mustard        winter or summer     1.5      spring to summer       >5 yrs
                      (L.) Scop.                             annual, rarely
                                                             biennial
 Mustard, wild        Brassica kaber (DC.) L. Mustard        summer or winter   1.6, 2.3   spring, late summer up to 60 yrs
                      C. Wheeler (= Sinapis                  annual                        to early fall
                      arvensis L.)
 Nightshade, eastern Solanum ptycanthum Nightshade           summer annual       0.43      spring to summer       up to 39 yrs
 black               Dun.
 Nutsedge, yellow     Cyperus esculentus L.   Sedge          perennial with      0.17      spring                 most tubers
                                                             rhizomes and                                         <2 yrs
                                                             tubers
 Panicum, fall        Panicum                 Grass          summer annual       0.57      late spring to         10 yrs
                      dichotomiflorum                                                      midsummer
                      Michx.
 Pennycress, field    Thlaspi arvense L.      Mustard        winter or summer    1.25      fall, spring           >20 yrs
                                                             annual
 Pepperweed, field    Lepidium campestre      Mustard        winter annual        1.9      late summer to         NA
                      (L.) R. Br.                                                          early fall
 Pepperweed,          Lepidium virginicum     Mustard        winter or           0.35      late summer to         NA
 Virginia             L.                                     summer annual,                early fall, some
                                                             occasionally                  spring
                                                             biennial
 Pigweed, Powell      Amaranthus powellii     Pigweed        summer annual       0.51      mid spring             NA
 amaranth             S. Wats.
 Pigweed, prostrate   Amaranthus blitoides    Pigweed        summer annual       0.89      late spring to early   NA
                      S. Wats.                                                             summer
 Pigweed, redroot     Amaranthus              Pigweed        summer annual       0.39      mid spring             up to 20 yrs
                      retroflexus L.
 Pigweed, smooth      Amaranthus hybridus     Pigweed        summer annual       0.37      mid to late spring     up to 40 yrs
                      L.
 Pigweed, tumble      Amaranthus albus L.     Pigweed        summer annual       0.28      late spring to early   NA
                                                                                           summer, some
                                                                                           through fall
 Purslane, common     Portulaca oleracea L.   Purslane       summer annual       0.13      summer                 >20 yrs
 Quackgrass           Elytrigia repens (L.)   Grass          perennial            2.0      spring, fall           5–20 yrs
                      Nevski                                 spreading by
                                                             shallow rhizomes
 Radish, wild         Raphanus                Mustard        winter or summer      8       late summer to fall,   up to 20 yrs
                      raphanistrum L.                        annual                        early spring
 Ragweed, common      Ambrosia                Lettuce        summer annual        3.2      early to late spring   up to 40 yrs
                      artemisiifolia L.
 Ragweed, giant       Ambrosia trifida L.     Lettuce        summer annual      17, 31     early spring,          4–18% survive
                                                                                           diminishing            1st yr
                                                                                           through early
                                                                                           summer




140 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
   APPENDIX 4 Characteristics of Common Agricultural Weeds Relevant to Crop Rotation (continued)

                                                                                       Seed
 Weed                   Weed                                                          weight      Season of              Seedbank
 common name            scientific name          Family         Life history          (mg)1,2     emergence              longevity3
 Rocket, yellow        Barbarea vulgaris         Mustard         biennial or short-      0.5      fall, spring, winter   1–5 yrs
                       R. Br.                                    lived perennial,
                                                                 occasionally a
                                                                 winter annual
 Ryegrass, Italian     Lolium multiflorum        Grass           winter annual            2       spring, late summer <4 yrs
                       Lam.                                                                       to mid fall
 Shattercane           Sorghum bicolor (L.)      Grass           summer annual           14       mid spring to early    <13 yrs
                       Moench                                                                     summer
 Shepherd's purse      Capsella bursa-           Mustard         summer or winter        0.1      fall, spring, summer, >20 yrs
                       pastoris (L.) Medicus                     annual                           winter
 Sida, prickly         Sida spinosa L.           Mallow          summer annual           2.3      spring to              up to 6 yrs
                                                                                                  midsummer
 Smartweed,            Polygonum                 Buckwheat       summer annual         4.5, 6.5   spring to early        up to 30 yrs
 Pennsylvania          pensylvanicum L.                                                           summer
 Sowthistle, annual    Sonchus oleraceus L.      Lettuce         winter or summer       0.27,     fall, spring           5–20 yrs
                                                                 annual                 0.34
 Sowthistle,           Sonchus arvensis L.       Lettuce         perennial             0.4–0.7    shoots: early          <5 yrs
 perennial                                                       spreading by                     spring; seedlings:
                                                                 creeping roots                   late spring to early
                                                                                                  summer
 Speedwell, corn       Veronica arvensis L.      Snapdragon      annual                  0.1      fall, spring           up to 20 yrs
 Speedwell, Persian    Veronica persica          Snapdragon      winter or summer       0.38,     fall, spring, summer, up to 30 yrs
                                                                 annual                 0.52      winter
 Speedwell, purslane Veronica peregrina L.       Snapdragon      annual                 0.03      spring, fall           NA
 Thistle, Canada       Cirsium arvense (L.)      Lettuce         perennial               1.2      spring, fall           5–20 yrs
                       Scop.                                     spreading by
                                                                 horizontal roots
 Velvetleaf            Abutilon theophrasti      Mallow          summer annual            7       late spring to early   up to 50 yrs
                       Medicus                                                                    summer
 Violet, field         Viola arvensis Murr.      Violet          annual                  0.2      fall, spring           >5 yrs
 Witchgrass            Panicum capillare L.      Grass           summer annual          0.35      late spring to         several
                                                                                                  midsummer              decades
 Woodsorrel, yellow    Oxalis stricta L.         Woodsorrel      perennial with         0.13      spring to summer       >5 yrs
                                                                 short, shallow
                                                                 rhizomes
 Yellowcress, marsh    Rorippa islandica         Mustard         annual, biennial,       NA       spring                 up to 10 yrs
                       (Oeder) Borbas                            short-lived
                                                                 perennial (rarely)

Notes:						
1. For comparison, one lettuce seed weighs about 1 milligram.
2. Multiple numbers are weights from different populations, except for common cocklebur.
3. Data are maximum survival of seeds in soil, often based on undisturbed burial experiments. Seeds usually die off at a constant
   rate, so that most are gone much more quickly than the numbers indicate. Also, they die off more quickly in regularly tilled soil.
   NA=Information not available.
4. Common cocklebur has one large and one small seed in each capsule.
Sources:
Compiled primarily from references 1, 7, 11, 12, 13, 15, 25, 32, 38, 49, 76, 77, 87, 88, 90, 91, 108, 109, 112, 116, 117, and data of the
author.


                                               APPENDIX 4 | Characteristics of Common Agricultural Weeds Relevant to Crop Rotation 141
   APPENDIX 5 Crop Disease Pathogens Hosted by Common Agricultural Weeds
                       Compiled by Charles L. Mohler and Margaret Tuttle McGrath

 Weed                Weed
 common name         scientific name       Pathogens and crop diseases1

 Barnyard grass      Echinochloa           Pythium ultimum (seed rot and root rot of pea, beet, and crucifer crops), Fusarium
                     crus-galli (L.)       oxysporum (various diseases of many crops), Colletotrichum graminicola (anthracnose
                     Beauv.                of corn), Phoma terrestris (onion pink rot), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many
                                           crops) (31); alfalfa dwarf disease (Xylella fastidiosa); viruses including maize dwarf mosaic,
                                           barley stripe mosaic hordeivirus, oat pseudo-rostette tenuivirus, and wheat streak mosaic
                                           rymovirus (45).
 Bedstraw,           Galium aparine L.     No records located for North America.
 catchweed
 (cleavers)
 Bedstraw,           Galium mollugo L.     No records located.
 smooth
 Bindweed, field     Convolvulus           Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31); alfalfa mosaic alfamovirus,
                     arvensis L.           cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, potato virus Y potyvirus, tomato spotted wilt tospovirus
                                           (128).
 Bindweed, hedge     Calystegia sepium
                     (L.) R. Br.
 Bluegrass, annual   Poa annua L.          Septoria nodorum (stagnospora blotch of wheat), Claviceps purpurea (ergot),
                                           Gaeumannomyces graminis (take-all), Erysiphe graminis (powdery mildew) (77), but whether
                                           the strains that attack annual bluegrass can damage wheat is unclear; Cephalosporium
                                           gramineum (cephalosporium stripe) (84); Fusarium sp. (various diseases of many crops),
                                           Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31); barley yellow dwarf virus (48).
 Buckwheat, wild     Polygonum             Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31); Meloidogyne hapla (northern root-
                     convolvulus L.        knot nematode) (113); tomato spotted wilt tospovirus (128).
 Burcucumber         Sicyos angulatus      Cucumber mosaic virus, papaya ring spot potyvirus, watermelon mosaic potyvirus (128).
                     L.
 Campion, white      Silene alba (Mill.)   Cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, turnip mosaic potyvirus, tobacco mosaic tobamovirus
                     E.H.L. Krause         (128).
 Chamomile, corn     Anthemis arvensis     Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31).
                     L.
 Chamomile,          Anthemis cotula L.    No records located.
 mayweed
 Chickweed,          Stellaria media       Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white mold and cottony rot of potato, tomato, beans, cabbage,
 common              (L.) Vill.            and carrot; lettuce drop) (31); Phoma exigua var. foveata (potato rot fungus) (77); cucumber
                                           mosaic cucumovirus, turnip mosaic potyvirus, bean yellow mosaic potyvirus, potato virus
                                           Y potyvirus, tomato spotted wilt tospovirus (128). Many additional viruses affecting crops
                                           are reported on common chickweed in the United Kingdom and may be present in North
                                           America as well (100).
 Chickweed,          Cerastium             Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31).
 mouseear            vulgatum L.
 Cockle, corn        Agrostemma            Fusarium sp. (various diseases of many crops) (31); cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, turnip
                     githago L.            mosaic potyvirus (128).
 Cocklebur,          Xanthium              Verticillium albo-atrum (verticillium wilt of nightshade crops) (26).
 common              strumarium L.
 Copperleaf,         Acalypha virginica    Alternaria spp. (alternaria leaf spot) (37).
 Virginia            L.




142 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
  APPENDIX 5 Crop Disease Pathogens Hosted by Common Agricultural Weeds (continued)


Weed               Weed
common name        scientific name        Pathogens and crop diseases1
Crabgrass, large   Digitaria              Colletotrichum graminicola (anthracnose of corn), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of
                   sanguinalis (L.)       many crops) (31); barley stripe hordeivirus (45); southern root-knot nematode (Meloidogyne
                   Scop.                  incognita) (29).
Dandelion          Taraxacum              Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white mold of potato, tomato, beans, cabbage, and carrot,
                   officinale             lettuce drop), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31); Verticillium albo-
                   Weber in Wiggers       atrum (verticillium wilt) (26); aster yellows phytoplasma, (46); alfalfa mosaic alfamovirus,
                                          cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, turnip mosaic potyvirus, potato virus Y potyvirus (128);
                                          dandelion yellow mosaic virus of lettuce (36).
Foxtail, giant     Setaria faberi         No records located.
                   Herrm.
Foxtail, green     Setaria viridis (L.)   Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white mold and cottony rot of potato, tomato, beans, cabbage, and
                   Beauv.                 carrot; lettuce drop), Exserohilum turcicum (northern corn leaf blight), Fusarium oxysporum
                                          (various diseases of several crops), Fusarium solani (fusarium dry rot of potato, fusarium
                                          crown and root rot of cucurbits), Stemphylium botryosum (onion stalk rot), Phoma terrestris
                                          (onion pink rot), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31).
Foxtail, yellow    Setaria glauca (L.)    Claviceps purpurea (ergot), Pythium graminicola (browning root rot), Sclerospora graminicola
                   Beauv.                 (downy mildew), Ustilago neglecta (smut) (17).
Galinsoga, hairy   Galinsoga ciliata      Alfalfa mosaic alfamovirus, cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, turnip mosaic potyvirus (128);
                   (Raf.) Blake           several nematodes including Meloidogyne hapla (northern root-knot nematode) and
                                          Heterodera schachtii (beet cyst nematode) (77).
Goosegrass         Eleusine indica (L.)   Colletotrichum graminicola (anthracnose of corn), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of
                   Gaertn.                many crops) (31); corn dwarf mosaic (45).
Groundcherry,      Physalis               Alfalfa mosaic alfamovirus, potato virus Y potyvirus, tobacco etch potyvirus (128).
smooth             subglabrata
                   Mackenz. & Bush
Groundsel,         Senecio vulgaris L.    Verticillium albo-atrum (verticillium wilt) (26, 31); alfalfa mosaic alfamovirus, cucumber
common                                    mosaic cucumovirus, lettuce mosaic virus (128); Meloidogyne hapla (northern root-knot
                                          nematode) (113).
Horsenettle        Solanum                Phoma terrestris (onion pink rot), Septoria lycopersici (septoria leaf spot of tomato) (31);
                   carolinense L.         Verticillium albo-atrum (verticillium wilt) (26, 31); Phytophthora capsici (phytophthora blight)
                                          (35); cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, tobacco etch potyvirus (128).
Horsetail, field   Equisetum              Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31).
                   arvense L.
Jimsonweed         Datura                 Alternaria solani (early blight), Septoria lycopersici (septoria leaf spot of tomato) (31); alfalfa
                   stramonium L.          mosaic alfamovirus, cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, potato virus X potyvirus, tobacco etch
                                          potyvirus, tobacco mosaic tobamovirus, tomato spotted wilt tospovirus, turnip mosaic
                                          potyvirus, watermelon mosaic potyvirus (128).
Johnsongrass       Sorghum                Exserohilum turcicum (northern corn leaf blight), Colletotrichum graminicola (corn
                   halpense (L.) Pers.    anthracnose) (31); beet yellows closterovirus, wheat streak mosaic rymovirus (45); maize
                                          dwarf mosaic, maize chlorotic dwarf mosaic virus (77).
Knotweed,          Polygonum              Meloidogyne hapla (northern root-knot nematode) (113).
prostrate          aviculare L.
Kochia             Kochia scoparia        Cercospora beticola (cercospora leaf spot of beet), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of
                   (L.) Schrad.           many crops) (31).




                                                     APPENDIX 5 | Crop Disease Pathogens Hosted by Common Agricultural Weeds 143
   APPENDIX 5 Crop Disease Pathogens Hosted by Common Agricultural Weeds (continued)

 Weed                 Weed
 common name          scientific name         Pathogens and crop diseases1
 Lambsquarters,       Chenopodium             Peronospora effusa (downy mildew of spinach), Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white mold and
 common               album L.                cottony rot of potato, tomato, beans, cabbage, and carrot; lettuce drop), Cercospora beticola
                                              (cercospora leaf spot of beet), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31);
                                              clubroot (Plasmodiophora brassicae) (36); Verticillium albo-atrum (verticillium wilt) (26);
                                              alfalfa mosaic alfamovirus, cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, bean yellow mosaic potyvirus,
                                              clover yellow vein potyvirus, potato virus Y potyvirus, soybean mosaic potyvirus, tobacco
                                              etch potyvirus, turnip mosaic potyvirus, watermelon mosaic potyvirus, lettuce mosaic virus
                                              (128); barley stripe mosaic hordeivirus, beet yellows virus, beet curly top virus (45); beet
                                              nematode (Heterodera schachtii) (20); Meloidogyne hapla (northern root-knot nematode)
                                              (113); Meloidogyne incognita (southern root-knot nematode) (29).
 Lettuce, prickly     Lactuca serriola L.     Microdochium panattonianum (lettuce anthracnose), Verticillium dahliae (verticillium
                                              wilt) (13); Cercospora longissima (cercospora leaf spot), Erysiphe cichoracearum (powdery
                                              mildew), and Septoria lactucae (septoria leaf spot of lettuce), Bremia lactucae (downy
                                              mildew of lettuce), Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white mold and cottony rot of potato, tomato,
                                              beans, cabbage, and carrot; lettuce drop), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many
                                              crops), Sclerotium rolfsii (southern blight) (31); cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, tomato
                                              spotted wilt tospovirus (31); Meloidogyne hapla (northern root-knot nematode) (113).
 Mallow, Venice       Hibiscus trionum L.     Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31).
 Medic, black         Medicago                Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31); alfalfa mosaic alfamovirus, bean
                      lupulina L.             yellow mosaic potyvirus, clover yellow vein potyvirus (128); Meloidogyne hapla (northern
                                              root-knot nematode) (113).
 Milkweed,            Asclepias syriaca       Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31); alfalfa mosaic alfamovirus,
 common               L.                      cucumber mosaic cucumovirus (128).
 Millet, wild-proso   Panicum                 Pythium ultimum (seed decay and root rot of many crops), Exserohilum turcicum (northern
                      miliaceum L.            corn leaf blight), Fusarium oxysporum (various diseases of many crops), Colletotrichum
                                              graminicola (corn anthracnose) (31).
 Morningglory,        Ipomoea                 Fusarium sp. (various diseases of many crops) (31).
 ivyleaf              hederacea (L.) Jacq.
 Morningglory,        Ipomoea                 Cucumber mosaic cucumovirus (128).
 pitted               lacunosa L.
 Morningglory, tall   Ipomoea                 Cucumber mosaic cucumovirus (128).
                      purpurea (L.) Roth
 Mustard, hedge       Sisymbrium              Peronospora parasitica (downy mildew of crucifer crops) (31).
                      officinale (L.) Scop.
 Mustard, wild        Brassica kaber          Peronospora parasitica (downy mildew of crucifer crops), Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white
                      (DC.) L. C.             mold and cottony rot of potato, tomato, beans, cabbage, and carrot; lettuce drop),
                      Wheeler (=              Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31); Cystopus candidus = Albugo
                      Sinapis arvensis        candida (white blister) (36); Plasmodiophora brassicae (clubroot), Bacterium campestre
                      L.)                     (77); cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, turnip mosaic potyvirus (128); Meloidogyne hapla
                                              (northern root-knot nematode) (113).
 Nightshade,          Solanum                 Phytophthora infestans (late blight), Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white mold and cottony rot of
 eastern black        ptycanthum Dun.         potato, tomato, beans, cabbage, and carrot; lettuce drop), Alternaria solani (early blight),
                                              Verticillium albo-atrum (verticillium wilt of solanaceous crops), Colletotrichum coccodes
                                              (anthracnose of tomato and eggplant, potato black dot), Rhizoctonia solani (various
                                              diseases of many crops) (31); Phytophthora capsici (phytophthora blight) (35); alfalfa
                                              mosaic alfamovirus, cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, potato virus Y potyvirus, tobacco etch
                                              potyvirus, tomato spotted wilt tospovirus, turnip mosaic potyvirus, watermelon mosaic
                                              potyvirus (128).



144 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
  APPENDIX 5 Crop Disease Pathogens Hosted by Common Agricultural Weeds (continued)

Weed                Weed
common name         scientific name      Pathogens and crop diseases1
Nutsedge, yellow    Cyperus              Sclerotinia minor on lettuce and peanut (44a and appendix 3); alfalfa mosaic virus (45);
                    esculentus L.        Meloidogyne incognita (southern root-knot nematode) (29).
Panicum, fall       Panicum              No records located.
                    dichotomiflorum
                    Michx.
Pennycress, field   Thlaspi arvense L.   Verticillium dahliae (verticillium wilt), Peronospora parasitica (downy mildew), Alternaria
                                         brassicicola (alternaria leaf spot) (13); Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white mold and cottony
                                         rot of potato, tomato, beans, cabbage, and carrot; lettuce drop) (31); Plasmodiophora
                                         brassicae (clubroot) (36, 31); cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, turnip mosaic potyvirus (128);
                                         Meloidogyne hapla (northern root-knot nematode) (113); M. incognita (southern root-knot
                                         nematode), Pratylenchus penetrans (meadow nematode), Heterodera schachtii (sugar beet
                                         cyst nematode), H. glycines (soybean cyst nematode) (11).
Pepperweed,         Lepidium             Plasmodiophora brassicae (clubroot) (36); Phoma terrestris (onion pink rot), Alternaria
field               campestre (L.)       brassicae (alternaria leaf spot of mustard family crops) (31); Meloidogyne hapla (northern
                    R. Br.               root-knot nematode) (113).
Pepperweed,         Lepidium             Plasmodiophora brassicae (clubroot), Alternaria brassicae (alternaria leaf spot of mustard
Virginia            virginicum L.        family crops) (31).
Pigweed, Powell     Amaranthus           Albugo bliti (white rust), Alternaria spp. (various leaf spots and blights), Fusarium spp.
amaranth            powellii S. Wats.    (various wilts and rots) (11).
Pigweed,            Amaranthus           Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31); alfalfa mosaic alfamovirus, potato
prostrate           blitoides S. Wats.   virus Y potyvirus, cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, tomato spotted wilt tospovirus (128).
Pigweed, redroot    Amaranthus           Albugo bliti (white rust), Alternaria solani (early blight), Choanephora cucurbitarum
                    retroflexus L.       (choanephora blossom blight and fruit rot of cucurbits), Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white
                                         mold and cottony rot of potato, tomato, beans, cabbage, and carrot; lettuce drop),
                                         Sclerotium rolfsii (southern blight), Verticillium albo-atrum (verticillium wilt of nightshades),
                                         Verticillium dahliae (verticillium wilt of cucurbits, nightshades), Rhizoctonia solani (various
                                         diseases of many crops, Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. betae (fusarium wilt of beet) (11); alfalfa
                                         mosaic alfamovirus, cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, tomato spotted wilt tospovirus,
                                         turnip mosaic potyvirus (128); Meloidogyne incognita (southern root-knot nematode) (29);
                                         Heterodera schachtii (sugar beet cyst nematode), Pratylenchus penetrans (lesion nematode)
                                         (11).
Pigweed, smooth     Amaranthus           Albugo bliti (white rust), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops), Fusarium
                    hybridus L.          oxysporum f. sp. radicis-lycopersici (tomato fusarium wilt) (11); alfalfa mosaic alfamovirus,
                                         potato virus Y potyvirus (128); tobacco mosaic virus (45); Meloidogyne incognita (southern
                                         root-knot nematode) (11).
Pigweed, tumble     Amaranthus           Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (11); overwintering host for alfalfa
                    albus L.             mosaic virus (51); Meloidogyne incognita (southern root-knot nematode), Heterodera
                                         schachtii (sugar beet cyst nematode) (11).
Purslane,           Portulaca            Fusarium sp. (various diseases of many crops), Verticillium albo-atrum (verticillium wilt of
common              oleracea L.          solanaceous crops), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31); Phytophthora
                                         capsici (phytophthora blight) (35); aster yellows phytoplasma, clover big vein virus (45);
                                         alfalfa mosaic alfamovirus, cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, potato virus Y potyvirus, turnip
                                         mosaic potyvirus, tomato spotted wilt tospovirus (128).
Quackgrass          Elytrigia repens     Pythium ultimum (seed rot and root rot of pea, beet, and crucifer crops), Colletotrichum
                    (L.) Nevski          graminicola (anthracnose of corn), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31);
                                         Gaeumannomyces graminis (take-all) (52).




                                                   APPENDIX 5 | Crop Disease Pathogens Hosted by Common Agricultural Weeds 145
   APPENDIX 5 Crop Disease Pathogens Hosted by Common Agricultural Weeds (continued)


 Weed                Weed
 common name         scientific name     Pathogens and crop diseases1
 Radish, wild        Raphanus            Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white mold and cottony rot of potato, tomato, beans, cabbage,
                     raphanistrum L.     and carrot; lettuce drop), Phoma lingam (black leg and seed decay of crops in the mustard
                                         family) (31); Plasmodiophora brassicae (clubroot) (36); cucumber mosaic cucumovirus,
                                         turnip mosaic potyvirus (128).
 Ragweed,            Ambrosia            Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white mold and cottony rot of potato, tomato, beans, cabbage,
 common              artemisiifolia L.   and carrot; lettuce drop), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many crops) (31); rusts of
                                         wheat, rye, and barley, aster yellows phytoplasma (77).
 Rocket, yellow      Barbarea vulgaris   Peronospora parasitica (downy mildew of crucifer crops) (31); Meloidogyne hapla (northern
                     R. Br.              root-knot nematode) (113).
 Ryegrass, Italian   Lolium              Colletotrichum graminicola (corn anthracnose), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many
                     multiflorum Lam.    crops) (31); Claviceps purpurea (ergot), barley yellow dwarf virus, oat sterile dwarf virus (6).
 Shattercane         Sorghum bicolor     Pythium ultimum (seed decay and root rot of several crops), Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white
                     (L.) Moench         mold and cottony rot of potato, tomato, beans, cabbage, and carrot; lettuce drop), Fusarium
                                         oxysporum (various diseases of several crops), Phoma terrestris (onion pink rot), Rhizoctonia
                                         solani (various diseases of many crops) (31); Peronosclerospora sorghi (sorghum downy
                                         mildew of corn) (123).
 Shepherd's purse    Capsella bursa-     Plasmodiophora brassicae (clubroot) and Cystopus candidus = Albugo candida (white blister),
                     pastoris (L.)       which attack most crops in the mustard family, Rhizoctonia solani (black scurf and stem
                     Medicus             canker of potato) (36); Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris (bacterial wilt), Peronospora
                                         parasitica (black rot and downy mildew of crops in the mustard family) (31); aster yellows
                                         phytoplasma (45); viruses including alfalfa mosaic alfamovirus, cucumber mosaic
                                         cucumovirus, turnip mosaic potyvirus, tomato spotted wilt tospovirus, watermelon mosaic
                                         potyvirus (128); aster yellows phytoplasma, beet curly top hybrigeminivirus, beet mosaic
                                         potyvirus, beet yellows closterovirus, cauliflower mosaic virus (45); Meloidogyne hapla
                                         (northern root-knot nematode) (113).
 Sida, prickly       Sida spinosa L.     Verticillium albo-atrum (verticillium wilt) (26).
 Smartweed,          Polygonum           No records located.
 Pennsylvania        pensylvanicum L.
 Sowthistle,         Sonchus oleraceus   Bremia lactucae (lettuce downy mildew), Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white mold and cottony
 annual              L.                  rot of potato, tomato, beans, cabbage, and carrot; lettuce drop) (31); aster yellows
                                         phytoplasma, beet curly top hybrigeminivirus (45); alfalfa mosaic alfamovirus, cucumber
                                         mosaic cucumovirus, tomato spotted wilt tospovirus, lettuce mosaic virus (128).
 Sowthistle,         Sonchus arvensis    Bremia lactucae (downy mildew of lettuce). Diseased roots can act as a source of Fusarium
 perennial           L.                  oxysporum (various diseases of many crops), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of many
                                         crops), and Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white mold and cottony rot of potato, tomato, beans,
                                         cabbage, and carrot; lettuce drop); aster yellows phytoplasma (12).
 Speedwell, corn     Veronica arvensis   Cucumber mosaic cucumovirus (128).
                     L.
 Speedwell,          Veronica persica    Arabis mosaic and strawberry latent ring spot viruses carried by the nematode Xiphinema
 Persian                                 diversicaudatum (111).
 Speedwell,          Veronica            Meloidogyne hapla (northern root-knot nematode) (113).
 purslane            peregrina L.
 Sunflower,          Helianthus          Erysiphe cichoracearum (powdery mildew), Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white mold and cottony
 common              annuus              rot of potato, tomato, beans, cabbage, and carrot; lettuce drop), Botrytis cineria (gray
                                         mold blight), Cladosporium cucumerinum (scab of cucurbits), Fusarium oxysporum (various
                                         diseases of many crops), Verticillium dahliae (verticillium wilt), Rhizoctonia solani (various
                                         diseases of many crops) (31).



146 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
      APPENDIX 5 Crop Disease Pathogens Hosted by Common Agricultural Weeds (continued)


Weed                     Weed
common name              scientific name      Pathogens and crop diseases1
Thistle, Canada          Cirsium arvense      Sclerotinia sclerotiorum (white mold and cottony rot of potato, tomato, beans, cabbage, and
                         (L.) Scop.           carrot; lettuce drop) (31); rusts of rye and barley (77); cucumber mosaic cucumovirus, bean
                                              yellow mosaic potyvirus, turnip mosaic potyvirus (128); aster yellows phytoplasma (76);
                                              Meloidogyne hapla (northern root-knot nematode) (113).
Velvetleaf               Abutilon             Phomopsis sojae (pod and stem blight of soybean), Colletotrichum dematium and
                         theophrasti          C. gloeosporioides (soybean anthracnose), Verticilium dahliae (verticillium wilt) (12);
                         Medicus              Colletotrichum coccodes (tomato anthracnose and potato black dot), C. gloeosporioides
                                              (pepper anthracnose) (31); Phytophthora capsici (phytophthora blight) (29); Meloidogyne
                                              hapla (northern root-knot nematode) (12); turnip mosaic potyvirus (128).
Violet, field            Viola arvensis       No records located.
                         Murr.
Witchgrass               Panicum capillare    Fusarium oxysporum (various vegetable diseases), Colletotrichum graminicola (corn
                         L.                   anthracnose), Phoma terrestris (onion pink rot), Rhizoctonia solani (various diseases of
                                              many crops) (31); wheat streak mosaic rymovirus, barley yellow dwarf luteovirus, barley
                                              stripe mosaic hordeivirus, maize chlorotic mottle machlomovirus, maize dwarf mosaic
                                              potyvirus, sugarcane mosaic potyvirus, wheat American striate mosaic nucleorhabdovirus;
                                              also susceptible to bromegrass mosaic virus but whether it hosts this virus in the field is
                                              unknown (13).
Woodsorrel,              Oxalis stricta L.    Sexual stages of Puccinia sorghi and P. polysora (corn rusts) and P. purpurea (sorghum rust)
yellow                                        (11).
Yellowcress,             Rorippa islandica    Plasmodiophora brassicae (clubroot), Peronospora parasitica (downy mildew of crucifer
marsh                    (Oeder) Borbas       crops) (31); cucumber mosaic cucumovirus (128).

1
    Both common and scientific names are given where possible. Note that diseases with the same common name are sometimes caused by
    different organisms in different crops (for example, downy mildew), and the weed may only host one of the pathogens with that common name.




                                                         APPENDIX 5 | Crop Disease Pathogens Hosted by Common Agricultural Weeds 147
   APPENDIX 6 Linking a Field Map and Spreadsheet in Microsoft Excel
                      Jody Bolluyt, Peter Lowy, and Charles L. Mohler




C        reating management maps of your fields using
         Excel is easy and allows you to link a spreadsheet
         similar to tables 5.2 and 5.3 (pages 62–67)
to the maps. Once you have a map and spreadsheet set up
in a workbook, entering crop names on the spreadsheet
                                                                   physically separated by driveways, as shown in the
                                                                   example, leaving blank lines between sections on the
                                                                   DATA sheet will make using the workbook easier.


causes them to appear on the map at the same time. The         To Create the MAP Sheet:
map and spreadsheet can also be set up to place additional     1. Click on the Sheet2 tab at the bottom of the page to
information, like target planting dates, on the map.              go to that sheet. Then double click that tab to select
Updating the map as the season progresses is as simple            it, and enter the name Field_nameMAP (for example,
as entering the changes in the spreadsheet. Moreover,             NorthMAP).
for subsequent years, you can duplicate the workbook,          2. Select cell C3 and in the formula bar (a toolbar available
rename it with the appropriate year, and enter the crops for      under View that appears above the workbook) enter
that year into the spreadsheet. The map has to be created         =Field_nameDATA!A2 and click on the checkmark
only once.                                                        in the toolbar. The value that appears in cell A2 of
    A sample map and spreadsheet called Example_field_            the DATA sheet should appear. Leaving rows 1 and 2
map_07 can be downloaded from http://www.neon.                    and columns A and B free gives you room to draw in
cornell.edu/croprotation/index.html. An example of                landmarks later.
a field map in use on a real farm can be viewed at http://     3. Including cell C3, choose as many cells to the right as
www.roxburyfarm.com and click on “Roxbury Farm                    you have data that you want to include on the map. In
Manuals.” In the section “Mapping of Crop Rotations”              the example, we selected Cells C3–G3. Then hit Ctrl-R
click on either sample database to see the table or sample        to fill those cells.
map to see the map. The web site does not support the          4. Select enough cells down to cover the number of rows
dynamic linkage between the table and map that you can            in your DATA sheet, and hit Crtl-D to fill them. Delete
achieve on your own computer, so click “No” when asked            any zeros that appear where data are absent on the
if you want to update linked information.                         DATA sheet.
                                                               5. Outline the sections and management units using the
                                                                  Outline box  ▶       on the formatting toolbar, or choose
To Create the DATA Sheet:                                         Cells from the Format menu and select Borders. First
1. Open a new Excel workbook and save it with an                  outline a section (a group of management units) with a
   appropriate name.                                              thick line, then select the rows within that outline and
2. To name the first sheet of the workbook, double click          underline them with a thin line.
   on the Sheet1 tab at the bottom of the page and name        6. Adjust the column widths (Columns on the Format
   it Field_nameDATA (for example, NorthDATA).                    menu) until all of the information is visible and
3. At the top of the table enter your column headings. In         pleasantly spaced. Widen or narrow the column
   the example, they are Section, MU, Crops, Date, and            containing the crop species information to make the
   Date2.                                                         management units appear more or less the shape they
4. Enter the data for each management unit, or copy and           are in the field. If necessary, adjust the row height
   paste columns from the FieldWork1 spreadsheet if you           (Rows on the Format menu) to help get the shape
   are following the detailed planning procedure.                 right. You will want the map to print nicely on one or
5. Columns containing dates need to be formatted: Select          possibly two pages, and this may also require adjusting
   those columns, go to Format menu, choose Cells,                column widths and row heights. If necessary, change
   click on the Number tab, choose Date, and select the           the font size in some columns to make the information
   date format you prefer.                                        fit. Use Print Preview on the File menu to see how the
6. If you break up crop fields into sections that are             map will appear on the printed page.


148 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
   APPENDIX 6 Linking a Field Map and Spreadsheet in Microsoft Excel (continued)


7. PC users: Go to Tools on the menu bar and select                Note that maps of many fields can be coordinated
   Options. Then click on the Gridlines box to make            with a single DATA sheet that contains information on all
   the checkmark disappear. This will eliminate the pale       management units on the farm. To make additional maps,
   gridlines, so that the page looks more maplike.             click on the Sheet3 tab at the bottom of the page. Then
   Mac users: Go to Excel on the menu bar and select           choose Worksheet on the Insert menu repeatedly to create
   Preferences. Verify that View is highlighted among          as many additional sheets as you have fields to map. For each
   the options on the left. If not, click View. Then, click    field, follow the instructions above for making a map.
   on the box next to Gridlines to make the checkmark
   disappear. Click OK.
8. Finally, use the Borders and Patterns tabs within
   Cells on the Format menu to add landmarks like
   roadways, hedgerows, etc.




                                                       APPENDIX 6 | Linking a Field Map and Spreadsheet in Microsoft Excel 149
                                              REFERENCES



Note: In the text, reference numbers are given in parentheses.         Contributions 84–102. Ottawa: Agricultural Institute
                                                                       of Canada.
1.  Abbas, H. K., D. J. Pantone, and R. N. Paul. 1999.           13.   Cavers, P. B., ed. 2005. The Biology of Canadian Weeds,
    Characteristics of multiple-seeded cocklebur: A                    Contributions 103–129. Ottawa: Agricultural Institute
    biotype of common cocklebur (Xanthium strumarium                   of Canada.
    L.). Weed Technology 13:257–63.                              14.   Cavigelli, M. A., S. R. Deming, L. K. Probyn, and
2. Andow, D. 1991. Vegetational diversity and arthropod                R. R. Harwood. 1998. Michigan Field Crop Ecology:
    population response. Annual Review of Entomology                   Managing Biological Processes for Productivity and
    36:561–86.                                                         Environmental Quality. Extension Bulletin E-2646.
3. APS Press. Diagnostic compendia for alfalfa, barley,                East Lansing: Michigan State University.
    corn, soybean, and wheat. http://www.shopapspress.           15.   Chancellor, R. J. 1986. Decline of arable weed seeds
    org/disease-diagnostic-series.html.                                during 20 years in soil under grass and the periodicity
4. APS Press. Diagnostic compendia for bean, beet,                     of seedling emergence after cultivation. Journal of
    carrot, cucurbit, lettuce, onion, pea, pepper, potato,             Applied Ecology 23:631–37.
    sweet potato, and tomato. http://www.shopapspress.           16.   Clements, D. R., A. DiTommaso, S. J. Darbyshire, P.
    org/disease-diagnostic-series.html.                                B. Cavers, and A. D. Sartonov. 2004. The biology of
5. Baskin, C. C., and J. M. Baskin. 1998. Seeds: Ecology,              Canadian weeds. 127. Panicum capillare L. Canadian
    Biogeography, and Evolution of Dormancy and                        Journal of Plant Science 84:327–41.
    Germination. San Diego: Academic Press.                      17.   Conners, I. L. 1967. An Annotated Index of Plant
6. Beddows, A. R. 1973. Biological flora of the British                Diseases in Canada and Fungi Recorded on Plants in
    Isles. Lolium multiflorum Lam. (L. perenne L., ssp.                Alaska, Canada and Greenland, Publication 1251.
    multiflorum (Lam) Husnot, L. italicum A. Braun).                   Ottawa: Canada Department of Agriculture.
    Journal of Ecology 61:587–600.                               18.   Cornell University. Vegetable MD Online,
7. Bell, R. S., W. H. Lachman, E. M. Rahn, and R. D.                   http://vegetablemdonline.ppath.cornell.edu/
    Sweet. 1962. Life History Studies as Related to Weed               NewsArticles/McNabRotations.htm.
    Control in the Northeast. 1. Nutgrass. Bulletin 364.         19.   Cunningham, S. J. 1998. Great Garden Companions.
    Kingston: University of Rhode Island, Agricultural                 Emmaus, PA: Rodale Press.
    Experiment Station.                                          20.   Curl, E. A. 1963. Control of plant diseases by crop
8. Boucher, T. J., and R. Durgy. 2003. Perimeter                       rotation. Botanical Review 29:413–79.
    trap cropping works! University of Connecticut,              21.   Davis, R. M., and J. J. Nunez. 1999. Influence of
    Integrated Pest Management, http://www.hort.                       crop rotation on the incidence of Pythium- and
    uconn.edu/ipm/veg/htms/ptcworks.htm.                               Rhizoctonia-induced carrot root dieback. Plant
9. Brainard, D. C., and R. R. Bellinder. 2004. Weed                    Disease 83:146–48.
    suppression in a broccoli–winter rye intercropping           22.   Davis, R. M., K. V. Subbarao, R. N. Raid, and E. A.
    system. Weed Science 52:281–90.                                    Kurtz, eds. 1997. Compendium of Lettuce Diseases. St.
10. Bruehl, G. W. 1987. Soilborne Plant Pathogens. New                 Paul, MN: APS Press.
    York: Macmillan.                                             23.   Dillard, H. R., and A. C. Cobb. 1998. Survival of
11. Cavers, P. B., ed. 1995. The Biology of Canadian Weeds,            Colletotrichum coccodes in infected tomato tissue and
    Contributions 62–83. Ottawa: Agricultural Institute                in soil. Plant Disease 82:235–38.
    of Canada.                                                   24.   Doran, J. W., and M. S. Smith. 1991. Role of cover
12. Cavers, P. B., ed. 2000. The Biology of Canadian Weeds,            crops in nutrient cycling. In Cover Crops for Clean


150 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
      Water, W. L. Hargrove, ed., pp. 85–90. Ankeny, IA:             of Weeds, W. Holzner and N. Numata, eds., pp. 123–
      Soil and Water Conservation Society.                           35. The Hague: Dr. W. Junk.
25.   Ecological Flora of the British Isles at the University   41. Hall, R., ed. 1991. Compendium of Bean Diseases. St.
      of York. http://www.ecoflora.co.uk                             Paul, MN: APS Press.
26.   Engelhard, A. W. 1957. Host index of Verticillium albo-   42. Hanson, A. A. 1990. Practical Handbook of Agricultural
      atrum Einke & Berth. (including Verticillium dahliae           Science. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
      Kleb.). Plant Disease Reporter, Supplement 244.           43. Hao, J. J., K. V. Subbarao, and S. T. Koike. 2003.
27.   Entz, M. H., W. J. Bullied, and F. Katepa-Mupondwa.            Effects of broccoli rotation on lettuce drop caused
      1995. Rotational benefits of forage crops in Canadian          by Sclerotinia minor and on the population density of
      prairie cropping systems. Journal of Production                sclerotia in soil. Plant Disease 87:159–66.
      Agriculture 8:521–29.                                     44. Høgh-Jensen, H., and J. K. Schjoerring. 1997.
28.   Epps, J. M., and A. Y. Chambers. 1958. New host                Interactions between white clover and ryegrass under
      records for Heterodera glycines: including one host in         contrasting nitrogen availability: N2 fixation, N
      the Labiatae. Plant Disease Reporter 42:194.                   fertilizer recovery, N transfer and water use efficiency.
29.   Everts, K., University of Maryland. Personal                   Plant and Soil 197:187–99.
      communication.                                            44a. Hollowell, J.E. and B.B. Shaw. 2001. Yellow nutsedge
30.   Everts, K. 2003. Development and evaluation of                 (cyperus esculentus L.) as a host for Sclerotinia minor.
      management alternatives for root knot nematodes                Plant Disease 85:562.
      and volunteer potatoes. SARE final project report         45. Holm, L. G., D. L. Plucknett, J. V. Pancho, and J. P.
      LNE00-131. http://www.sare.org/reporting/                      Herberger. 1977. World’s Worst Weeds: Distribution
      report_viewer.asp.                                             and Biology. Honolulu, HI: University Press of
31.   Farr, D. F., G. F. Bills, G. P. Chamuris, and A. Y.            Hawaii, East-West Center.
      Rossman. 1989. Fungi on Plants and Plant Products in      46. Holm, L., J. Doll, E. Holm, J. Pancho, and J. Herberger.
      the United States. St. Paul, MN: APS Press.                    1997. World Weeds: Natural Histories and Distribution.
32.   Fenner, M. 1983. Relationships between seed weight,            New York: John Wiley.
      ash content and seedling growth in twenty-four            47. Hunt, D.W. A., and R. S. Vernon. 2001. Portable
      species of Compositae. New Phytologist 95:697–706.             trench barrier for protecting edges of tomato
33.   Ferro, D. N. 1996. Cultural control. Radcliffe’s IPM           fields from Colorado potato beetle (Coleoptera:
      World Textbook, University of Minnesota, http://               Chrysomelidae). Journal of Economic Entomology
      ipmworld.umn.edu/chapters/ferro.htm.                           94:204–7.
34.   Foster, R., and B. Flood, eds. 1995. Vegetable            48. Hutchinson, C. S., and G. B. Seymour. 1982.
      Insect Management: With Emphasis on the Midwest.               Biological flora of the British Isles. Poa annua L.
      Willoughby, OH: Meister Publishing.                            Journal of Ecology 70:887–901.
35.   French-Monar, R. D. 2006. Characterization of             49. Ilnicki, R. D., and S. N. Fertig. 1962. Life History
      Phytophthora capsici associated with roots of weeds            Studies as Related to Weed Control in the Northeast.
      on Florida vegetable farms. Plant Disease 90:345–50.           3. Horse Nettle. Bulletin 368. Kingston: University of
36.   Gram, E., and A. Weber. 1953. Plant Diseases in                Rhode Island, Agricultural Experiment Station.
      Orchard, Nursery and Garden Crops. New York:              50. Ingerson-Mahar, J., M. Huffaker, and S. Eck-
      Philosophical Library.                                         Jones. 1997. Managing wireworms in New Jersey’s
37.   Greene, H. C. 1945. Notes on Wisconsin parasitic               field crops. Rutgers Cooperative Extension Fact
      fungi VII. American Midland Naturalist 34:258–70.              Sheet, FS880. http://njaes.rutgers.edu/pubs/
                                                                     publication.asp?pid=FS880.
38.   Grime, J. P., J. G. Hodgson, and R. Hunt. 1988.
      Comparative Plant Ecology: A Functional Approach to       51. Kaiser, W. J., and R. M. Hannan. 1983. Additional
      Common British Species. London: Unwin Hyman.                   hosts of alfalfa mosaic virus and its seed transmission
                                                                     in tumble pigweed and bean. Plant Disease 67:1354–
39.   Grubinger, V. P. 1999. Sustainable Vegetable
                                                                     57.
      Production from Start-up to Market. Ithaca, NY:
      Cornell University, Natural Resource, Agriculture         52. Kirby, R. S. 1922. The take-all disease of cereals and
      and Engineering Service (NRAES).                               grasses. Phytopathology 12:67–88.
40.   Håkansson, S. 1982. Multiplication, growth and            53. Koike, S. T., R. F. Smith, L. E. Jackson, L. J. Wyland,
      persistence of perennial weeds. In Biology and Ecology         J. I. Inman, and W. E. Chaney. 1996. Phacelia, Lana


                                                                                                            REFERENCES 151
      woollypod vetch, and Austrian winter pea: Three new               http://vegetablemdonline.ppath.cornell.edu/
      cover crop hosts of Sclerotinia minor in California.              NewsArticles/McNabRotations.htm.
      Plant Disease 80:1409–12.                                    67. MacNab, A. A., and T. A. Zitter.
54.   Kraft, J. M., and F. L. Pfleger, eds. 2000. Compendium            http://vegetablemdonline.ppath.cornell.edu/
      of Pea Diseases and Pests, 2nd ed. St. Paul, MN: APS              NewsArticles/McNabRotations.htm.
      Press.                                                       68. Magdoff, F., and H. Van Es. 2000. Building Soils for
55.   Landis, D. A., S. D. Wratten, and G. M. Gurr. 2000.               Better Crops. Beltsville, MD: Sustainable Agriculture
      Habitat management to conserve natural enemies                    Network.
      of arthropod pests in agriculture. Annual Review of.         69. Maynard, D., G. Hochmuth. 1997. Knott’s Vegetable
      Entomology 45:175–201.                                            Handbook, 4th ed. New York: John Wiley.
56.   Ledingham, R. J. 1961. Crop rotations and common             70. McLenaghen, R. D., K. C. Cameron, N. H. Lampkin,
      rootrot in wheat. Canadian Journal of Botany 41:479–              M. L. Daly, and B. Deo. 1996. Nitrate leaching from
      86.                                                               ploughed pasture and the effectiveness of winter
57.   Levine, E., and H. Oloumi-Sadeghi. 1991.                          catch crops in reducing leaching losses. New Zealand
      Management of diabroticite rootworms in corn.                     Journal of Agricultural Research 39:413–20.
      Annual Review of Entomology 36:229–55.                       71. Metcalf, R. L., and W. H. Luckmann. 1982.
58.   Liebhardt, W. C., R. W. Andrews, M. N. Culik, R. R.               Introduction to Insect Pest Management, 2nd ed. New
      Harwood, R. R. Janke, J. K. Radke, and S. J. Rieger-              York: John Wiley.
      Schwartz. Crop production during conversion from             72. Mitkowski, N. A., J. G. Van der Beek, and G. S. Abawi.
      conventional to low-input methods. Agronomy                       2002. Characterization of root-knot nematode
      Journal 81:150–59.                                                populations associated with vegetables in New York
59.   Liebman, M., Iowa State University. Personal                      State. Plant Disease 86:840–47.
      communication.                                               73. Mohler, C. L. 2001a. Weed life history: Identifying
60.   Liebman, M., and E. Dyck. 1993. Crop rotation                     vulnerabilities. In Ecological Management of
      and intercropping strategies for weed management.                 Agricultural Weeds, M. Liebman, C. L. Mohler, and
      Ecological Applications 3:92–122.                                 C. P. Staver, eds., pp. 40–98. New York: Cambridge
61.   Liebman, M., and E. R. Gallandt. 1997. Many little                University Press.
      hammers: Ecological management of crop-weed                  74. Mohler, C. L. 2001b. Enhancing the competitive
      interactions. In Agricultural Ecology, L. E. Jackson,             ability of crops. In Ecological Management of
      ed., pp. 291–343. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.                  Agricultural Weeds, M. Liebman, C. L. Mohler, and C.
62.   Liebman, M., and C. P. Staver. 2001. Crop                         P. Staver, eds., pp. 269–321. New York: Cambridge
      diversification for weed management. In Ecological                University Press.
      Management of Agricultural Weeds, M. Liebman, C. L.          75. Muller, J. C., D. Denys, G. Morlet, and A. Mariotta,
      Mohler, and C. P. Staver, eds., pp. 322–74. New York:             1988. Influence of catch crops on mineral nitrogen
      Cambridge University Press.                                       leaching and its subsequent plant use. In Nitrogen
63.   Lovett Doust, L., A. MacKinnon, and J. Lovett Doust.              Efficiency in Agricultural Soils, vol. 2, D. S. Jenkinson
      1985. Biology of Canadian weeds. 71. Oxalis stricta               and K. A. Smith, eds., pp. 85–98. New York: Elsevier
      L., O. corniculata L., O. dillenii Jacq. ssp. dillenii and        Applied Science.
      O. dillenii Jacq. ssp. filipes (Small) Eiten. Canadian       76. Mulligan, G. A., ed. 1979. The Biology of Canadian
      Journal of Plant Science 65:691–709.                              Weeds, Contributions 1–32. Publication 1693. Ottawa:
64.   Luna, J., and P. Jepson. 2002. Enhancement of                     Agricultural Institute of Canada.
      Biological Control with Insectary Plantings.                 77. Mulligan, G. A., ed. 1984. The Biology of Canadian
      Information Bulletin 11. Santa Cruz, CA: Organic                  Weeds, Contributions 33–61. Publication 1765.
      Farming Research Foundation.                                      Ottawa: Agricultural Institute of Canada.
65.   Maas, E. M. C. 1990. Crop rotation and take-all of           78. Plant Nutrient Content Database, http://www.nrcs.
      wheat in South Africa. Soil Biology and Biochemistry              usda.gov/technical/ECS/nutrient/tbb2.html.
      22:489–94.                                                        U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
66.   MacNab, A. A., and T. A. Zitter. 2000. Do rotations               Conservation Service.
      matter within disease management programs?                   78a. DACUM & SCID Training Information. Center for
      Vegetable MD Online, Cornell University,                          Education and Training for Development, College


152 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
      of Education and Human Ecology, Ohio State                 92. Reeves, D.W. 1994. Cover crops and rotations. In
      University, http://www.dacumohiostate.com/.                     Crops Residue Management, J. L. Hatfield and B. A.
79.   Ominski, P. D., M. H. Entz, and N. Kenkel. 1999.                Stewart, eds., pp. 125–58. Ann Arbor, MI: CRC Press.
      Weed suppression by Medicago sativa in subsequent          93. Reichert, S. E. 1998. The role of spiders and their
      cereal crops: A comparative survey. Weed Science                conservation in the agroecosystem. In Enhancing
      47:282–90.                                                      Biological Control: Habitat Management to Promote
80.   Observation of growers at the DACUM expert farmer               Natural Enemies of Agricultural Pests, C. H. Pickett and
      workshop, Jan. 30–Feb. 1, 2002.                                 R. L. Bugg, eds., pp. 211–37. Berkeley: University of
81.   Observation of growers at Northeast Organic Farmers             California Press.
      Association of New Jersey workshop “Identifying            94. Robak, J. 1994. Crop rotation effect on clubroot
      Problems in Crop Rotation Sequences,” Feb. 2003.                disease decrease. Acta Horticulturae 371:223–26.
82.   Observation of growers at Northeast Organic Farmers        95. Sarantonio, M. 1992. Northeast Cover Crop Handbook.
      Association of New York workshop “Identifying                   Soil Health Series. Emmaus, PA: Rodale Institute.
      Problems in Crop Rotation Sequences,” Jan. 26, 2003.       96. Scott, T. W., J. Mt. Pleasant, R. F. Burt, and D. J. Otis.
83.   Observation of growers at Northeast Organic                     1987. Contributions of ground cover, dry matter, and
      Network (NEON) meeting, Jan. 29, 2003.                          nitrogen from intercrops and cover crops in a corn
84.   An Online Guide to Plant Disease Control. Oregon                polyculture system. Agronomy Journal 79:792–98.
      State University Extension, http://plant-disease.          97. Sherf, A. F., and A. A. MacNab. 1986. Vegetable
      ippc.orst.edu/index.cfm.                                        Diseases and Their Control, 2nd ed. New York: John
85.   Papavizas, G. C. 1966. Suppression of aphanomyces               Wiley.
      root rot of peas by cruciferous soil amendments.           98. Skoglund, L. G., H. F. Schwartz, and W. M. Brown.
      Phytopathology 56:1071–75.                                      1999. Cultural approaches to managing plant
86.   Pedersen, L., and C. Eckenrode. 1980. Predicting                pathogens. In Handbook of Pest Management, J. R.
      Cabbage Maggot Flights in New York Using Common                 Ruberson, ed., pp. 291–307. New York: Marcel
      Wild Plants, FLS 87. Geneva: New York State                     Dekker.
      Agricultural Experiment Station, Cornell University.       99. Smith, H. A., and R. McSorley. 2000. Intercropping
87.   Peters, R. A., and S. Dunn. 1971. Life History Studies          and pest management: A review of major concepts.
      as Related to Weed Control in the Northeast. 6. Large           American Entomologist 46:154–61.
      and Small Crabgrass. Bulletin 415. Storrs: University      100. Sobey, D. G. 1981. Biological flora of the British Isles.
      of Connecticut, College of Agriculture and Natural              Stellaria media (L.) Vill. Journal of Ecology 69:311–35.
      Resources, Storrs Agricultural Experiment Station.         101. Sorenson, K. A., and J. R. Baker. eds. Insects and
88.   Peters, R. A., J. A. Meade, and P. W. Santelmann.               Related Pests of Vegetables. AG-295. Raleigh: North
      1963. Life History Studies as Related to Weed Control           Carolina State University, http://ipm.ncsu.edu/
      in the Northeast. 2. Yellow Foxtail and Giant Foxtail.          AG295/html/.
      Bulletin 369. Kingston: University of Rhode Island,        102. Stivers-Young, L. J. 1998. Growth, nitrogen accu-
      Agricultural Experiment Station.                                mulation and weed suppression by fall cover crops
89.   Radke, J. K., and R. T. Hagstrom. 1976. Strip                   following early harvest of vegetables. HortScience
      intercropping for wind protection. In Multiple                  33:60–63.
      Cropping, R. I. Papendick, P. A. Sanchez, and G. B.        103. Stoner, K. A. 1997. Influence of mulches on the
      Triplett, eds., pp. 201–22. Madison, WI: American               colonization by adults and survival of larvae of the
      Society of Agronomy.                                            Colorado potato beetle (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae)
90.   Rahn, E. M., R. D. Sweet, J. Vengris, and S. Dunn.              in eggplant. Journal of Entomological Science 32:7–16.
      1968. Life History Studies as Related to Weed Control in   104. Stoner, K. A., ed. 1999. Alternatives to Insecticides
      the Northeast. 5. Barnyardgrass. Bulletin 368. Newark:          for Managing Vegetable Insects. NRAES-138.
      University of Delaware, Agricultural Experiment                 State of Connecticut, Agricultural Experiment
      Station.                                                        Station, http://www.ct.gov/caes/cwp/view.
91.   Raleigh, S. M., T. R. Flanagan, and C. Veatch. 1962.            asp?a=2797&q=345156
      Life History Studies as Related to Weed Control in the     105. Subbarao, K. V., J. C. Hubbard, and S. T. Koike. 1999.
      Northeast. 4. Quackgrass. Bulletin 365. Newark:                 Evaluation of broccoli residue incorporation into
      University of Delaware, Agricultural Experiment                 field soil for Verticillium wilt control in cauliflower.
      Station.                                                        Plant Disease 83:124–29.

                                                                                                             REFERENCES 153
106. Subbarao, K. V. 2001. Rotations with broccoli—A          118. Virginia Cooperative Extension. Integrated Disease
     sustainable alternative to soil chemical fumigants.           Management in Small Grains. Diseases and
     SARE final project report SW99-009. http://                   management practices. http://www.ppws.vt.edu/
     www.sare.org/reporting/report_viewer.                         stromberg/smallgrain/sgpractices.html.
     asp?pn=SW99-009.                                         119. Wallace, J., ed. 2001. Organic Field Crop Handbook,
107. Sustainable Agriculture Network (SAN). 1998.                  2nd ed. Ottawa: Canadian Organic Growers.
     Managing Cover Crops Profitably, 2nd ed. Beltsville,     120. Warwick, S. I., A. Francis, and D. J. Susko. 2002.
     MD: Sustainable Agriculture Network (SAN).                    The biology of Canadian weeds. 9. Thlaspi arvense L.
108. Sweet, R. D. 1986. Life History Studies as Related to         (updated). Canadian Journal of Plant Science 82:803–
     Weed Control in the Northeast. 9. Galinsoga. Ithaca,          23.
     NY: Cornell University Agricultural Experiment           121. Weiner J., H.-W. Griepentrog, and L. Kristensen.
     Station, New York State College of Agriculture and            2001. Increasing the suppression of weeds by cereal
     Life Sciences.                                                crops. Journal of Applied Ecology 38:784–90.
109. Sweet, R. D., Veatch, C., and S. Dunn. 1978. Life        122. Weisz, R., A. Smilowitz, and B. Christ. 1994. Distance,
     History Studies as Related to Weed Control in the             rotation and border crops affect Colorado potato
     Northeast. 8. Common Ragweed. Bulletin 1033. Ithaca,          beetle (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) colonization
     NY: Cornell University Agricultural Experiment                and population density and early blight (Alternaria
     Station, New York State College of Agriculture and            solani) severity in rotated potato fields. Journal of
     Life Sciences.                                                Economic Entomology 87:723–29.
110. Tahvanainen, J. O., and R. B. Root. 1972. The            123. White, D. G., ed. 1999. Compendium of Corn Diseases,
     influence of vegetational diversity on the population         3rd ed. St. Paul, MN: APS Press.
     ecology of a specialized herbivore, Phyllotreta          124. Wiggins, B. E., and L. L. Kinkel. 2005. Green manures
     cruciferae (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae). Oecologia             and crop sequences influence potato diseases
     (Berlin) 10:321–46.                                           and pathogen inhibitory activity of indigenous
111. Thomas, P. R. 1970. Host status of some plants                streptomycetes. Phytopathology 95:178–85.
     for Xiphinema diversicaudatum (Micol.) and their         125. Wijands, F. G. 1999. Crop rotation in organic farming:
     susceptibility to viruses transmitted by this species.        Theory and practice. In Designing and Testing Crop
     Annals of Applied Biology 65:169–78.                          Rotations for Organic Farming, J. E. Olesen, R. Eltun,
112. Thompson, K., S. R. Band, and J. G. Hodgson. 1993.            M. J. Gooding, E. S. Jensen, and U. Köpke, eds. Tjele:
     Seed size and shape predict persistence in soil.              Danish Research Center for Organic Farming.
     Functional Ecology 7:236–41.                             126. Wiley, R. W. 1981. Proceedings of the International
113. Townshend, J. L., and T. R. Davidson. 1962. Some              Workshop on Intercropping, 10–13 January 1979.
     weed hosts of the northern root-knot nematode,                Hyderabad, India: International Crops Research
     Meloidogyne hapla Chitwood, 1949, in Ontario.                 Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics.
     Canadian Journal of Botany 40:543–48.                    127. Wright, R. J. 1999. Use of Cultural Practices in Crop
114. Turkington, T. K., and G. W. Clayton. Crop Rotation           Insect Pest Management. Nebraska Cooperative
     and Plant Disease Management. http://ssca.ca/                 Extension EC95-1560-B. http://www.ianr.unl.edu/
     conference/2000proceedings/turkington.html.                   pubs/insects/ec1560.htm.
115. University of Connecticut, Integrated Disease            128. Zitter, T. A. 2001. A Checklist of Major Weeds and
     Management. Having problems controlling vegetable             Crops as Natural Hosts for Plant Viruses in the
     crop diseases? Try rotation. http://www.hort.                 Northeast. http://vegetablemdonline/ppath.
     uconn.edu/ipm/veg/htms/rotate.htm.                            cornell.edu/Tables/WeedHostTable.html.
116. Uva, R. H., J. C. Neal, and J. M. DiTomaso. 1997.
     Weeds of the Northeast. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
     Press.
117. Vengris, J., S. Dunn, and M. Stacewicz-Sapuncakis.
     1972. Life History Studies as Related to Weed Control
     in the Northeast. 7. Common Purslane. Research
     Bulletin 598. Amherst: University of Massachusetts,
     College of Food and Natural Resources, Agricultural
     Experiment Station.


154 Crop Rotation on Organic Farms: A Planning Manual
                                                                          About SARE




SARE is a grant making and outreach program. Its mission is to advance­­­—to the whole of American
agriculture—innovations that improve profitability, stewardship and quality of life by investing in
groundbreaking research and education. SARE provided financial resources to lower the cost of this book,
thus ensuring its vital information is accessible to as many people as possible.

For more information about SARE’s grant making program and information products, visit www.sare.org
                                             or contact:
                                                                     SARE Outreach
                                                                 1122 Patapsco Building
                                                                 University of Maryland
                                                              College Park, MD 20742-6715
                                                            info@sare.org • (301) 405-7955

                                                                             SARE Regions
  SARE’s four regional offices and outreach office work to advance sustainable innovations to the whole of
                                           American agriculture.

                                                                                             North Central SARE

  Western SARE
                                                                                                                  Northeast SARE




                                                                                               Southern SARE
  In addition to the 50 states, SARE works in American Samoa, the Federated States of
  Micronesia, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands.


                                                                                                                              155
                                                 About PALS

   Plant and Life Sciences Publishing (PALS) is a program of the Department of Horticulture in the College of Agriculture
and Life Sciences (CALS) at Cornell University. PALS assists university faculty and their colleagues in publishing,
marketing and distributing books for small farmers, gardeners, land owners, workshops, college courses, and consumers.
The University of Maine and West Virginia University are partners.

    PALS books are practical and comprehensive. They are based on decades of grower experience and university research.
Book categories include garden and landscape, small-scale farming, small-fruit production, composting, pasture-based
livestock production, rural-land management and personal finance. The gardening, small-scale farming, small-fruit
production, rural-land management and pasture-based livestock production books were written for the Northeast, Mid-
Atlantic and Great-Lakes states and adjoining Canadian provinces. Most contain knowledge that will be useful to a wider
audience.

                               Visit PALS web site for descriptions of books distributed.

                                       Plant and Life Sciences Publishing (PALS)
                                                 34 Plant Science Building
                                                  Ithaca, New York 14853
                                                  Phone: (607) 255-7654
                                                    Fax: (607) 254-8770
                                           E-mail: palspublishing@cornell.edu
                                      Web site: http://palspublishing.cals.cornell.edu
                                                Marty Sailus, PALS Director




156
