                                            Sustainable Agriculture
              A program of the National Center for Appropriate Technology • 1-800-346-9140 • www.attra.ncat.org



              Tipsheet: Transitioning to Organic
              Management of Orchards
Organic certification verifies that fruit is produced
according to United States Department of Agri-
culture (USDA) organic standards. See www.ams.
usda.gov/nop for details of the standards. In gen-
eral, the regulations make several requirements of
certified organic fruit:
      yy Produced without genetic engineering,
         ionizing radiation, or sewage sludge
      yy Managed in a manner that conserves nat-
         ural resources and biodiversity
      yy Raised per the National List of Allowed
         and Prohibited Substances (National List)
      yy Overseen by a USDA-authorized certifying
         agent
All National Organic Program regulations for crops
apply to tree fruits. The only regulation specifically
pertaining to orchards is 7 CFR §205.204(a)(4):                                 Organic Magness pears. Photo: Guy Ames, NCAT

“Nonorganically produced planting stock to be used to produce a perennial crop may be sold, labeled, or repre-
sented as organically produced only after the planting stock has been maintained under a system of organic man-
agement for a period of no less than 1 year…”

Basic Principles
      yy Numerous pests and diseases, coupled with the high cosmetic standards of the market, make commercial
         organic tree fruit production difficult, especially in the East.
      yy The relative permanence of an orchard provides ecological stability, including opportunities for soil conser-
         vation and soil building. On the other hand, that relative permanence can allow the build-up of some pests,
         diseases and weeds since crop rotation is eliminated as a pest-management tool for all but the cover crop in
         the aisles.

Transitioning to Organic Disease Control in Orchards
      yy Disease-resistant cultivars should be the foundation of an organic disease management program. However,
         many popular commercial cultivars have little or no genetic resistance to diseases. Furthermore, only a few
         cultivars have across-the-board resistance to all the major diseases in an area, and these cultivars are gener-
         ally not well known to consumers.
      yy Sulfur and copper-type fungicides/bactericides are the mainstays of organic disease management; however,
         they are problematic, especially in the humid East where they must be on plant surfaces before a rain to pre-
         vent infection, but can easily be washed off by rain.
      yy Agricultural-grade antibiotics are no longer allowed in organic production for fire blight control in apples
         and pears.
     yy New-generation disease management tools,
        like microbial antagonists of certain pathogens,
        are becoming available, but are also problem-
        atic, especially in the East, where disease pres-
        sure is higher.
     yy Cultural techniques for managing tree fruit dis-
        eases mostly involve opening up the trees with
        pruning and training to promote rapid drying
        of plant surfaces after rain. These techniques
        are generally not adequate by themselves
        to control diseases, but can augment other
        approaches.
     yy Flail mowing of prunings or removal of prun-
        ings from the orchard removes an important
        source of disease inoculum.
                                                             Sooty blotch and flyspeck are serious cosmetic disorders on apples in
     yy Commercial-scale organic production of stone the East. Photo: Robyn Metzger, NCAT
        fruits, excepting tart cherries, is nearly impossi-
        ble in the East due to diseases. However, where and when prices are high enough to justify the costs, organic
        production of stone fruits in high tunnels is possible.

Transitioning to Organic Insect and Mite Control in Orchards
     yy Several key pests, such as codling moth, plum curculio (only east of the Rockies), cherry fruit fly, and stink
        bugs can render the better part of a fruit crop unsaleable if ignored. Consumers, in general, are not accepting
        of insect damage on, or especially in, a fruit. Because of the many pests that attack tree fruits and the low tol-
        erance for damage, the grower needs to understand the life cycles of the pests and the points at which they
        are vulnerable to management.
     yy “Particle film technology” using a finely pulverized kaolin clay product, Surround™, has revolutionized
        organic insect management in tree fruits in the past two decades, making organic control of stubborn pests
        like plum curculio possible. Surround™ controls most tree fruit pests if fruit and leaves are adequately cov-
        ered. Three problems bear mentioning: 1) Surround™ does weather off with time and rain, so multiple appli-
        cations can be necessary, 2) if it doesn’t weather off or get washed off in a brusher/washer, residues will
        remain on fruit, 3) Surround™ readily precipitates
        out of solution in the spray tank, so the tank must
        be constantly agitated while applying.
     yy At least one botanical insecticide, neem, and sev-
        eral relatively new microbials—e.g., Spinosad™
        and Beauvaria bassiana—can be effective against
        particular pests.
     yy Pheromone disruption systems for specific pests,
        like codling moth and oriental fruit moth, are
        effective.
     yy Conservation of habitat and food sources (e.g.,
        certain wildflowers) encourages beneficial insects
        and other organisms and can augment insect and
        mite control in orchards.

Transitioning to Organic Weed
Management in Orchards
     yy Crop rotation is impossible in an orchard situa-
        tion. Pernicious weeds, like bermudagrass in the                            Almond trees in bloom. Photo: Rex Dufour, NCAT


Page 2                                                            Tipsheet: Transitioning to Organic Management of Orchards
       South and quackgrass in the North, are hard to control organically, especially if you can’t rotate to a smother
       crop. However, a thick cover crop in the aisles can keep weeds like bermudagrass from getting started and
       moving under the tree canopy. Also, the aisles can be planted (and rotated) to various cover crops for advan-
       tages such as providing mulch material, enhancing pest control, and contributing to tree nutrition.
     yy Mulch can be part of a good weed management strategy but can also encourage pests like mice and voles.
        Wood chip mulches don’t harbor rodents and have performed well in research trials.
     yy Precision, tractor-mounted mechanical weeders that prevent trunk damage are effective but not in mulched
        trees.
     yy Flame weeding and organic herbicides can be effective where weeds are short and applications are
        repeated, but the multiple applications necessary can get costly. No systemic herbicides are available for
        organic production, making control of some weeds very difficult.

Organic Fertility in Orchards
     yy Liming should occur prior to planting and in accordance with soil tests.
     yy Foliar analysis coupled with soil tests will give the best indication of tree nutrient status.
     yy Pre-plant cover crops are advised for both fertility and weed control.
     yy Nutrient contribution of cover crops in the aisles between rows appears to be small and should not be relied
        upon alone for fertility. (However, cover crops have other beneficial impacts on soil and the orchard ecosys-
        tem, such as minimizing erosion, improving water infiltration, and providing habitat for beneficial insects.)
     yy In general, fruit trees are not heavy feeders, and their needs are often met by decomposing mulches, com-
        post applications, and/or organic foliar feeding. In fact, too much nitrogen can induce problems like fire
        blight and soft fruit.
     yy With education and experience, most fruit grow-
        ers will learn to recognize the symptoms of nutrient
        problems: inadequate growth of shoots, chlorotic
        color of leaves, fruit disorders (e.g., apple measles),
        etc.

Market Considerations for Organic Fruit
     yy Demand for organic fruit is usually high, and the
        premium for organically certified fruit is usually cor-
        respondingly high.
     yy In the West, brokers, some specializing in organic
        fruit, handle most of the fruit; much of it is headed
        to the East where organic production of tree fruits is
        comparatively small. In the East, the small amount of
        organic fruit produced is most often retailed directly
        by the farmer, but there is beginning to be some dis-
        tribution through food hubs.
     yy In the East, growers will often have to educate cli-
        entele about why their fruit looks the way it does.
        Direct contact with the end consumer is usually nec-
        essary for this education.
     yy Growers, especially in the East, should have a mar-
        keting plan that includes value-added products like
        cider, sauce, jams, and jellies to provide a use for
        damaged and cosmetically inferior fruit.                                                    Photo: Marisa Alcorta, NCAT




www.attra.ncat.org                                                                                                     Page 3
Further Resources
ATTRA’s series on organic fruit production, including publications on organic production of cherries, apples, peaches,
plums, and pears. Access at www.attra.ncat.org or call 1-800-346-9140.
Peck, Gregory, Ian Merwin, et al. 2009. A Growers Guide to Organic Apples. NYS IPM Publication No. 223. Cornell Uni-
versity. Ithaca, NY. http://nysipm.cornell.edu/organic_guide/apples.pdf
WSU Tree Fruit Research & Extension Center. Organic & Integrated Tree Fruit Production.
www.tfrec.wsu.edu/pages/organic/Organic_Production
University of California Small Farm Program. http://sfp.ucdavis.edu/
USDA Organic Regulations 7 CFR 205: www.ams.usda.gov/nop
USDA National Organic Program Handbook: www.ams.usda.gov/NOPProgramHandbook
    yy NOP 5029 – Guidance: Seeds, Annual Seedlings and Planting Stock in Organic Crop Production.
USDA National List of Allowed and Prohibited Substances: www.ams.usda.gov/NOPNationalList




                                  This product was developed with support from
              U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Agricultural Marketing Service, National Organic Program




                                                                                       Tipsheet: Transitioning to Organic Management
                                                                                       of Orchards
           Produced by the National Center for Appropriate Technology
                                                                                       By Guy Ames, NCAT Agriculture Specialist
                www.ncat.org • 1-800-275-6228 (1-800-ASK-NCAT)
                                                                                       Published July 2015
          (Parent organization to the ATTRA Project, www.attra.ncat.org)


Page 4                                                                     Tipsheet: Transitioning to Organic Management of Orchards
