 ORGANIC
TRANSITION
           A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR
           FARMERS, RANCHERS AND
            FOOD ENTREPRENEURS




12
HANDBOOK
                               Gigi DiGiacomo
                                Robert P. King
                               Dale Nordquist
             ORGANIC
            TRANSITION A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR
                       FARMERS, RANCHERS AND
                        FOOD ENTREPRENEURS

                      Gigi DiGiacomo, Robert P. King and Dale Nordquist




                                    SARE handbook series 12

       Published by the Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE) program,
with funding from the National Institute of Food and Agriculture, U.S. Department of Agriculture.
    Published in 2015.                                                Any opinions, findings, conclusions or recommendations
                                                                      expressed in this publication are those of the authors and
    This planner was developed by Gigi DiGiacomo, Robert P.           do not necessarily reflect the view of the USDA, SARE or
    King and Dale Nordquist as part of the Tools for Transi-          MISA.
    tion Project, which was funded under the USDA National
    Institute of Food and Agriculture’s Organic Research              Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication
    and Education Initiative (award No. 2010-51300-21401).            DiGiacomo, Gigi, author.
    This planner was published by Sustainable Agriculture
    Research and Education (SARE), supported by USDA’s                 Organic transition : a business planner for farmers,
    National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) under           ranchers and food entrepreneurs / Gigi DiGiacomo, Rob-
    award number 2014-38640-22173. The Minnesota                      ert P. King and Dale Nordquist.
    Institute for Sustainable Agriculture (MISA) also made
                                                                          p. cm. -- (SARE handbook series ; 12)
    significant contributions during the review and publica-
    tion process.                                                      Funding from the National Institute of Food and Agricul-
                                                                      ture, U.S. Department of Agriculture
    To order:
    For online orders visit www.sare.org/WebStore. Call (301)          ISBN 978-1-888626-15-5 (spiral-bound pbk. : alk. paper)
    779-1007 to order by phone with credit card payment. To
    pay by check or purchase order, make payable to “SARE              1. Organic farming--Planning. 2. Business planning. 3.
    Outreach Publications” and send to:                               Farm management. I. King, Robert Philip, 1950- author.
                                                                      II. Nordquist, Dale W., author. III. Sustainable Agricul-
    SARE Outreach Publications                                        ture Research & Education (Program), publisher. IV. Title.
    c/o International Fulfillment Corporation                         V. Series: SARE handbook ; 12.
    7100 Old Landover Rd., Suite 500
    Hyattsville, MD 20785                                              S605.5.D54 2015

    Cost:                                                              631.5’84068--dc23
    • $16 for orders of 1-9 books
                                                                                                       2015030201
    • $12 for 10-24 books (a 25% discount)
    • $8 for 25 or more books (a 50% discount)                        Authors: Gigi DiGiacomo, Robert P. King and Dale
    Shipping:                                                         Nordquist
    • $7.95 for first book (within the United States). Add
                                                                      Farmer Participants: Rory Beyer, Vitaly Brukhman,
      $3 s/h for each additional book—up to nine books—
                                                                      Bryan and Theresa Kerkaert, Lars and Melissa Rowe,
      shipped within the United States.
                                                                      Bernice Schmidt, and Angie and Nate Walter.
    • For s/h rates on orders of 10 or more books, call (301)
      779-1007 or visit www.sare.org/WebStore.                        Technical Reviewers: Rory Beyer, Minnesota organ-
                                                                      ic dairy farmer; Jennifer Buckley, Organic Processing
    International orders:
                                                                      Institute; Matt Leavitt, Albert Lea Seed House; and Jim
    • Call (301) 779-1007 or visit www.sare.org/WebStore.
                                                                      Riddle, Organic Independents, LLP.

    The SARE program provides information to everyone,                Production Manager: Andy Zieminski, SARE
    without regard to race, religion, national origin, sex, age,
    disability, familial or veteran status. Every effort has been     Graphic Design: Kirsten Ankers, Citrine Sky Design
    made to make this publication as complete and as accu-
                                                                      Printing: University of Maryland Printing Services.
    rate as possible. It is only a guide, however, and should
                                                                      Printed on paper that is 100 percent post-consumer-waste
    be used in conjunction with other information sources
                                                                      recycled and processed chlorine free.
    and in consultation with other financial and production
    experts. The editors/authors and publisher disclaim any           Cover Photos: Front cover and back cover background—
    liability, loss or risk, personal or otherwise, which is in-      iStock; Back cover insets, clockwise from top—Angie
    curred as a consequence, directly or indirectly, of the use       Walter, Margaret Wiegelt, courtesy Vitaly Brukhman.
    and application of any of the contents of this publication.




2   ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
About the Planner
The Tools for Transition Project
The Tools for Transition (TFT) Project is a four-year research program designed to yield
new insights about the economics of organic transition; create unique data resources for
farmers, other agricultural professionals and lenders; and inform policymakers of the
potential economic barriers to organic certification. TFT outreach materials include farm
transition profiles, whole-farm and enterprise financial analyses, and business planning
materials. They were developed through the analysis of initial farm data, participant
surveys and interviews with transitioning farmers. Resources are available for download at
http://eorganic.info/toolsfortransition. The Tools for Transition Project received a four-
year grant (2010-2014) from the USDA’s National Institute of Food and Agriculture (award
No. 2010-51300-21401).



Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture (MISA)
Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture (MISA) is a partnership between Uni-
versity of Minnesota Extension, the College of Food, Agricultural and Natural Resource
Sciences, and the Sustainers’ Coalition, a group of individuals and community-based
nonprofit organizations. The purpose of MISA is to bring together the diverse interests of
the agricultural community with interests from across the University community in a coop-
erative effort to develop and promote sustainable agriculture in Minnesota and beyond.



Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE)
SARE is a national grants and outreach program working to advance sustainable innova-
tions to the whole of American agriculture. SARE is part of USDA’s National Institute of
Food and Agriculture (NIFA). See pages 5-6 for SARE grant opportunities and educational
materials (books, bulletins, videos and online tools) related to the transition to organic
agriculture. For more information, contact:

SARE Outreach
University of Maryland
Symons Hall Room 1296
7998 Regents Drive
College Park, MD 20742-5505
info@sare.org
www.sare.org




                                        ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS   3
                            About the Authors
                            Gigi DiGiacomo is a Research Fellow in the Department of Applied Economics at the
                            University of Minnesota, where she currently studies the performance of transitioning
                            organic farm businesses, supply chains for local food products, food systems and farm
                            business planning. During 2007-2008 Gigi served as Senior Fellow in the Endowed Chair
                            Program of the School of Agriculture, during which she helped develop marketing tools
                            for organic producers in the Upper Midwest, including the USDA Agricultural Market
                            News Service’s Upper Midwest Organic Price Report for Grains and Feedstuffs and the
                            2009 Minnesota Directory of Organic Buyers. Gigi has also served as a board member with
                            the Organic Crop Improvement Association and the Minnesota Institute for Sustainable
                            Agriculture.

                            Robert P. King, PhD, is a Professor Emeritus in the Department of Applied Economics
                            at the University of Minnesota, where he taught courses on managerial economics and
                            food systems. His research focused on management issues across the food system, ranging
                            from primary farm production to supermarkets and food shelves. Areas of research in-
                            cluded: the economics of transition to organic agriculture, food quality in the hunger relief
                            system, supply chain management and local food systems. Rob is a past President and
                            Fellow of the Agricultural & Applied Economics Association. He has served on the Board
                            of Directors of the Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture and the Administrative
                            Council for the North Central Region Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education
                            (SARE) program.

                            Dale Nordquist is Associate Director of the Center for Farm Financial Management. His
                            areas of focus include farm business analysis, financial planning, credit analysis and soft-
                            ware development. He has over 30 years of experience in teaching farm management and
                            developing software tools for farm financial planning and analysis. He is a board member
                            of the Farm Financial Standards Council (FFSC) and a former chair of the FFSC techni-
                            cal committee. Dale has also been a major contributor to the design and development of
                            the FINPACK farm financial planning and analysis software, as well as the FINBIN Farm
                            Financial Database and many other software tools available from the Center for Farm
                            Financial Management.




4   ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
Commonly Used Acronyms
BJF - Bubbly Jen’s Farm; the organic processing business created by Vitaly Brukhman

CRP - Conservation Reserve Program (USDA)

FSA - Farm Service Agency (USDA)

GMO - Genetically modified organism

MISA - Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture

NOP - National Organic Program

OSP - Organic System Plan

OSPH - Organic System Plan for Handlers

SARE - Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education

SWOT - Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats




                                       ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS   5
      SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE RESEARCH AND EDUCATION (SARE)

      Opportunities for Organic
      Farmers and Ag Professionals
      Whether it is controlling weeds or pursuing price premiums, making the switch to an
      organic farming system often presents both new challenges and rewarding opportuni-
      ties. Over the years, hundreds of farmers, ranchers, educators and researchers have used     Since 1988, SARE has invested
      SARE grants to improve the profitability and ecological management of organic systems        $74.8 million in more than
      by testing new ideas in the areas of production, management and marketing. The USDA’s        1,427 research and educa-
      Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education (SARE) program was the first federal          tion projects that address
      program to fund research in organic agriculture and, since 1988, has invested in hundreds    organic systems. Explore your
      of organic research and education projects.                                                  questions by searching through
                                                                                                   thousands of research reports
      As you use the Planner to map out your transition to organic—or if you are a service pro-    in SARE’s database of projects:
      vider interested in helping producers transition—consider whether the following opportu-     www.sare.org/projects.
      nities through SARE are right for you. Visit www.sare.org to learn more.


      SARE Grant Opportunities
      SARE offers several types of competitive grants to support the innovative applied research
      and outreach efforts of key stakeholders in U.S. agriculture, including:

      • Farmer/Rancher Grants—these grants help farmers and ranchers test innovative
        ideas in the field.
      • Research and Education Grants—for interdisciplinary, in-depth exploration of
        critical sustainable agriculture issues.
      • Professional Development Program Grants—fund training programs on sustain-
        able agriculture for Cooperative Extension staff and other educators.
      • Partnership Grants—for ag professionals who are collaborating with producers to
        conduct on-farm research and education projects.
      Grant programs are administered by four regional offices. For detailed information, dead-
      lines and application instructions visit www.sare.org/grants.


      Examples of Funded Projects on Organic Systems
      SARE grants are available for research and education projects. Here are just a few ex-
      amples of how producers, educators and researchers have used SARE grants to improve
      organic farming systems:

      • Dick Grotberg and his partners wanted to turn a 400-acre conventional farm in North
        Dakota into a diversified organic operation that integrates crops and livestock. They
        received a SARE grant to monitor how organic management practices changed soil
        health, which provided valuable baseline data they continue to use as they improve the
        sustainability of their farm.
      • In Washington, Gary Miller and Amy Plant wanted to do more to improve the soils on
        their organic vegetable farm, so they used a SARE grant to test no-till while growing



6   ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
   carrots and leafy greens. After two years, they saw higher sales from no-till beds than
   tilled beds due to earlier planting dates and lower pest pressure.
• To bolster the organic dairy industry in the Southeast, Extension specialists from North
  Carolina and Arkansas used a SARE grant to hold conferences and tours for farmers
  and service providers. Participants discussed how to improve the efficiency and produc-
  tivity of organic dairies, particularly during the transition period.
• Pennsylvania farmers and Rodale Institute specialists used SARE grants to conduct
  early research on the roller crimper, an increasingly popular implement that allows
  farmers to control weeds and add natural inputs, such as compost, without soil-eroding
  tillage.
• Large-scale vegetable growers in California’s Salinas Valley successfully converted to
  organic, thanks to a SARE-funded research project at the University of California. The
  researchers monitored fields and provided feedback to the growers, who, in turn, modi-
  fied their strategies to suit their cropping systems.
Visit SARE’s database of projects to explore the entire portfolio of organic research and
education projects: www.sare.org/projects.



SARE’s Library of Publications
In addition to offering competitive grants, SARE maintains a wealth of educational ma-
terials in our online library of practical books, bulletins, grantee-produced information
products and other materials—available at www.sare.org/resources. Examples of materials
related to organic agriculture include:

• Transitioning to Organic Production. This bulletin describes many promising conver-
  sion strategies, covering typical organic production practices, innovative marketing
  ideas and federal standards for certified organic crop production.
• A Transition Guide to Certified Organic Crop Management. This manual outlines Na-
  tional Organic Program standards and guides readers step-by-step through the certifi-
  cation process.
• Crop Rotation on Organic Farms. This book provides an in-depth review of crop rota-
  tion, including its role in improving soil quality and managing pests.
• Building Soils for Better Crops. This book is an in-depth, practical guide to ecological
  soil management.
• Managing Cover Crops Profitably. This book explores how to integrate cover crops—an
  indispensable tool for organic farmers—into any cropping system.
• Manage Insects on Your Farm. This book highlights ecological strategies that improve
  your farm’s natural defenses and encourage beneficial insects.
• Steel in the Field. This book shows how today’s implements and techniques can control
  weeds while reducing—or eliminating—herbicides.
• Manage Weeds on Your Farm: A Guide to Ecological Strategies. This 416-page book
  is a definitive guide to understanding agricultural weeds and how to manage them effi-
  ciently, effectively and ecologically—for organic and conventional farmers alike.




                  ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS   7
                                     Preface
                                     Are you considering making a transition to organic production or processing? If so, you
                                     may be wondering if the price premiums and other potential benefits associated with going
                                     organic will outweigh the known production and marketing challenges. You are not alone.
                                     Many farmers and food entrepreneurs ask the same question. In truth, there is no way to
THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN               know for sure. Ultimately, your success as an organic business owner will depend on your
PLANNING AND A PLAN                  goals, your situation heading into transition, the strategies that you put in place when
                                     making the switch and your ability to manage unexpected challenges as they arise.
Business planning. Business
planning is the process of
identifying, exploring and testing      TEXT BOX PT.1
operational, marketing, human
resource and financial strategies       WHAT IS ORGANIC?
aimed at achieving farm business        “Organic is a labeling term for food or other agricultural products that have been produced accord-
and personal goals.                     ing to the USDA organic regulations. … Producers and handlers must meet these standards to use the
Business plan. A business plan          word ‘organic’ or the USDA organic seal on food, feed or fiber. Organic operations must show that
is the document that formu-             they protect natural resources, conserve biodiversity and use only approved substances.”
lates and communicates goals            From “Is Organic an Option for Me?” USDA. August 2012.
and how the farm business will
reach these goals through tested
production, marketing, human
resource and finance-related         You can improve your chances of success by writing a business plan to guide your transi-
strategies. A business plan doc-     tion to organic. Generally, a business plan describes future intentions and strategies relat-
uments where you want to go          ed to operations, marketing, human resources and financial management. It also identifies
and how you plan to get there.       the resources you will need to achieve your goals—outlining how to use existing resources
                                     and how to acquire needed resources. A business plan can be likened to a roadmap that
                                     describes where you want to take the business (i.e., organic certification), how you will get
                                     there (i.e., transition) and when you will begin the journey. For example, after working
                                     through the business planning process you may decide that transitioning to organic man-
                                     agement is a good idea but, due to cash flow or other constraints, it makes sense to wait a
                                     while before doing so. Or you may decide that the best time to transition is now!

                                     In many ways, a business plan is similar to the Organic System Plan (OSP) or Organic
                                     System Plan for Handlers (OSPH) used to document production and processing practices
                                     for certification. Like an OSP and OSPH, a business plan is forward looking and compre-
                                     hensive. And, just as the OSP and OSPH require you to look at your farm as an integrated
                                     whole, a business plan requires you to plan for all aspects of farm management that you
                                     need to become sustainable: operations, marketing, human resources and finances.

                                     Before writing a business plan, we recommend developing and testing long-term farm
                                     business strategies that will help you make it through transition. Just as OSP and OSPH
                                     development can help you avoid wasting resources and time on a certification application
                                     that may not succeed, business planning can help you explore and test whole-farm strat-
                                     egies before deciding whether to invest time and resources in business ideas that may not
                                     succeed. You will benefit from simply putting ideas on paper and testing their feasibility.
                                     Moreover, a written business plan can improve your chances of securing financing when
                                     working with a lender, investor or business partner.




8            ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
Table of Contents
Introduction: Using the Planner........................................................................................11

    Meet the Farmers............................................................................................................. 14

    Before You Begin.............................................................................................................. 17

Planning Task One: Values..............................................................................................22

Planning Task Two: History and Current Situation........................................................27

Planning Task Three: Vision, Mission and Goals.......................................................... 60

Planning Task Four: Strategic Planning and Evaluation............................................... 66

Planning Task Five: Presenting, Implementing and Monitoring Your Plan................ 141

Appendix: Farmers’ Business Plans

   Nate and Angie Walter. ...................................................................................................148

   Bryan and Theresa Kerkaert. .......................................................................................... 155

   Vitaly Brukhman. ............................................................................................................165

Glossary. ........................................................................................................................... 175




                                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS   9
Using the Organic Transition                                                                                                   INTRO
Business Planner
T    his publication, referred to as the Planner, is a specialized guide to assist farmers,
     ranchers and food business owners (new or experienced, small- or large-scale)
     interested in exploring transition strategies prior to becoming certified organic.
The Planner will prove most useful if applied before beginning transition. However,
you will certainly benefit from using the Planner if you are in the midst of transitioning
or have already become certified. The Planner addresses organic certification require-
ments as they pertain to or affect business planning; however, the Planner is not a
comprehensive guide to becoming certified organic.

If you are new to organic management, we suggest you do the following before beginning
to plan:

    • review the organic management basics listed in Text Box IT.1: The National
      Organic Program and Certification Basics
    • take a tour of the National Organic Program (NOP) website (www.ams.usda.gov/
      AMSv1.0/nop)
    • listen to the “USDA Organic 101” training module, which provides an overview of
      organic farming principles, USDA labeling and USDA resources (http://apps.ams.
      usda.gov/organic/101/)
    • explore the Cooperative Extension Service’s organic resource site, called eOrganic
      (http://eorganic.info).

You will also benefit from additional research and conversations with certified farmers,
ranchers, certifiers and educators about what it means to become certified.

The Planner can be used alone or in conjunction with the more comprehensive business
planning publication Building a Sustainable Business: A Guide to Developing a Business
Plan for Farms and Rural Businesses (referred to as the Guide and available for download
at www.misa.umn.edu/Publications/BuildingaSustainableBusiness/index.htm or
www.sare.org/business.)1

Like the Guide, the Planner is divided into five planning tasks:
    • Planning Task One: Values
    • Planning Task Two: History and Current Situation
    • Planning Task Three: Vision, Mission and Goals
                                                                                                     1 The Organic Transition
    • Planning Task Four: Strategic Planning and Evaluation                                            business planner draws
    • Planning Task Five: Presenting, Implementing and Monitoring Your Plan                            heavily on content and
                                                                                                       worksheets found in Build-
To facilitate easy movement between publications, the planning tasks used in this Planner              ing a Sustainable Business:
correspond to planning tasks outlined in the Guide.                                                    A Guide to Developing a
                                                                                                       Business Plan for Farms and
Each planning task begins with an introduction to key business planning concepts, such as              Rural Businesses. There may
                                                                                                       be some duplication.
mission statements or strategic planning. Four management areas—operations, marketing,




                                       ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS           11
               TEXT BOX IT.1


INTRO          THE NATIONAL ORGANIC PROGRAM AND CERTIFICATION BASICS

             T
                    he following overview of certification requirements comes       • Organic management from last third of gestation for slaughter
                    from What Is Organic Food and Why Should I Care?. See             livestock or second day after hatching for poultry
                    the Resources section at the end of this introduction for       • A one-time transition of a conventional dairy herd is allowed.
             more information, including USDA publications outlining NOP              One year of organic management is required prior to the
             rules. Organic is a labeling term regulated by the USDA NOP that         production of organic milk. Transitioned animals cannot be
             “indicates that the food or other agricultural product has been          sold as organic.
             produced through approved methods that integrate cultural, bio-
             logical, and mechanical practices that foster cycling of resources,    • Mandatory year-round outdoor access for all species when
             promote ecological balance, and conserve biodiversity.” Basic            weather is suitable
             requirements include that all operations must:                         • Mandatory grazing on pastures for ruminants during the
             • Apply and be inspected annually                                        grazing season with a minimum of 120 days. At least 30% dry
                                                                                      matter intake (DMI) must come from pastures during the
             • Keep auditable records for at least five years, and which must         grazing season.
               be available for inspectors to review
                                                                                    • No use of antibiotics, growth hormones, GMOs or feeding of
             • Be available for unannounced inspections and pesticide                 animal by-products
               residue sampling
                                                                                    • Implementation of preventative health care practices (vaccines
             In simplified terms, NOP regulations for crops allow or require:         are allowed)
             • 36 months with no application of prohibited materials (no syn-       • Parasiticides prohibited for slaughter stock and tightly regulat-
               thetic fertilizers, pesticides or GMOs) prior to the first harvest     ed for dairy and breeder stock
               of organic crops
                                                                                    • No withholding of treatment in order to preserve an animal’s
             • Buffer zones to prevent contamination from adjoining land              organic status
               uses
                                                                                    • Management of manure to prevent contamination of crops,
             • Implementation of an Organic System Plan (OSP), including              water and soil, and to optimize recycling of nutrients
               proactive management systems to conserve and enhance bio-
               diversity, build soil health and ensure environmentally sound        • Poultry and hog operations must comply with new indoor and
               fertility-, weed-, disease- and insect-management practices            outdoor space requirements

             • Use of natural inputs or approved synthetic substances on the        • Poultry barns must comply with new requirements for outdoor
               National List of Allowed and Prohibited Substances, which are          access, providing at least 1 linear foot of exit area for every 360
               allowed only if proactive measures are insufficient                    birds, unless an alternative is proposed by the certifier

             • No use of GMOs, sewage sludge or irradiation                         • Poultry barn operators must ensure ammonia levels do not
                                                                                      exceed 20 ppm
             • Use of organic seeds and planting stock when commercially
               available and use of organic seedlings for annual crops              NOP regulations for processing operations allow or require:
             • Use of raw manure and compost must follow specific guide-            • Use of mechanical or biological processing methods
               lines to safeguard human and environmental health                    • No commingling or contamination of organic products during
             • Use of practices, such as crop rotations, to maintain or improve       processing or storage
               the physical, chemical and biological condition of the soil, and     • No use of GMOs, irradiation, artificial dyes, solvents or preser-
               minimize soil erosion                                                  vatives
             • Fertility management that does not contaminate crops, soil           • Use of proactive sanitation and facility pest management
               or water with plant nutrients, pathogens, heavy metals or              practices to prevent pest infestations
               prohibited substances                                                • Must take steps to protect organic products and packaging
             • No field burning to dispose of crop residues (may only burn to         from contamination
               suppress disease, stimulate seed germination or control weeds)       Farmers and ranchers seeking organic certification must prepare
             NOP regulations for livestock allow or require:                        an OSP annually. It is reviewed by third party certifiers for compli-
             • Use of 100 percent organic feed for all organic animals              ance with NOP regulations. For details about the NOP, regulations
                                                                                    and certification, visit: www.ams.usda.gov/AMSv1.0/nop.



  12    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
human resources and finances—are discussed, and we provide references to NOP regu-
lations specific to each area. The Planner is not a guide to organic certification. However,
NOP rules are referenced throughout as they impact your business strategies, decisions                                           INTRO
and planning.

Worksheets are included at the end of each planning task to help you explore concepts by
answering important business questions. The worksheets are intended to help you develop
and test your ideas through the planning process, before you finalize them as part of a
business plan.

Material in each planning task is augmented with real-life examples and excerpts from
worksheets completed by transitioning and recently certified farmers. You can read about
these farmers—a dairy producer, a grain producer and a beginning vegetable processor—in
Text Box IT.2: Meet the Farmers. Examples from their plans are offset as “story panels”
throughout the text. A symbol representing each of their operations accompanies each
story panel, making it easy to follow the same farmer throughout the Planner:


                 A cow represents excerpts from Minnesota dairy farmers
                 Nate and Angie Walter.


                 A corn stalk represents excerpts from Minnesota grain
                 producers Bryan and Theresa Kerkaert.


                 A jar of pickles represents excerpts from New Jersey
                 processor Vitaly Brukhman.


These farmers’ complete business plans also are included in the Appendix.

Most worksheets in the Planner should be completed individually by you and, in some                   WORKSHEETS ARE NOW
cases, by other planning team members (i.e., those involved in your business’ brainstorm-             AVAILABLE ONLINE
ing and decision-making—see Organize a Planning Team in the following section). Blank                 Visit www.misa.umn.edu/Publi-
worksheets are provided at the end of each planning task. We recommend photocopying                   cations/OrganicTransitionPlanner
enough worksheets for each member of your planning team before beginning to use them,                 to obtain fillable PDF worksheets
or visit www.misa.umn.edu/Publications/OrganicTransitionPlanner to obtain fillable PDF                and electronic spreadsheets.
worksheets. Electronic spreadsheets are also provided to assist with some of the financial
worksheets and can be found on the same MISA website.

A section called Dig Deeper follows the discussion of questions, activities and worksheets
in some planning tasks. This section includes suggestions for further planning should you
find yourself wanting to explore a particular concept in more detail. Additional worksheets
from the Guide are referenced in the Dig Deeper section, so it is a good idea to have that
publication on hand as you begin your business planning.

Each task in the Planner also includes a section called Put it in Writing. This section
summarizes information that should be included in your business plan and provides tips
for using the recommended software, AgPlan (available online at www.cffm.umn.edu/
products/AgPlan.aspx). AgPlan, designed to be used like a word processing program, is
a simple tool for drafting your business plan either at the end of planning or as you work
through ideas. AgPlan contains an organic transition outline that corresponds to the text


                                       ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS          13
                              TEXT BOX IT.2

                              MEET THE FARMERS:
INTRO                         NATE AND ANGIE WALTER
                              TRANSITIONING DAIRY, MINNESOTA


                                                                             N
                                                                                     ate and Angie Walter operate a 100-cow dairy in Villard, Minn.
                                                                                     They have two young children whom they hope will take over
                                                                                     the farm someday or join the business with new enterpris-
                                                                             es. Nate grew up on the Villard farm but left after high school to
                                                                             work off-farm. He returned home in 2002 after marrying Angie and
                                                                             purchased the farm business at full market value from his father: 160
                                                                             acres of pasture/cropland, 80 cows, 80 young stock, equipment and
                                                                             buildings. Assets were financed through a long-term loan guaranteed
                              Walter family (from left to right): Laureen,   by the USDA Farm Service Agency.
                              Angie, Nate and Levi. (Angie Walter)
                                                                             Decision to Transition. Nate and Angie had been considering organic
                                                                             certification for five years prior to making the decision to switch
                                                                             in October 2010. “We went to an organic field day in 2005,” recalls
                                                                             Angie. “I was really excited about it but Nate wasn’t so sure.” So they
                                                                             waited until 2009 when their farm business management instructor
                                                                             ran some numbers showing them that the farm would have grossed
                                                                             another $180,000 that year if they had been organic. That extra
                                                                             money would have helped the Walters reach their goal of becoming
                                                                             debt free. Going organic “was a way for us to remain a family farm,”
                                                                             says Angie. “Otherwise we were considering growing the farm [con-
                              (Angie Walter)
                                                                             ventionally]; getting bigger in hopes of paying off our debt,” explains
                                                                             Nate. “We knew that might be a losing proposition.”
                              Transition Strategies. The Walters began transitioning all of their land in spring 2011. At that time they
                              added 20 cows and another 80 acres to support forage needs for the herd. They began transitioning
                              their cows in fall 2012 with an October 2013 target date for certifying their land and animals. Since tran-
                              sitioning, the Walters have not had to make many changes in the way they manage, particularly when
                              it comes to the dairy enterprise. “We were always doing 85 percent of the organic work and just not
                              getting paid for it,” explains Angie. “We’ve never believed in hormones and had rarely used antibiotics.”
                              Transition Challenges. In March 2012 the Walters grew approximately 60 percent of the herd’s feed.
                              They supplemented with additional grain, protein and straw purchased nearby. The need to purchase
                              inputs posed one of the Walters’ greatest transition challenges. “We’re nervous about having to buy all
                              this organic feed [during transition],” said Nate at the time, echoing the concerns of many transitioning
                              farmers. Organic corn and soybean prices per bushel averaged $10.72 and $21.63, respectively, in 2011
                              compared to $5.67 and $11.41 per bushel for conventional corn and soybeans, according to the Minnesota
                              Farm Business Management Program annual financial reports.
                              Business Planning Need. The Walters drafted a business plan during their second year of transition
                              when realizing that organic feed costs exceeded their income from conventional milk sales. Their business
                              plan was written primarily to support their request for a short-term loan that would help pay for organic
                              feed required during the transition, bedding and new equipment. With a loan in hand to bridge cash-flow
                              shortfalls, the Walters will be able to make it through transition to certification, when income from organic
                              premiums will allow them to comfortably afford needed inputs.




  14    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
TEXT BOX IT.2

MEET THE FARMERS:                                                                                                                             INTRO
BRYAN AND THERESA KERKAERT
TRANSITIONING GRAINS, MINNESOTA


                                                        I
                                                           t is hard to find a more enterprising, determined couple than
                                                           Bryan and Theresa Kerkaert. They have been giving organics
                                                           everything they’ve got since beginning to farm row crops in
                                                        2007 on a collection of scattered parcels. By 2013 Bryan and The-
                                                        resa were transitioning approximately 500 acres of rented land.
                                                        Much of the land was former Conservation Reserve Program
                                                        (CRP) acreage, while other parcels were what Bryan calls “low- to
                                                        no-input” organic ground. All of the Kerkaert’s rented acreage is
                                                        located up to 20 miles away from their seven-acre farmstead and
Kerkaert family (from left to right): Bryan, Josh and   varies by soil type and topography. Bryan and Theresa find them-
Theresa. (Margaret Wiegelt)
                                                        selves regularly needing to fine-tune land management strate-
                                                        gies as they continue to learn about farming and organic crop
                                                        production. They also are forced to simultaneously rework cash
                                                        flow plans as lease arrangements and market prices fluctuate.
                                                        Decision to Transition. When asked why they decided to go
                                                        organic, Bryan responds, “Organic opens up opportunities. When
                                                        we farm conventionally, our opportunities are the same as that
                                                        for 99 percent of the other farmers. But we’re in the one-per-
                                                        cent category when we grow organically and that opens up a
                                                        lot more opportunities.” In 2007 Bryan signed his first rental
                                                        agreement, borrowed equipment from a friend and began
Organic grain bin. (Gigi DiGiacomo)                     farming organically.
                                            Transition Strategies. By fall 2013 Bryan and Theresa had transi-
tioned approximately 40 percent of the land they farmed (parcels under long-term lease). While he would
love to farm everything organically, Bryan explained that he is unable to plan crop rotations on land under
12-month leases. “I don’t know if I’ll have that land next year, let alone five years from now,” Bryan says.
Transition Challenges. The Kerkaerts have overcome several finance- and production-related challenges,
including the management of widely dispersed rental acreage. Their greatest challenge, however, has been
the cost and uncertainty associated with renting land. Land prices in their area have gone up by 25 percent
annually over the past few years. This has become a significant cash-flow issue for the Kerkaerts. Their
solution: negotiate long-term leases and eventually find a farm of their own to purchase.
Business Planning Need. The Kerkaerts fully intend to continue farming organically but say this will only
be feasible under long-term lease agreements or, ideally, on farm land of their own. “Five years ago, we
had to learn the agronomics of how to farm organically,” says Bryan. “Now we need some land security.
We’d like to buy a farm and pay for it before we retire.” The Kerkaerts developed a business plan to
secure stable, continuous access to land in 2016 through a five-year lease with the right of first refusal to
purchase the land at the end of the lease. Their plan is written for a potential landlord to demonstrate
that they have the knowledge, skills and equipment to successfully transition and farm more than 500
acres of land.




                                                        ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    15
                              TEXT BOX IT.2

                              MEET THE FARMERS:
INTRO                         VITALY BRUKHMAN
                              ORGANIC PROCESSING, NEW JERSEY


                                                                  V
                                                                          italy Brukhman embodies the spirit of a true entrepreneur—full
                                                                          of energy, ideas and enthusiasm for his start-up organic processing
                                                                          business called Bubbly Jen’s Farm, or BJF (named after his daugh-
                                                                  ter). Brukhman’s goal is to develop a line of naturally fermented, locally
                                                                  produced, organic foods and specialty beverages targeted at ethnic
                                                                  consumer markets. His passion for organic food stems from a bout with
                                                                  thyroid cancer. His desire to master natural fermentation originates from
                                                                  the recipes he enjoyed as a child growing up in Moldova. His affinity for
                                                                  all things local comes from the New Jersey countryside, where he lives in
                                                                  a recently purchased century-old farmhouse.
                                                                  Brukhman left his information technology job in 2012 to grow and market
                                                                  organic fruits and vegetables on the two acres of land adjoining his farm-
                                                                  house. His long-term goal was to process the produce that he grew into
                                                                  naturally fermented products. Since 2012, however, his ideas have evolved,
                                                                  as has his knowledge of organic production. In 2013 Brukhman graduated
                                                                  from a beginning farmer program sponsored by the National Organic Farm-
                                                                  ing Association. In 2014 he participated in several online courses through the
                                                                  Organic Processing Institute and met with two dozen restaurant chefs, retail
                              (Photos courtesy Vitaly Brukhman)   grocers, processors, farmers and potential consumers to network and learn
                                                                  as much as he could.
                              Decision to Transition. Brukhman anticipated that the transition to organic would be fairly easy, since the
                              land he purchased had not been farmed for several years. He planted his first crop of radishes, garlic and
                              mustard greens in 2013. When meeting with a certifier in 2014, however, Brukhman was told that he had
                              violated several organic rules—because he had planted conventional garlic—and therefore his land no
                              longer qualified for immediate certification; he would have to make the three-year transition. “At that point,
                              I decided that I might be better off purchasing organic crops to process while transitioning my own land,”
                              Brukhman says. The processing idea was moved to the front burner.
                              Transition Strategies. During the winter of 2014-2015, Brukhman planned to continue honing his
                              processing skills and recipes by renting kitchen space, and completing the Food Safety Manager Program
                              (required for food handling). He then plans to purchase needed inputs and distribute the products for
                              taste testing and sampling to potential buyers. By spring of 2015, Brukhman hopes to have secured organ-
                              ic kitchen space and organic handler certification. If all goes well, he expects to begin processing naturally
                              fermented sauerkraut, pickles and tomatoes by fall 2015 and secure marketing agreements for up to 2,500
                              pints.
                              Transition Challenges. Most beginning processors find it a bit daunting to navigate required paperwork and
                              food safety training. Brukhman, however, is comfortable keeping records and learning new skills. It is the
                              access to capital—needed to launch and grow the business—that he finds challenging.
                              Business Planning Need. Brukhman developed his business plan for BJF to explore opportunities for
                              financial investment and business growth. A former IT colleague has expressed interest in investing in BJF.
                              The business plan will help Brukhman determine if the business can support the financial goals of both
                              owner and investor.




  16    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
FIGURE IT.1: BUSINESS PLANNING PROCESS


                                                                                                                                                 INTRO




Business planning is a multi-step process that can require you to revise your strategies as you go. Gigi DiGiacomo




and worksheets provided in the Planner. The software also includes a built-in tool that
allows you to easily share your plan with others (e.g., advisors, business partners and lend-
ers) and obtain their feedback as you test strategies. Note that if you decide to draft a plan
gradually—upon completion of each planning task—you may find the writing sequence is
different than what is outlined in the AgPlan software. For example, though the Executive
Summary appears first in the AgPlan outline, it is one of the last pieces that you will write
if you follow the Planner. There is nothing wrong with this—just be aware that you will
likely need to skip sections in AgPlan and return to them when ready. At the end of each
planning task is a list of additional resources that may help with plan development.

As you begin, remember that business planning is a fluid process, as shown in Figure
IT.1: Business Planning Process. It involves brainstorming, analysis and monitoring.
For example, you may need to revise strategies you identified during the brainstorming
phase after you have done some analysis to test their feasibility. Your plan, too, will be a
dynamic roadmap changing over time as new challenges or opportunities appear. Business
planning can be done anytime, but it can be particularly useful when completed before
beginning transition. It is a process that can help you decide whether and when to transi-
tion your farm business. Business planning can be helpful at other times—when working
through a significant challenge, exploring an opportunity or testing an alternative idea
when business or personal goals change.



BEFORE YOU BEGIN: WHAT IS YOUR PLANNING ISSUE?
Planning usually begins with a problem or an opportunity, or both. Transition may require
that you make significant changes in the way you farm, but it also brings the promise of
marketing opportunities and potential health, conservation or financial rewards.

Identify Your Planning Issue and Motivation for Transitioning
Given the challenges associated with organic transition, it is important to carefully consider
why you are transitioning—to be clear about your reasoning. Nate and Angie Walter, for
example, are transitioning to improve long-term farm profitability and consequently to gen-
erate income for family and hired labor. See the story panel from Nate and Angie Walter.


                                                           ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    17
                                      It is also important to identify other structural changes that you would like to make to the
                                      farm business as you plan your transition to organic, such as changes in labor and man-
INTRO                                 agement or the addition or elimination of enterprises. We call these motivators “critical
                                      planning issues.” Use Worksheet IT.1: Why Transition? to briefly document your
                                      critical planning issues, your reason(s) for making the transition to organic production and
                                      other changes that you would like to make to the farm business. Begin by asking yourself
                                      why it is important to you to farm organically.

                                      Organize a Planning Team
                                      A planning team is an advisory board of sorts—a group of trusted individuals who can help
                                      guide you through major changes, such as the transition from conventional to organic pro-
  WHY TRANSITION?                     duction. Planning teams often include family members, business partners, farmer men-
  • Make our farm more profit-        tors, entrepreneurs, potential buyers and others who can help you brainstorm strategies,
    able and have all of our family   identify challenges, network and generally provide feedback as you work through ideas.
    involved in the farm.             See what transitioning dairy farmers Nate and Angie Walter have to say about the value of
  • Have the freedom to market        team building in the story panel.
    and sell products on our farm.    In many cases, planning team members may serve as more than advisors—they may repre-
  • Not to have to work off the       sent the key decision-makers for your business (e.g., a spouse). If this is the case, encourage
    farm.                             them to complete worksheets with you. You can do this together or independently when rec-
                                      ommended. For example, try posing questions from Worksheet IT.1: Why Transition?
  • Have more family time by          to family members or business partners. Then share your ideas before moving to Planning
    going organic and being able      Task One. You may be surprised to identify differences in your planning objectives!
    to hire employees.
                                      Contact a Certifier
                                      We encourage you to meet with a certifier early in the transition process or even before be-
                                      ginning transition. Certifiers can help you identify resources, answer compliance questions
                                      and, in some cases, provide a starter packet.
                                      There are approximately 50 accredited certifying agencies (ACAs) in the United States and
                                      another 35 or so agencies located outside the country that are authorized to issue USDA
                                      organic certificates and other internationally recognized certificates. When exploring certi-
                                      fiers, consider:
                                           •   certification fees
                                           •   certification fee structures
                                           •   agency location
                                           •   educational services or resources offered
                                           •   national versus international recognition if exporting
                                      For a complete list of certifiers, visit the USDA NOP website: www.ams.usda.gov/
                                      AMSv1.0/nop. Most certification agencies will mail a starter pack to help you navigate re-




                                         IMPORTANCE OF TEAM BUILDING
                                         We rely heavily on our Farm Business Management instructor to guide us through
                                         alternative strategies and to identify information sources. Farm Business Manage-
                                         ment has been the center spoke for all of our networking. Others who have helped include dairy
                                         consultants, experienced organic farmers and Farm Service Agency staff. They all serve as an informal
                                         planning team. We could not make the transition without the advice and help of so many people.




  18          ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
quirements and plan for certification. The Midwest Organic and Sustainable Education Ser-
vice (MOSES) also offers a packet for free via download or by contacting the MOSES office.
See the Resources section for more information. Another good way to connect with certifiers                                       INTRO
is to visit them at local organic conferences and trade shows. The Organic Trade Association
(www.OTA.com) provides information on conferences and other events nationally.

Consider How Your Business Plan Will Be Used
Ultimately, the way you intend to use your plan will affect how you write and present it
as a document. Will your business plan be used internally—among family—as a tool to
guide discussions and make key decisions? Will it serve to communicate about working
assets, experience and a long-range vision to lenders when applying for new financing? If
you only intend to use your business plan internally, it may not be necessary to formally
document your farm history, to describe the people involved in your farm business, or to
outline repayment capacity. However, if you will be taking your plan to potential business
partners or lenders, you will need a more formal plan to properly introduce readers to your
farm, the people involved, the skills they offer and the assets available. See Text Box IT.3:
Transition Business Plan Outline for an outline that can be adapted for almost any farm
business.



  TEXT BOX IT.3

  TRANSITION BUSINESS PLAN OUTLINE
  Executive Summary                                   Human Resources
     1. Business overview                               1. Current HR
     2. Mission statement                               2. HR opportunities
     3. Goals                                           3. Planning and management team
     4. Transition plan summary                         4. Workforce
     5. Capital request                                 5. Licenses and safety regulations
                                                        6. HR strategy
  Business Description                                  7. HR risk management
     1. Farm business history
     2. Land and other resources                      Finances
     3. Ownership structure                              1. Current financial position
                                                         2. Historical financial performance
  Operations                                             3. Financial opportunities
    1. Current operations                                4. Financial projections
    2. Production opportunities                          5. Financial strategy
    3. Operations strategy                               6. Capital request
    4. Licenses and organic certification                7. Financial risk management
    5. Resource needs and acquisition
    6. Operations risk management                     Appendices
                                                        1. Implementation to-do list
  Marketing                                             2. Monitoring checkpoints
    1. Current marketing                                3. OSP and/or OSPH summary
    2. Marketing opportunities                          4. Marketing contracts
    3. Marketing strategy                               5. Tax returns
    4. Licenses and organic certification
    5. Marketing risk management




                                            ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    19
                                       Thinking now about how you will use your business plan can help focus your research and
                                       documentation when you begin the planning process. Do not be afraid to skip some of the
INTRO                                  worksheets in the Planner if they do not seem necessary for the type of plan you are writing.



                                                 DIG DEEPER
                                       If you are interested in learning more about identifying business stakeholders or about
                                       how to create a planning team, see pages 14-17 in the Guide. A worksheet sample, completed
                                       by Dave and Florence Minar of Cedar Summit Farm in Minnesota, is included in this section.



                                                 PUT IT IN WRITING!
                                       Briefly describe your reasons for transitioning. This will serve as the beginning of your
                                       transition plan summary as outlined in AgPlan under Executive Summary. Next, list
                                       members of your planning team (advisory board) and a board of directors if you have one
                                       (often created when incorporating). Briefly note the skills or experience offered by each
                                       member of your advisory board. If using AgPlan software, record your advisory board
                                       description under Planning and Management Team.



                                       RESOURCES
 WORKSHEETS ARE NOW                    • Accredited Certifying Agents. USDA-AMS. Visit www.ams.usda.gov and search
 AVAILABLE ONLINE                        “accredited certifying agents.”

 Visit www.misa.umn.edu/Publi-         • Documentation Forms for Organic Crop and Livestock Producers. March 2011. Baier,
 cations/OrganicTransitionPlanner        A. USDA and ATTRA. https://attra.ncat.org/organic.html.
 to obtain fillable PDF worksheets     • Do I Need to Be Certified Organic? June 2012. National Organic Program, USDA -
 and electronic spreadsheets.            Agricultural Marketing Service.
                                         www.ams.usda.gov/services/organic-certification/need-be-certified.
                                       • How to Choose an Organic Certification Agency and the Organic Certification Process.
                                         2012. Midwest Organic and Sustainable Education Service (MOSES).
                                         http://mosesorganic.org/publications/organic-fact-sheets.
                                       • Is Organic an Option for Me? April 2015. USDA - Agricultural Marketing Service.
                                         Visit www.ams.usda.gov and search “is organic an option for me.”
                                       • National Organic Program website. USDA - Agricultural Marketing Service.
                                         www.ams.usda.gov/AMSv1.0/nop.
                                       • National Organic Program Handbook. National Organic Program, USDA - Agricultural
                                         Marketing Service. www.ams.usda.gov/AMSv1.0/nopprogramhandbook.
                                       • Organic Certification Guidebook, 6th Ed. August 2012. Behar, H., J. Padgham, and
                                         A. Sullivan. Midwest Organic and Sustainable Education Service (MOSES).
                                         http://mosesorganic.org/publications/guidebook-for-certification.
                                       • The United States Regional Guide. Organic Trade Association.
                                         www.howtogoorganic.com/index.php?page=united-states.
                                       • What Is Organic Food and Why Should I Care? 2010. Riddle, J. and B. Markhart.
                                         http://swroc.cfans.umn.edu/prod/groups/cfans/@pub/@cfans/@swroc/documents/
                                         asset/cfans_asset_292359.pdf.




  20           ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                                  DOWNLOAD THE PDF
                                                                                                  Worksheet IT.1: Why Transition?
  WORKSHEET IT.1                                                                                  (http://misadocuments.info/
                                                                                                  IT.1WhyTransition.pdf)              INTRO
WHY TRANSITION?
Use the space below to describe why you are thinking about making the transition to organic production or processing. Is it for
financial, environmental, health or other reasons? If you are having trouble answering this question, try describing how your
business may change after transition. Then identify your critical planning issue, or the one factor that must be addressed by your
business strategy in order for the transition to be worthwhile. Next, list specific challenges that you expect to face during tran-
sition and identify people (your planning team) who will be able to help you work through these challenges and can assist with
brainstorming, providing feedback and identifying resources. Lastly, note how you will use your business plan: for internal (family
only) or external (e.g., lenders, business partners) planning purposes.

1. Why are you interested in transitioning to organic management?
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

2. What is your critical planning issue?
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

3. What are your biggest challenges in transitioning from conventional to organic production, or in becoming certified?
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

4. Who would you like to include on your planning team?
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

5. How will you use your business plan? Will it be for internal planning or for communicating to a lender, business partner or
   buyer, or both?
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________



                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS      21
                                      PLANNING TASK ONE: Values
                                     I  n this planning task you will explore personal and business-related values. Well-de-
                                        fined values will help you develop goals that all members of the family and business




 1
                                        support. You may choose not to include values in your written business plan—this
                                      will depend on your audience and how you intend to use the business plan. However,
TASK 1                                your values will serve as an important point of reference—you will use them to test
                                      strategies in Planning Task Four: Strategic Planning, so it is important to record them.

                                      Values can be defined as the standards, beliefs or qualities that you consider worth up-
  LOOK FOR THESE
                                      holding or pursuing. They become critical when planning collectively with other business
  STORY PANEL ICONS
                                      stakeholders, including family members. We suggest taking some time now to think about
            A cow represents          and explore your personal values. Begin by asking yourself and your planning team mem-
            excerpts from             bers what it means to be successful. See the story panels for examples of values.
  Minnesota dairy farmers
                                      Next, read over the values identified by the Beyer family in Text Box 1T.1: Beyer Family’s
  Nate and Angie Walter.
                                      Shared Community Values. All three members of the family, Richard, Sharon and Rory,
                                      take pride in producing good food on their Rollingstone, Minn., dairy farm. They also val-
           A corn stalk               ue community to one degree or another. Sharon’s community values are the most active;
           represents excerpts        she says that she wants to “be of help” and “make someone else’s life better.” Likewise,
  from Minnesota grain                Richard hopes to help others but sees himself doing so by “set[ting] an example as an
  producers Bryan and                 organic farmer.” As they develop their organic business, it will be important for the Beyers
  Theresa Kerkaert.                   to discuss the importance of one another’s values and to think about how best to honor all
                                      values when making decisions about where in their community to invest, how much to in-
                                      vest and when to invest. Can you begin to see how the Beyer family’s values might be used
          A jar of pickles            to inform their long-term farm-business goals and strategies?
          represents excerpts
  from New Jersey processor           Use Worksheet 1T.1: My Values, reproduced from the Guide, to explore personal, eco-
  Vitaly Brukhman.                    nomic, environmental and community values.



                                         VALUES
                                         Hard work, honesty, family structure/tradition, growing without stepping on
                                         neighbors, giving animals a natural life. We also value family time (it is important
                                         to take time away from the farm), saving for the future and creating a place for the
                                         next generation to grow.


                                         We value fiscal responsibility, honesty, relationships, community and the environ-
                                         ment. It is important to us to travel; to learn new things by experiencing other cul-
                                         tures and ideas. Above all, we believe in treating others and the earth with respect.


                                         I take responsibility for everything that happens to me. Money is a useful resource
                                         and a tool, but not the ultimate goal. Respect everything that helps us sustain
                                         ourselves. A successful enterprise should share with its community.




  22          ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
  TEXT BOX 1T.1

  BEYER FAMILY’S SHARED COMMUNITY VALUES
  Richard Beyer: “To set an example as an organic farmer; to produce food without chemicals and




                                                                                                                                   1
  drugs.”
  Sharon Beyer: “To connect with the community where you can be of help and are comfortable doing                                 TASK 1
  so; to give; to make someone else’s life better and in doing so, yours will be better. In organics this
  means sharing your knowledge and experience to help young farmers (or not so young) be successful
  in a very challenging environment.”
  Rory Beyer: “I define community as the family and friends that I want to associate with and help. Also,
  I value producing good-quality food for the people who purchase our products.”




         DIG DEEPER
For further discussion on values, refer to pages 19-23 in the Guide. Many farm families
have found the Guide’s Worksheet 1.2: Common Values (page 25) helpful, particu-
larly when the operation involves many people or when planning for a major change such
as transition. First, ask everyone involved in the farm business to complete Worksheet
1T.1: My Values. Then, share your values with one another and use Worksheet 1.2:
Common Values from the Guide to identify those values that you share and those that
you do not hold in common. It will be important to be aware of any significant differences
as you move forward in planning, as values underpin most decision-making. Worksheet
1.2: Common Values can be downloaded at: www.misa.umn.edu/Publications/
BuildingaSustainableBusiness/index.htm.

Finally, if you are having trouble getting started on personal values—or simply enjoyed
the values exercise—take a look at Worksheet 1T.2: Personal Qualities at the end of
this planning task to view a list of personal qualities and values identified as important by
Minnesota organic farmers. Bryan and Theresa Kerkaert completed this worksheet inde-
pendently then compared answers. Some of the Kerkaerts’ answers are shown in Text Box
1T.2: Personal Qualities. Like the Kerkaerts, you can use the worksheet to identify person-
al strengths and weaknesses. You may want to incorporate positive personal qualities in
your final plan as part of the business overview.



         PUT IT IN WRITING!
Much of the work you have done in this planning task will serve simply as a compass to
guide you when brainstorming strategies and testing ideas in Planning Task Four: Stra-
tegic Planning. If you would like to include some of your values in the business plan, con-
sider adding them in your business overview or as part of the mission statement that you
draft in Planning Task Three: Vision, Mission and Goals. Alternatively, if you choose not
to include values directly in your plan, keep them close at hand to remind you and your
planning team what is important when making critical business decisions in the future.



                                            ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    23
                                         TEXT BOX 1T.2

                                         PERSONAL QUALITIES
                                         Example provided by Bryan and Theresa Kerkaert, organic grain farmers, Minnesota




 1
                                         1 = Rarely; 2 = Sometimes; 3 = Most of the time; 4 = Almost always		
TASK 1                                   Bryan Theresa
                                           4       3      I have a strong work ethic.
                                           4       2      I pay attention to detail.
                                           3       2      It is important to me to do things on time.
                                           4       3      I am persistent—I finish what I start.
                                           4       3      I am interested in learning new ideas or ways of doing things.
                                           3       4      I am flexible and willing to make changes when necessary.
                                           3       4      I have good working relationships with others (e.g., neighbors, hired labor).
                                           4       3      I communicate directly; I listen to others and am not afraid to ask questions or
                                                          say what I think.
                                           4       4 		I am willing to consider others’ advice and opinions.
                                           4       3      I seek out relationships with other organic farmers I look up to and can turn to
                                                          for advice.
                                           3       1      I keep up on organic market trends.
                                           3       2      I enjoy farming and the challenges of farming organically.
                                           3       4      I have a supportive spouse, family members, and/or farm partner(s).




  WORKSHEETS ARE NOW
                                      RESOURCES
  AVAILABLE ONLINE                    • Do I Need to Be Certified Organic?. June 2012. National Organic Program, USDA -
                                        Agricultural Marketing Service. www.ams.usda.gov/services/organic-certification/
  Visit www.misa.umn.edu/Publi-
                                        need-be-certified.
  cations/OrganicTransitionPlanner
  to obtain fillable PDF worksheets   • Is Organic an Option for Me? April 2015. USDA - Agricultural Marketing Service. Visit
  and electronic spreadsheets.          www.ams.usda.gov and search “is organic an option for me.”
                                      • National Organic Program Handbook. National Organic Program, USDA - Agricultur-
                                        al Marketing Service. www.ams.usda.gov/AMSv1.0/nopprogramhandbook.
                                      • What Is Organic Food and Why Should I Care? 2010. Riddle, J. and B. Markhart.
                                        http://swroc.cfans.umn.edu/prod/groups/cfans/@pub/@cfans/@swroc/documents/
                                        asset/cfans_asset_292359.pdf.




  24          ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                                DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 1T.1                                                                                Worksheet 1T.1: My Values
                                                                                                (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                                info/1T.1MyValues.pdf)
MY VALUES
Think about your values and list them in the space below. Consider what it means for you to be successful in farming, or try dis-




                                                                                                                                      1
tinguishing between personal, financial, environmental and community values. If you are having trouble putting values onto paper,
recall a critical turning point in your life when you were faced with a serious tradeoff. What values guided your decision-making?
Or take a peek at Worksheet 1T.2: Personal Qualities to explore personal strengths or qualities.                                     TASK 1
Personal Values:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


Financial Values:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


Environmental Values:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


Community Values:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS      25
                                                                                                             DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 1T.2                                                                                  Worksheet 1T.2: Personal
                                                                                                             Qualities (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                                             info/1T.2PersonalQualities.pdf)
           PERSONAL QUALITIES
           If you are having trouble identifying values, try using the following list to identify personal strengths or qualities that you think are



 1
           important to work toward. Remember, nobody is good at everything!
TASK 1     Personal Qualities
           1 = Rarely; 2 = Sometimes; 3 = Most of the time; 4 = Almost always
           				

           _____ I have a strong work ethic.

           _____ I pay attention to detail.

           _____ It is important to me to do things on time.

           _____ I am persistent—I finish what I start.

           _____ I am interested in learning new ideas or ways of doing things.

           _____ I am flexible and willing to make changes when necessary.

           _____ I have good working relationships with others (e.g., neighbors, hired labor).

           _____ I communicate directly—I listen to others and am not afraid to ask questions or say what I think.

           _____ I am willing to consider others’ advice and opinions.

           _____ I am careful about the advice I take.

           _____ I seek out relationships with organic farmers I look up to and can turn to for advice.

           _____ I keep up on organic market trends.

           _____ I enjoy farming and its challenges.

           _____ I have a supportive spouse, family members and farm partner(s).

           _____ I stay involved in a community or farm organization.

           _____ There are things in my life besides the farm (I am not “all work and no play”).

           _____ I seek help when I need it.

           _____ I take responsibility for the decisions I make.

           _____ Everyone on the farm is working toward the same goals as a team.

           _____ I enjoy recordkeeping and accounting.


           (Reproduced with minor modifications from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture’s management skills assessment, Organic
           Farmers: Steps to Success.)




  26     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
PLANNING TASK TWO:
History and Current Situation
I n this task, you will begin exploring your readiness for transition by taking stock of
  past experiences and by preparing an inventory of current resources. The farm histo-
  ry and current situation summaries that you develop here will help you communicate
to family members, other business partners and lenders that you have the experience
and resources needed to make a successful transition. After completing this planning




                                                                                                                                          2
task you will be ready to write the following sections of your business plan:

      •   Business Overview                                                                                                           TASK 2
      •   Farm Business History
      •   Land and Other Resources
      •   Current Operations
      •   Current Marketing                                                                                 LOOK FOR THESE
      •   Current Human Resources                                                                           STORY PANEL ICONS
      •   Current Financial Position
                                                                                                                      A cow represents
      •   Historical Financial Performance
                                                                                                                      excerpts from
Using the worksheets in this planning task, you will begin by briefly documenting your                      Minnesota dairy farmers
farm and business history—recording business strategies that have been successful,                          Nate and Angie Walter.
describing how you have managed risk during difficult times or how you have responded
when plans did not unfold as expected. You also will document resources (including people
skills) that will be available to the business as you transition, and prepare financial docu-                        A corn stalk
ments that will help when assessing the feasibility of transition strategies. Let’s begin!                           represents excerpts
                                                                                                            from Minnesota grain
Farm Business History                                                                                       producers Bryan and
You have several options for documenting your farm’s history: photos, a timeline and text.                  Theresa Kerkaert.
However you approach this, do so with the intention of communicating to someone who is
unfamiliar with your farm business. Begin documenting your farm business history by re-
                                                                                                                    A jar of pickles
flecting on past successes (and, yes, perhaps some challenges or failures too). What would
                                                                                                                    represents excerpts
you want someone to know about the farm and your management practices, past produc-
                                                                                                            from New Jersey processor
tivity and marketing of crops, livestock, or products and services? Has the farm changed
                                                                                                            Vitaly Brukhman.
in size or in management since you acquired the land that you now farm? How have you
managed risk? In other words, what has led you to this point? Be sure to describe success-
es and lessons learned over the years.



    FARM HISTORY
    In 1935, Nathan’s grandparents moved to this farm with six Guernsey cows. They
    raised 14 children and farmed through many ups and downs. Nathan and his father,
    Fred, farmed together until Nathan and Angie purchased the farm in 2002. “We milked 80 cows in a
    stanchion barn, switching one time. There were 40 stanchions and 40 free-stalls. … In 2011 we began
    transitioning our farm to organics. We have never used [the growth hormone] BST and rarely have
    used antibiotics, so we felt that organic was a good choice for us. We are on track to be shipping
    organic milk to Organic Valley in the fall of 2013.”




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS          27
                                         If you are new to farming, try thinking of this as a meet and greet, where you have the
                                         opportunity to introduce yourself to someone. Describe your skills, the experience that you
                                         bring to the table and the history of the new land you will manage.

                                         Do not worry about polishing your story or getting every detail just right. Instead, take 10-
                                         15 minutes to chronicle your past using Worksheet 2T.1: Farm History, reproduced
                                         from the Guide. See the story panels for examples of farm histories.

                                         Current Situation
                                         Next, take time to document your current operational, marketing, human resource and
                                         financial situation. This can be a time-consuming task, but it is critical when mapping
                                         out strategies to get you from here (pre-transition) to there (certification). Your resource




 2
                                         inventory should include marketing resources (infrastructure, contracts, competitive-
                                         ness), physical resources (buildings, equipment, fields, livestock), human resources (labor,
TASK 2                                   knowledge, skills) and financial resources (income, cash flow, working capital, financing).
                                         We will get you started with worksheets for each area.



                                                                           OPERATIONS
                                                                           It is important to document current physical resources and
                                                                           management practices. Doing so will make it easier to identi-
                                                                           fy available operational assets and resources needed to make
                                                                           a successful transition. Physical resources include land, build-
                                                                           ings and other structures, as well as machinery, equipment,
                                                                           water supplies, breeding livestock and poultry. The quantity
                                                                           and quality of tangible assets that you control can significantly
                                                                           affect future opportunities.
  (Stephen Kirkpatrick, USDA NRCS)
                                         Begin documenting your current resources by drawing a map or obtaining an aerial pho-
                                         tograph of your fields and buildings. Record your map using Worksheet 2T.2: Current
                                         Farm or Facilities Map. (Google Earth, available on the Internet at no cost, has built-in
                                         tools that allow you to map fields from aerial photographs. See the Resources section for
                                         more information on where to go for more traditional aerial maps.) For land, depict or
                                         write in crop rotations or grazing patterns for the previous one to three years. Also indicate
                                         the locations of perennial crops, conservation easements, buffer strips, water supplies,
                                         buildings and non-tillable acreage. This information will provide the basis for planning
                                         crop planting, rotation and harvest schedules as well as livestock housing, feeding and
                                         grazing schedules during transition and beyond. Your mapping inventory should also




                                            FARM HISTORY
                                            I am new to farming but have experience as an entrepreneur and have operated a success-
                                            ful computer business for the past several years. In 2012, I purchased a small farmstead
                                            with 1.75 acres to begin cultivating my agricultural production skills. During 2013-2014 I acquired
                                            hands-on experience growing radishes and mustard greens while completing a beginning farmer
                                            program with the National Organic Farming Association of New Jersey. Most recently, I participated
                                            in four courses as part of the Organic Processing Institute’s School for Organic Processing Entrepre-
                                            neurs to gain a better understanding of organic processing and handling requirements.




  28             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
FIGURE 2T.1: CURRENT FARM OR FACILITIES MAP




                                                                                             Hay
                                                                                                      Hay
                                                                                                               Corn
                                                                     Corn    Corn
                                                                                        Hay
                                                                                                    Hay




                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                            Hay

                                                                                                                                                TASK 2
                                                       Corn
                        Hay            Corn




Creating a detailed farm map that includes information about crop rotations and grazing patterns helps you plan land-use strategies during
transition. This map, based on a Google Earth image, depicts the pre-transition farm of Nate and Angie Walter. (Gigi DiGiacomo)


include notes about land type, soil class and soil quality for each field. Certifiers and other
organic production specialists recommend having your soil tested to determine nutrient
availability before establishing future crop and livestock rotations. Figure 2T.1: Current
Farm or Facilities Map shows a farm map from a transitioning crop farmer who rents
fields at various locations.

If you process (e.g., wash, cook, preserve, dry, cure, ferment), create a facility map or
diagram showing the size of the building(s) and what type of equipment you own or rent
(e.g., sinks, boilers, freezers, ovens). We also recommend developing a flow chart depict-
ing steps, stations and activities performed when processing. See Figure 2T.2: Processing
Flow Chart, Pickles for an example.

After creating a farm or processing map, use Worksheet 2T.3: Current Operations
to summarize the products and services that you produce and to briefly describe how you
produce them. When doing so, be sure to record:

      •   types of products/services produced
      •   volume produced
      •   custom hire work performed
      •   inventory management and quality control
      •   rental/lease agreements
      •   seasonal considerations
Much of the information that you record on this worksheet can be included in your busi-
ness plan and in your OSP or OSPH. It also will provide the information needed to do
effective strategic planning in Planning Task Four: Strategic Planning. Be sure to check out



                                                          ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    29
                                 FIGURE 2T.2: PROCESSING FLOW CHART, PICKLES

                                   Wash, chop,                                                                Sanitize jars and                    Store
                                                                         Mix ingredients
                                   scale ingredients                                                          package pickles                      refrigerated


                                   Store at room
                                   temperature                                                                                                      Deliver pickles
                                                                                                                                                    to retailer or
                                                                                                                                                    direct to end
                                   Receive cucumbers,                                                                                               user
                                   garlic, vinegar and other
                                   purchased ingredients




 2
TASK 2                           the Dig Deeper section at the end of this planning task for suggestions on where to go in
                                 the Guide for worksheets that will assist you with more detailed operations planning.

                                 Next, take a few minutes and use the worksheets provided (Worksheets 2T.4-2T.6) to
                                 briefly answer the question, How close am I to farming or processing organically? If you
                                 are unfamiliar with the differences between conventional and organic management, check
                                 out Table 2T.1: Comparison of Organic and Conventional Agriculture. If you are new to
                                 farming or are unable to answer some of the questions, leave the worksheets blank. These
                                 worksheets are provided simply as a way to help you narrow down what will be most im-
                                 portant or needed when developing strategies in Planning Task Four: Strategic Planning.

                                 TABLE 2T.1: COMPARISON OF ORGANIC AND CONVENTIONAL AGRICULTURE

                                                                ORGANIC AGRICULTURE                                            CONVENTIONAL AGRICULTURE
                                  Fertility                     Non-synthetic amendments like manure,                          Primarily synthetic fertilizers
                                                                compost and green manures; legumes in
                                                                rotation
                                  Weed Control                  Multiple strategies are employed, including:                   Primarily synthetic herbicides,
                                                                diverse rotations, mechanical weed control,                    GMO crops
                                                                cultural methods
                                  Insect Control                Diverse rotations, some non-synthetic insec-                   Primarily synthetic insecticides,
                                                                ticides, biological control                                    GMO crops
                                  Crops                         Non-GMO only                                                   Either GMO or traditionally bred
                                  Rotations                     Diverse rotations that include other crops in                  Often includes just corn and
                                                                addition to corn and soybeans                                  soybeans; continuous cropping
                                                                                                                               is possible
                                  Profits                       Comparable to conventional                                     Comparable to organic
                                  Inputs                        Fewer inputs                                                   More inputs
                                  Buffers                       Buffers are necessary to protect organic                       Buffers are not required
                                                                crops from GMO contamination, pesticides
                                  Time in Field                 Depending on the crop, more time may be                        Depending on the crop, less time
                                                                spent in the field                                             may be spent in the field
                                  Yields                        Corn and soybean yields have the potential                     Can be higher depending on
                                                                to be lower but small grains and forages can                   crop fertilization, chemical weed
                                                                have similar yields                                            control
                                 Source: Moncada, Kristine M. and Craig C. Sheaffer, Eds. 2010. Tools for Managing Pest and Environmental Risks to Organic Crops in the
                                 Upper Midwest. University of Minnesota. 2010.




  30     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
MARKETING
Use Worksheet 2T.7: Current Marketing to document commodities, products and
services that you currently market, as well as the volume of product sold last year. Be sure
to record average or contracted market prices, or both. If you use marketing contracts to
sell forward, you should describe the contract terms in this section. See the story panels
for examples of marketing practices. Next, describe current market trends, including
anticipated changes in conventional markets and opportunities to market organically.
Opportunities may be formal (e.g., the opportunity to contract with a processor or retailer)
or informal (e.g., the opportunity to sell to a neighbor). Use Worksheet 2T.8: Current
Enterprise Sales to calculate your revenue from crop, livestock and processed product
enterprises. This information will provide the basis for organic marketing strategies that




                                                                                                                                      2
you develop in Planning Task Four: Strategic Planning.

                                                                                                                                    TASK 2
  CURRENT MARKETING PRACTICES
  We currently market all of our milk to the local creamery. Conventional milk prices
  have varied from $13 per hundredweight to $20 per hundredweight over the past
  five years.



  We obtain forward contracts at profitable prices to help lock in our current-year cash
  flow and to assure the bank of the value of the products we produce. We are in regular
  contact with eight wholesale commodity brokers to research and finalize our contracts.




HUMAN RESOURCES
You have looked at operations and marketing. Now it is time to document your current
human resources situation, to describe the people that keep your farm going and help
make your business successful. Later, in Planning Task Four: Strategic Planning, you will
have the opportunity to identify labor needs based on your transition goals and explore
strategies for filling any gaps. For now, however, list the people involved in your business—
family, partners, hired labor, consultants and interns—using Worksheet 2T.9: Current
Human Resources. Then describe each person’s role on the farm, identifying manag-
ers, full-time workers and part-time workers as well as the activities that they perform.
This worksheet will provide a snapshot of the types of jobs that exist on your farm and the
workload of each person currently employed.

As you inventory physical and human resources, keep in mind that you may be the most
                                                                                                          2 Krawczyk, G. and J. Travis.
important resource to consider. We have all heard it said that the learning curve can
                                                                                                            2009. Pennsylvania Regional
be steep when transitioning from conventional to organic management. Organic apple                          Organic Fruit Industry Tran-
growers, for example, must learn to use complex—often experimental—pest management                          sition. Project funded by USDA
strategies to control over two dozen arthropod pests that affect tree health, fruit quality                 Sustainable Agriculture Re-
                                                                                                            search and Education (SARE).
and fruit yield.2 Every farmer who has made the transition, no matter what they produce,
                                                                                                            To access, visit www.sare.org/
will tell you to expect new challenges and to be prepared to learn new skills. So, the big                  project-reports and search by
question is, are you ready?                                                                                 project number LNE06-248.



                                            ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS        31
                                       Use the management assessment Worksheet 2T.10: Are You Ready to Manage
                                       Organically? to find out just how ready you are to face some of the challenges and
                                       risks associated with organic farming. If you find yourself answering yes to many ques-
                                       tions on the list, be sure to document these qualities in your business plan. These can help
                                       demonstrate to a lender, certifier, buyer or future business partner that you are ready to
                                       farm organically.

                                       Finally, recordkeeping will be a critical human resource when transitioning and once cer-
                                       tified. Recordkeeping tools include calendars, notebooks, preprinted forms and computer
                                       software. Many farmers have developed their own spreadsheets to track input purchases
                                       and applications, labor and machinery hours, productivity (yields, animal output), and
                                       sales. Use Worksheet 2T.11: How Good Are Your Records? to document current




 2
                                       recordkeeping practices.

TASK 2                                 If you already maintain detailed production, marketing and financial records, be sure
                                       to mention this in your business plan. If, on the other hand, you are not used to keeping
                                       records or your system is akin to keeping receipts in a shoebox, be aware of what lies
                                       ahead! Good records are essential for obtaining certification and for documenting mar-
                                       keting contract compliance. Also, they are useful when evaluating business successes
                                       and failures; most farmers find them to be indispensable management tools. You will
                                       have a chance in Planning Task Four: Strategic Planning to explore recordkeeping
                                       options and choose a system that works best for your business while satisfying OSP
                                       and OSPH requirements.



                                       FINANCES
                                       Knowing your financial status is critical when planning for transition. This is especially
                                       true if you expect to lease land, hire labor, purchase certified organic feed or acquire new
                                       equipment. Why? Knowing your financial situation before making a major change in
                                       operations allows you to explore options on paper before investing. This exercise will also
                                       prepare you for meetings with lenders and potential investors. As National Center for Ap-
                                       propriate Technology Agricultural Specialist Hannah Lewis puts it, “If you are comfortable
                                       answering questions about your financial situation for yourself, you will be able to answer
                                       the same questions for a lender.”3 Most importantly, the work you do here to document
                                       your financial situation will provide a baseline for strategic planning later on; it will help
                                       you determine if certification goals are financially feasible.

                                       Begin by estimating family living expenses and income needs. If you do not have a per-
                                       sonal budget, now is a time to prepare one. Use Worksheet 2T.12: Current Family
                                       Living Expenses or the “Living Expenses” spreadsheet (available at http://misadocu-
                                       ments.info/OrganicTransitionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx) to estimate current spending.
                                       The information you provide here will be very useful when budgeting for expenses during
                                       the transition period.

                                       Next, record current farm expenses using Worksheet 2T.13: Current Farm
                                       Expenses. See Text Box 2T.1: Sample List of Farm Operating Expenses for a list of
                                       typical farm expenses that you may want to include when calculating total cash operating
  3 Lewis, H. 2012. Basic              expenses for your income statement. If you are new to farming, you can skip this
    Accounting: Guidance for
                                       worksheet or use it to prepare your first expense budget.
    Beginning Farmers. ATTRA.
    Visit https://attra.ncat.org and
    search “basic accounting.”




  32           ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
Finally, we suggest preparing a current income statement, cash flow and balance sheet for
your farm business using Worksheet 2T.14: Current Income Statement, Work-
sheet 2T.15: Current Cash Flow, and Worksheet 2T.17: Current Balance Sheet.
Text Box 2T.2: Calculating Depreciation describes how to calculate depreciation, which
is also needed for your income statement. You can use Worksheet 2T.16: Calculating
Depreciation and Inventory Changes for this purpose. Later, in Planning Task Four:
Strategic Planning, you will compare your current financials to projected income, expens-
es, cash flow and net worth to determine how the transition to organic management may
impact finances.




                                                                                                                             2
  TEXT BOX 2T.1

  SAMPLE LIST OF FARM OPERATING EXPENSES                                                                                    TASK 2
  Crops/Livestock                               Processing
  Crops                                         Materials
     • Seed                                        • Ingredients
     • Fertilizers (e.g., manure)                  • Processing aids
     • Irrigation energy                           • Containers
     • Cleaning and drying                         • Labels
     • Storage                                     • Other
     • Other                                    Equipment/machinery
  Livestock                                        • Lease
     • Feeder livestock expenses                   • Repairs and maintenance
     • Feed and forages                            • Other
     • Pasture expenses                         Buildings
     • Breeding fees                               • Rent
     • Breeding livestock                          • Repairs and maintenance
     • Veterinary                                  • Utilities
     • Other                                       • Rent and leases
  Equipment/machinery                              • Other
     • Lease                                    Miscellaneous
     • Repairs and maintenance                     • Storage
     • Fuel and oil                                • Labor
  Buildings                                        • Office supplies
     • Rent
     • Repairs and maintenance
     • Utilities
  Land
     • Rent
  Miscellaneous
     • Labor
     • Office supplies
     • Other




                                      ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    33
                                    TEXT BOX 2T.2

                                    CALCULATING DEPRECIATION
                                    Depreciation is defined by the Internal Revenue Service as “an annual allowance for the wear
                                    and tear, deterioration or obsolescence of the property.” Most types of tangible property are
                                    depreciable, such as buildings, machinery, vehicles and equipment, but land is not. When estimat-
                                    ing depreciation, the Center for Farm Financial Management suggests using 10 percent per year
                                    of the purchase price of machinery and equipment, 15 percent per year of the purchase price of
                                    titled vehicles, and 5 percent per year of the purchase price of buildings and other improvements.
                                    A spreadsheet is available to assist with these calculations at http://misadocuments.info/Organic-




 2
                                    TransitionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx.

TASK 2                           If you need help preparing current financial documents, consider contacting a farm
                                 business management instructor, enrolling in a farm finance course or hiring a farm
                                 accountant. Electronic spreadsheets, found at http://misadocuments.info/OrganicTransi-
                                 tionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx, are also available to help make recording and calculating
                                 income, expenses, cash flow and net worth a bit easier. The Resources section includes
                                 other useful farm finance publications and websites.

                                 Finally, it is a good idea to look at your farm business’ overall competitive situation—to
                                 document the current internal strengths of the business as well as opportunities that exist
                                 in the marketplace or elsewhere outside of your business. Explore your current competi-
                                 tive situation using Worksheet 2T.18: Current Whole-Farm SWOT. You also may
                                 use this worksheet to identify current internal weaknesses and external threats to the farm
                                 business. SWOT statements (“Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats”) are
                                 classic business planning assessments. Your SWOT statement may also address less tangi-
                                 ble, visionary ideas. Newly certified organic dairy farmer Kent Hoehne from Frazee, Minn.,
                                 for example, included the following opportunity in his SWOT:

                                 “I’m excited about [organic] crop farming because as an organic farmer, you are ‘farm-
                                 ing.’ You are learning about rotations and the viability of the soil. If I am excited, maybe
                                 I can pull some other kid along with me. I think organic farming is an opportunity to
                                 change the future of agriculture in my community.”

                                 It is a good idea to address the four business characteristics (operations, marketing,
                                 human resources and finances) when describing your SWOT, if applicable. While you may
                                 not include a discussion of your farm’s weaknesses and threats in the final business plan, it
                                 will be useful for all planning team members to be aware of these conditions as you move
                                 forward to develop transition strategies. Also, the information from your SWOT can be
                                 useful when developing contingency statements in Planning Task Five: Implementation
                                 and Monitoring.


                                           DIG DEEPER
                                 For more information, ideas and examples about how to document your history and cur-
                                 rent situation refer to pages 27-66 in the Guide. You may also want to complete Work-
                                 sheets 2.15-2.18 in the Guide. These financial worksheets will provide further operation-
                                 al and financial baselines for your farm business. The answers that you provide on these
                                 worksheets will be valuable as you build strategies and communicate with others, such as



  34     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
business partners, lenders, buyers and certifiers. Other worksheets from the Guide that we
recommend when digging deeper are:

Worksheet 2.3: Tangible Working Assets. When completing this worksheet, be
certain to note the current or potential certification status of leased or rented land. This
worksheet will give you a good start on the problem-solving required in Planning Task
Four: Strategic Planning. For example, after using it to identify needed resources, you will
be ready to think critically about how best to fill any resource gaps.

Worksheet 2.4: Institutional Considerations. This worksheet provides space for
you to document current access to rental acreage or leased land. Be sure to note the con-
ditions and terms of your current agreements, making special note of the length of these




                                                                                                                               2
agreements and whether your landlord is on board for the transition. It may also be worth
asking about rental rates during and after transition. In some cases, landlords are willing
to offer a variable rental rate, where prices are reduced during transition to help offset                                    TASK 2
cash flow bottlenecks and then are increased after certification to offset the discounted rate
you had been receiving.

Worksheets 2.9-2.10. These worksheets will be important to review if you have a large
number of people involved in business operations or if human resource issues are among
the main drivers behind your decision to develop a business plan.

Worksheet 2.17: Risk Management. This worksheet asks you to rank your farm
business’ exposure to risk in marketing, operational, financial and personal areas. In
Planning Task Four: Strategic Planning, you will compare current risks to potential
transition-related risks. This will be an important part of feasibility testing when evaluat-
ing your final transition strategy.



         PUT IT IN WRITING!
Record a brief statement about your farm history in AgPlan in the Farm Business History
section or using your own word processing program. If you have compiled a page or more
describing your farm business history, consider condensing it for the business plan. This is
the place to be brief; one to two paragraphs, or even a few sentences, will do. After writing
your farm business history, identify current resources and comment on your readiness to
go organic.

If using AgPlan or the outline suggested on page 19, complete the following additional
sections:
    •   Business Overview
    •   Current Operations
    •   Land and Other Resources
    •   Current Marketing
    •   Current Human Resources
    •   Current Financial Position

As with the Farm Business History section, we suggest that you be brief when completing
these AgPlan sections. Two or three paragraphs will suffice. For example, rather than list-
ing under Current Operations all of the organic management practices that you currently
employ, simply summarize the information reported on Worksheets 2T.4-2T.6 How
Close Am I to Farming Organically?.



                                        ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    35
                                      RESOURCES
  WORKSHEETS ARE NOW                  • Documentation Forms for Organic Crop and Livestock Producers. March 2011.
  AVAILABLE ONLINE                      Baier, A. USDA and ATTRA. https://attra.ncat.org/organic.html.
  Visit www.misa.umn.edu/Publi-       • Farmers’ Guide to Organic Contracts. August 2012. Heyman, A. N. Farmers’ Legal
  cations/OrganicTransitionPlanner      Action Group. www.flaginc.org/publication/farmers-guide-to-organic-contracts.
  to obtain fillable PDF worksheets   • Guide for Organic Processors. November 2012. Coleman, P. ATTRA and USDA
  and electronic spreadsheets.          Agricultural Marketing Service. https://attra.ncat.org/organic.html.
                                      • Illustrated Guide to Soil Taxonomy. 2015. Soil Survey Staff. USDA - Natural Resources
                                        Conservation Service. National Soil Survey Center. www.nrcs.usda.gov.




 2
                                      • Major Land Uses: Glossary. February 2014. Borchers, A. USDA - Economic Research
                                        Service. Visit www.ers.usda.gov and search “major land uses: glossary.”
TASK 2                                • OMRI Products List. 2015. Organic Materials Review Institute. Updated annually.
                                        www.omri.org/about-products-list.
                                      • Organic Cost Share Program. 2015. USDA - Agricultural Marketing Service.
                                        Visit www.ams.usda.gov and search “organic cost share program.”
                                      • Organic Farming Manual: A Comprehensive Guide to Starting and Running a
                                        Certified Organic Farm. 2010. Hansen, A. L. Storey Publishing. www.storey.com.
                                      • Tools for Managing Pest and Environmental Risks to Organic Crops in the Upper
                                        Midwest. 2010. Moncada, K. M. and C. C. Sheaffer, Eds. University of Minnesota.
                                        www.organicriskmanagement.umn.edu.
                                      • Understanding Net Worth. December 2009. Hofstrand, D. Iowa State University.
                                        Visit www.extension.iastate.edu and search “C3-19.”
                                      • Writing Your Family/Business History. 1997. Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. In
                                        The Multi-Generational Family Farm. http://eruralfamilies.uwagec.org/ERFLibrary/
                                        DEFAULT.htm.




  36          ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                               DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 2T.1                                                                               Worksheet 2T.1: Farm History
                                                                                               (http://misadocuments.info/2T.
                                                                                               1FarmHistory.pdf)
FARM HISTORY
Write a brief history chronicling the important events and decisions in your life and farm business. Why did you make the choices
you did? What have been the most important outcomes? What key lessons have you learned? Use whatever time frame is needed
(one, five, 10 years) to best capture why and how you have arrived at your current farm business situation.

_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                                                                                                                     2
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________                               TASK 2
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS     37
                                                                                                            DOWNLOAD THE PDF
              WORKSHEET 2T.2                                                                                Worksheet 2T.2: Current Farm or
                                                                                                            Facilities Map (http://misadocu-
                                                                                                            ments.info/2T.2CurrentMap.pdf)
           CURRENT FARM OR FACILITIES MAP
           Use the space below to draw or insert a map depicting your current farm layout. Note fields and acreage, fencing, buildings and
           sizes, etc. If you process, include a detailed facilities map or floor plan (with dimensions) showing processing stations, equipment,
           storage, bathroom(s), etc.




 2
TASK 2




  38     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                                DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 2T.3                                                                                Worksheet 2T.3: Current Oper-
                                                                                                ations (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                                info/2T.3CurrentOperations.pdf)
CURRENT OPERATIONS
Use the space below to describe current resources: land, animals, buildings and equipment. Next, briefly identify custom services
that you hire out each year (including trucking) and long-term lease agreements (or other contracted agreements, including con-
servation easements). Finally, make note of any farm programs and insurance options that you use.

Farm location (note proximity to markets, if applicable):
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                                                                                                                                2
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________                                       TASK 2
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


Land:
Cropland (number of acres owned, rented)____________________________________________________________________

Grazing land (number of acres)________________________________________________________________________________

Other land (number of acres, describe)_________________________________________________________________________

Annual crop production_____________________________________________________________________________________

Perennial crop/orchard production__________________________________________________________________________

Soil type/quality (describe)________________________________________________________________________________

Water features (describe)_ ________________________________________________________________________________

Livestock:
Milking cows (number of animals)___________________________________________________________________________

Breeding livestock (number of animals)_______________________________________________________________________

Replacements (number of animals)__________________________________________________________________________

Meat or stock animals (number of animals)____________________________________________________________________

Other livestock (specify type and number)____________________________________________________________________

Equipment and buildings (list):
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                                                                                                    continued
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS                39
           Inputs used (list products, where and when applied):
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Product transport and storage (how it is accomplished):
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




 2
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

TASK 2     _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

           Custom hire (services you use):
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

           Long-term agreements (contracts, conservation easements, etc.):
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

           Farm program participation (list programs and annual value):
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

           Insurance (types, coverage, cost):
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




  40     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                   DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 2T.4                                                                   Worksheet 2T.4: How Close Am I to Farming
                                                                                   Organically, Crops? (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                   info/2T.4HowClosetoOrganicCrops.pdf)
HOW CLOSE AM I TO FARMING
ORGANICALLY, CROPS?
Complete this worksheet for your current crop rotation. Check the appropriate box to indicate if you are generally using conven-
tional or organic management for each cropping system practice. Use the notes section to identify specific practices, inputs and
equipment that you need to make the transition from conventional to organic management for each practice. Next, answer the
cropping questions listed. This worksheet is meant to provide a general snapshot of your current management status; the more
check marks you have in the organic management column, the less you will need to change to become certified.


 Crop Production
 Practice Areas


 Soil fertility
                         Manage/Source
                         Conventionally
                                             Manage/Source
                                             Organically
                                                                Notes

                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                         TASK 2




 Water management




 Weed management




 Insect management




 Disease management




 Seed




 Other inputs




 Storage
                                                                                                                                   continued




                                            ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS                41
           1. Do you have a soil-building rotation for all fields? Please explain:
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           2. Do you have adequate buffers in place for all fields that adjoin land not under your control?



 2
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
TASK 2
           3. Do you maintain production records for all fields and enterprises?
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           4. Date of last application of a prohibited substance not allowed under organic certification (e.g., non-approved pesticides or
              synthetic fertilizers):
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




              NEED HELP ANSWERING THESE QUESTIONS?
              Check out the following publications:
              Documentation Forms for Organic Crop and Livestock Producers. March 2011. Baier, A. USDA and ATTRA.
              https://attra.ncat.org/organic.html.
              The Organic Farming Manual: A Comprehensive Guide to Starting and Running a Certified Organic Farm. March 2010.
              Hansen, A. L. Storey Publishing. www.storey.com.




  42     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                             DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 2T.5                                                             Worksheet 2T.5: How Close Am I to Farming
                                                                             Organically, Livestock? (http://misadocuments.info/
                                                                             2T.5HowClosetoOrganicLivestock.pdf)
HOW CLOSE AM I TO FARMING
ORGANICALLY, LIVESTOCK?
Complete this worksheet for each significant livestock enterprise in your current operation. Check the appropriate box to indicate
if you are generally using conventional or organic management for each livestock system practice. Use the notes section to identify
specific practices, inputs and equipment that you need to make the transition from conventional to organic management for each
practice. Next, answer the livestock management questions listed. This is meant to provide a general snapshot of your current man-
agement status; the more check marks you have in the organic management column, the closer you are to becoming certified.




                                                                                                                                              2
 Livestock System                             Manage/Source Manage/Source Notes
 Practice Area                                Conventionally Organically
                                                                                                                                            TASK 2
 Source of animals (e.g., young stock,
 replacements)

 Management of young stock

 Feed (Consider: Do you have farm-
 raised organic feed?)

 Feed supplements


 Outdoor access (non-ruminants)


 Pasture access (ruminants)


 Veterinary inputs

 Herd health (e.g., therapeutic versus
 sub-therapeutic use of antibiotics,
 hormones, dry-cow treatments, para-
 siticides)

 Fly control


 Housing


 Bedding

 Animal welfare (e.g., physical alterations
 such as tail docking)                                                                                                                continued




                                               ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS            43
           1. Do you have enough pasture to satisfy NOP rules for a minimum of 120 days grazing and 30 percent dry matter intake during
              the grazing season?
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




           2. Do you maintain production records for this enterprise?
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




 2
           3. Date of last application of a prohibited substance not allowed under organic certification (e.g., non-approved pesticides or
              synthetic fertilizers) or non-organic feed:
TASK 2
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




             NEED HELP ANSWERING THESE QUESTIONS?
             Check out the following publications:
             Documentation Forms for Organic Crop and Livestock Producers. March 2011. Baier, A. USDA and ATTRA.
             https://attra.ncat.org/organic.html.
             The Organic Farming Manual: A Comprehensive Guide to Starting and Running a Certified Organic Farm. March 2010.
             Hansen, A. L. Storey Publishing. www.storey.com.




  44     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                     DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 2T.6                                                                     Worksheet 2T.6: How Close Am I to Processing
                                                                                     Organically? (http://misadocuments.info/
                                                                                     2T.6HowClosetoOrganicProcessing.pdf)
HOW CLOSE AM I TO
PROCESSING ORGANICALLY?
Complete this worksheet for each product that you process. (Processing refers to livestock slaughter, cooking, baking, heating, curing,
canning, drying, mixing, grinding, churning, separating, extracting, cutting, fermenting, distilling, preserving, dehydrating, freezing and
the repackaging of bulk foods into smaller containers for resale.) Check the appropriate box to indicate if you are generally using
conventional or organic management for each processing practice. Use the notes section to identify specific practices, inputs and
equipment that you need to become certified organic; also identify suppliers for NOP-approved inputs. Next, answer the processing
questions listed. This is meant to provide a general snapshot of your current processing status; the more check marks you have in the



                                                                                                                                                      2
organic management column, the closer you are to becoming certified.

 Processing Practice Area         Manage/Source Manage/Source Notes                                                                                 TASK 2
                                  Conventionally Organically

 Source of raw inputs and
 ingredients



 Transportation and storage
 of inputs and ingredients



 Cleaning and sanitation




 Processing facility




 Pest management
                                                                                                                                              continued




                                                ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS                   45
           1. Do you have access to a processing facility that is equipped for processing your product?
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           2. If you use water as an ingredient or to wash inputs and equipment, have you verified that the water meets Safe Drinking
              Water Act standards?
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           3. Do you obtain organic certificates from each input supplier if you are already sourcing organic ingredients? These are required
              for certification.




 2
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

TASK 2
           4. Do you have a product flow chart that tracks the movement of all ingredients and products?
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           5. Do you have a plan for proper labeling of finished products (e.g., “100 percent organic,” “organic,” “made with organic
              ingredients”)?
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




             NEED HELP ANSWERING THESE QUESTIONS?
             Check out the following publication:
             Coleman, P. November 2012. Guide for Organic Processors. ATTRA and USDA - Agricultural Marketing Service.
             https://attra.ncat.org/organic.html.




  46     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                       DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 2T.7                                                                       Worksheet 2T.7: Current Marketing
                                                                                       (http://misadocuments.info/
                                                                                       2T.7CurrentMarketing.pdf)
CURRENT MARKETING
Use the space below to list each major commodity or product marketed and stored for future sale. Be sure to include custom hire ser-
vices that you perform in the list of marketed products. Record the sales volume and the average price(s) earned for your most recent
harvest or processing run. Conclude by describing current marketing trends, opportunities and challenges. When doing so, think about
your proximity to markets, transportation and storage, and ease of sale. Copy this worksheet if more space is needed.

Year: _____________________
Crops Sales volume (amount sold, retained)                                                                  Average price




                                                                                                                                         2
		                                                                                                          (value per unit)
______________________________________                _ _____________________________________               _ _________________
______________________________________                _ _____________________________________               _ _________________
                                                                                                                                        TASK 2
______________________________________                _ _____________________________________               _ _________________


Animals and livestock products
______________________________________                _ _____________________________________               _ _________________
______________________________________                _ _____________________________________               _ _________________
______________________________________                _ _____________________________________               _ _________________


Processed products
______________________________________                _ _____________________________________               _ _________________
______________________________________                _ _____________________________________               _ _________________
______________________________________                _ _____________________________________               _ _________________


Custom hire (services you perform)		
______________________________________                _ _____________________________________               _ _________________
______________________________________                _ _____________________________________               _ _________________
______________________________________                _ _____________________________________               _ _________________


Marketing trends:_ ______________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

Marketing opportunities:__________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

Marketing challenges:____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS        47
                                                                                                     DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 2T.8                                                                          Worksheet 2T.8: Current Enterprise Sales
                                                                                                     (http://misadocuments.info/
                                                                                                     2T.8CurrentEnterpriseSales.pdf)
           CURRENT ENTERPRISE SALES
           Use the space below to estimate sales revenue for crop, livestock and processed product enterprises. Calculate revenue for those
           products that you sold or plan to sell. Do not include revenue for products that are utilized on the farm, such as livestock feed. Add
           the revenue from each field or enterprise to arrive at total enterprise sales. If needed, make additional copies of this worksheet to
           capture income from all enterprises. An electronic spreadsheet is available to help with these calculations at http://misadocuments.
           info/OrganicTransitionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx.




 2
           Field/enterprise                             ________________________________________________________________

               (a) Output for sale (units _________) ________________________________________________________________
TASK 2
               (b) Price per unit                       ________________________________________________________________

               (c1) Revenue (a*b)                       ________________________________________________



           Field/enterprise                             ________________________________________________________________

               (a) Output for sale (units _________) ________________________________________________________________

               (b) Price per unit                       ________________________________________________________________		

               (c2) Revenue (a*b)                       ________________________________________________



           Field/enterprise                             ________________________________________________________________

               (a) Output for sale (units _________) ________________________________________________________________

               (b) Price per unit                       ________________________________________________________________

               (c3) Revenue (a*b)                       ________________________________________________



           Total enterprise sales (c 1+c 2+c 3)         ________________________________________________




  48     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                          DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 2T.9                                                                          Worksheet 2T.9: Current Human
                                                                                          Resources (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                          info/2T.9CurrentHR.pdf)
CURRENT HUMAN RESOURCES
Use this worksheet to identify the people involved in your farming operation and their key responsibilities within the business. In the
first column, list the names of all full-time, part-time and seasonal workers who provide labor on the farm, including family. Use the
next column to describe their key responsibilities related to operations, marketing, human resources and finance. In the remaining
monthly columns, indicate each person’s busiest and slowest times of the year. You can do this simply by placing the letter “B” in the
busy months or color coding (e.g., shade busy months red and slow months yellow). This will help you identify current labor bottle-
necks and anticipate future labor needs when developing transition strategies.


 Person        Key Responsibilities           JAN     FEB    MAR     APR    MAY     JUN     JUL    AUG      SEP    OCT NOV        DEC


                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                          TASK 2




                                               ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS         49
                                                                                                    DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 2T.10                                                                        Worksheet 2T.10: Are You Ready to
                                                                                                    Manage Organically? (http://misadocu-
                                                                                                    ments.info/2T.10AreYouReady.pdf)
           ARE YOU READY TO MANAGE ORGANICALLY?
           (Adapted from the Minnesota Department of Agriculture’s management skills assessment, Organic Farmers: Steps to Success.)



           1 = Rarely; 2 = Sometimes; 3 = Most of the time; 4 = Almost always			

           ______     I have specific short- and long-term goals for the farm.




 2
           ______     I write these goals down and refer to them periodically.

TASK 2     ______     I keep accurate financial records.

           ______     I use the financial records to help make farm decisions.

           ______     I keep detailed input and production records.

           ______     I create (and use) a monthly cash flow plan.

           ______     I know the true cost of production for each enterprise on the farm.

           ______     I have a manageable debt load.

           ______     I make good spending decisions (buying versus repairing equipment; purchased inputs, etc.).

           ______     I maintain equipment, buildings and other farm assets.

           ______     I do a good job of prioritizing farm work and getting it done on a timely basis.

           ______     I have enough labor to keep up with the work to be done.

           ______     I do a good job managing employees (hiring, training, termination).

           ______     I use strategies to help manage risk (diversified production, diversified markets, insurance, etc.).

           ______     I am already meeting some or all organic standards.

           ______     I read publications and attend events to learn new ideas.

           ______     I take pride in my farm’s appearance.




  50     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                        DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 2T.11                                                                       Worksheet 2T.11: How Good Are Your
                                                                                        Records? (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                        info/2T.11HowGoodAreRecords.pdf)
HOW GOOD ARE YOUR RECORDS?
Use the space below to document current recordkeeping practices by management area and to consider what, if anything,
needs to change during transition. For example, describe whether you use a calendar, notebook or computer software to
maintain records. Use the line after each records title to identify the person(s) responsible for recordkeeping. Next, consider
what new recordkeeping practices will be required for an OSP or OSPH. Recordkeeping forms are available through ATTRA
(https://attra.ncat.org/organic.html), or check out COG Pro for online recordkeeping (https://cog-pro.com).

Production records (person responsible):____________________________________________________________________




                                                                                                                                     2
a. Crop recordkeeping practices:____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________                               TASK 2
b. Livestock recordkeeping practices:___________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
c. Processing recordkeeping practices:________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

Marketing records (person responsible): _ ___________________________________________________________________
a. Crop recordkeeping practices:____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
b. Livestock recordkeeping practices:_____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
c. Processing recordkeeping practices:__________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


Human resource records (person responsible): _ ______________________________________________________________
a. Labor (hourly, salaried) recordkeeping practices:______________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
b. Tax and workers compensation recordkeeping practices:_________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


Financial records (person responsible):______________________________________________________________________
a. Expense recordkeeping practices:____________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
b. Income recordkeeping practices:__________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

Will current recordkeeping practices satisfy OSP or OSPH requirements? (Visit the National Organic Program website to learn
about organic recordkeeping regulations: www.ams.usda.gov/nop.)
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________



                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    51
                                                                                         DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 2T.12                                                             Worksheet 2T.12: Current Family Living Expenses
                                                                                         (http://misadocuments.info/2T.12CurrentFami-
                                                                                         lyLivingExpenses.pdf)
           CURRENT FAMILY LIVING EXPENSES
           Use this worksheet to estimate your current annual family living expenses (based on last year’s expenses) and your necessary
           income contribution from the farm business. An electronic spreadsheet is available to help with these calculations at
           http://misadocuments.info/OrganicTransitionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx.

           FAMILY LIVING EXPENSES				                                               $/YEAR
           Food and meals                                                _________________________________
           Medical care and health insurance                             _________________________________



 2
           Cash donations                                                _________________________________ 		
TASK 2     Household supplies                                            _________________________________ 		
           Clothing                                                      _________________________________ 		
           Personal care                                                 _________________________________ 		
           Child/dependent care                                          _________________________________ 		
           Gifts                                                         _________________________________ 		
           Education                                                     _________________________________ 		
           Recreation                                                    _________________________________ 		
           Utilities (household share)                                   _________________________________ 		
           Nonfarm vehicle operating expense                             _________________________________
           Household real estate taxes                                   _________________________________ 		
           Dwelling rent                                                 _________________________________ 		
           Household repairs                                             _________________________________ 		
           Nonfarm interest                                              _________________________________ 		
           Life insurance payments                                       _________________________________ 		
           Other                                                         _________________________________ 		
           Total family living expenses (sum of all above)               _________________________________
           Farm assets used for personal/family consumption              _________________________________ 		
           Total family living expenses (a)                              _________________________ 		

           OTHER NONFARM EXPENSES
           Income taxes                                                  _________________________________ 		
           Furnishings and appliances                                    _________________________________ 		
           Nonfarm vehicle purchases                                     _________________________________ 		
           Nonfarm real estate purchases                                 _________________________________ 		
           Other nonfarm capital purchases                               _________________________________
           Nonfarm savings and investments                               _________________________________
           Other nonfarm expenditures                                    _________________________________ 		
           Total other nonfarm expenditures (b)                          _________________________

           Total cash family living investment
           and nonfarm capital purchases (c) = (a)+(b)                   _________________________________
           Nonfarm income (d)                                            _________________________________ 		
           Necessary contribution from farm business (c)-(d)             _________________________

  52     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                     DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 2T.13                                                                    Worksheet 2T.13: Current Farm Expenses
                                                                                     (http://misadocuments.info/2T.13Current-
                                                                                     FarmExpenses.pdf)
CURRENT FARM EXPENSES
Use this worksheet to record direct and overhead expenses for the most recent production year. (Many of these numbers can be
found on your Schedule F Tax Statement.) Be sure to estimate and include annual ownership costs of machinery, equipment and
buildings (i.e., depreciation, interest, repairs, taxes and insurance). See page 34 for tips on how to calculate depreciation or use
Worksheet 2T.16: Calculating Depreciation and Inventory Changes. An electronic spreadsheet is available to help with current
farm expense calculations at http://misadocuments.info/OrganicTransitionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx.
DIRECT EXPENSES				                                                       $/YEAR
Seed                                                            _________________________________ 		




                                                                                                                                        2
Fertilizer                                                      _________________________________ 			
Chemicals                                                       _________________________________ 			
Irrigation energy                                               _________________________________ 			                                  TASK 2
Other direct crop expenses                                      _________________________________ 		
Feeder livestock                                                _________________________________ 			
Feed and forages                                                _________________________________ 			
Pasture                                                         _________________________________ 			
Breeding                                                        _________________________________ 			
Veterinary                                                      _________________________________ 			
Other direct livestock expenses                                 _________________________________ 		
Crop insurance                                                  _________________________________ 			
Custom hire                                                     _________________________________ 			
Fuel and oil                                                    _________________________________ 			
Repairs and maintenance                                         _________________________________ 		
Storage                                                         _________________________________ 			
Processing                                                      _________________________________ 			
Certification fees                                              _________________________________ 			
Professional fees                                               _________________________________ 			
Education                                                       _________________________________ 			
Office supplies                                                 _________________________________ 			
Marketing                                                       _________________________________ 			
Seasonal labor                                                  _________________________________ 			
Interest on operating loan(s)                                   _________________________________ 		
Sales taxes                                                     _________________________________ 			
Other operating expenses                                        _________________________________ 		
Total direct expenses (a)                                       _______________________________ 		

OVERHEAD EXPENSES
Utilities                                                       _________________________________ 			
Rent and leases                                                 _________________________________ 			
Hired labor                                                     _________________________________ 			
Owner wages                                                     _________________________________ 			
Depreciation                                                    _________________________________ 			
Farm insurance                                                  _________________________________ 			
Taxes (property, payroll)                                       _________________________________ 		
Interest on intermediate loan(s)                                _________________________________ 		
Interest on long-term debt                                      _________________________________ 		
Other overhead expenses                                         _________________________________ 		
Total overhead expenses (b)                                     _______________________________ 		
Total farm expenses (a)+(b)                                     _______________________________ 		

                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS       53
                                                                                                 DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 2T.14                                                                     Worksheet 2T.14: Current Income
                                                                                                 Statement (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                                 info/2T.14CurrentIncomeStatement.pdf)
           CURRENT INCOME STATEMENT
           Use this worksheet to calculate current net farm income for the past year (or several years). Enterprise sales and farm expense
           data can come from your Schedule F statement or from Worksheet 2T.8: Current Enterprise Sales and Worksheet 2T.13: Current
           Farm Expenses. Worksheet 2T.16: Calculating Depreciation and Inventory Changes will help you with depreciation and inventory
           estimates. An electronic spreadsheet is available to help with all of these calculations at http://misadocuments.info/OrganicTransi-
           tionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx.




 2
           For the period beginning (date)                                _________________________________ 		
TASK 2        and ending (date)		          			


           Enterprise sales                                           +_________________________________ 		
           Cooperative distributions                                  +_________________________________
           Government payments                                        +_________________________________ 		
           Crop insurance proceeds                                    +_________________________________
           Custom hire income                                         +_________________________________ 		
           Other income                                               +_________________________________ 		
           Farm expenses                                              - ________________________________
           Inventory change                                         +/-_________________________________ 		

           Net Farm Income                                              =_________________________




  54     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                     DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 2T.15                                                                    Worksheet 2T.15: Current Cash Flow
                                                                                     (http://misadocuments.info/2T.15Cur-
                                                                                     rentCashFlow.pdf)
CURRENT CASH FLOW
Use the space below to record cash flow for your most recent production year (reflecting your current, pre-transition operations).
Begin by tallying annual cash inflows and annual cash outflows. Then subtract outflows from the inflows. If the projected net cash
flow is positive, then you should have had enough cash on hand to cover expenses and make debt payments on time. (Keep in
mind that month-to-month cash flow may still have been an issue.) If, on the other hand, net cash flow is negative, the farm busi-
ness may have had trouble repaying short-term debt. An electronic version of this worksheet is available at http://misadocuments.
info/OrganicTransitionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx.




                                                                                                                                      2
YEAR                                                          _________________________________

CASH INFLOWS                                                                                                                         TASK 2
Gross cash farm income (a)                                    _________________________________ 			
Nonfarm income (b)                                            _________________________________
Capital sales (c)                                             _________________________________
New borrowings (d)                                            _________________________________
Grants (e)                                                    _________________________________
Total Cash Inflows (f) = (a+b+c+d+e)                          _________________________

CASH OUTFLOWS
Total farm expenses (g)                                       _________________________________
Depreciation (h)                                              _________________________________
Total cash farm expenses (i) = (g-h)                          _________________________________
Living expenses (j)                                           _________________________________
Taxes (income, social sec.) (k)                               _________________________________
Capital purchases (l)                                         _________________________________
Principal payments (m)                                        _________________________________
Total Cash Outflows (n) = (i+j+k+l+m)                         _________________________


Net Cash Flow (f-n)                                           _________________________




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS      55
                                                                                        DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 2T.16                                                            Worksheet 2T.16: Calculating Depreciation and
                                                                                        Inventory Changes (http://misadocuments.in-
           CALCULATING DEPRECIATION                                                     fo/2T.16CalculatingDepreciationandInventory.pdf)

           AND INVENTORY CHANGES
           Calculating Depreciation
           Depreciation is defined by the Internal Revenue Service as “an annual allowance for the wear and tear, deterioration or obsoles-
           cence of the property.” Most types of tangible property are depreciable, such as buildings, machinery, vehicles and equipment, but
           land is not. When estimating depreciation, the Center for Farm Financial Management suggests using 10 percent per year of the
           purchase price of machinery and equipment, 15 percent per year of the purchase price of titled vehicles, and 5 percent per year of
           the purchase price of buildings and other improvements. Use the table below to estimate the total value of depreciation for your
           farm assets. You will use this information when compiling farm expenses. A spreadsheet is available to assist with these calcula-



 2
           tions at http://misadocuments.info/OrganicTransitionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx.
TASK 2                		
                                                   Beginning     Purchases          Sales         Ending      Depreciation Depreciation
                                                       $              $               $            Value            %             Expense
                                                                                                     $                                $
                                                     +               +              -               =              *               =
             Machinery (a)                                                                                         10% (0.1)
             Vehicles (b)                                                                                         15% (0.15)
             Buildings (c)                                                                                        5% (0.05)
             Breeding livestock
             replacements (d)
             Total Depreciation = (a+b+c+d)
           			
           Calculating Inventory Changes
           Inventory changes affect net farm income and should be accounted for each year. Use the space below to record the value of in-
           ventory at the beginning of the year and at the end of the year. Subtract the ending inventory value from the beginning inventory
           value. You will be asked to add or subtract the final change in inventory when calculating net farm income on Worksheet 2T.14:
           Current Income Statement.

                                                         Beginning Inventory            Ending Inventory      Ending–Beginning Inventory
                                                                  $                             $                         $
            Crops and feed (a)
            Livestock held for sale (b)
            Accounts receivable (c)
            Hedging accounts (d)
            Other inventory (e)
            Prepaid expenses and supplies (f)
            Growing crops (g)
            Inventory change (h) = (a+b+c+d+e+f+g)
            Accounts payable (i)
            Accrued interest (j)
            Inventory change (k) = (i+j)
            TOTAL INVENTORY CHANGE = (h-k)




  56     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                        DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 2T.17                                                                       Worksheet 2T.17: Current Balance Sheet
                                                                                        (http://misadocuments.info/2T.17Cur-
                                                                                        rentBalanceSheet.pdf)
CURRENT BALANCE SHEET
Construct your current and historical balance sheets using this worksheet. Where possible, include itemized details under each
asset and liability category. A spreadsheet is available to assist with these calculations at http://misadocuments.info/OrganicTransi-
tionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx.

ASSETS
Current Farm Assets




                                                                                                                                          2
Cash and checking                                               _________________________________
Prepaid expenses and supplies                                   _________________________________
Growing crops                                                   _________________________________                                        TASK 2
Accounts receivable                                             _________________________________
Hedging accounts                                                _________________________________
Crops and feed in storage                                       _________________________________
Crops under government loan                                     _________________________________
Market livestock                                                _________________________________
Other current assets                                            _________________________________
Total current assets (a)                                        _________________________


Intermediate Farm Assets
Breeding livestock                                              _________________________________
Machinery and equipment                                         _________________________________
Other intermediate assets                                       _________________________________
Total intermediate assets (b)                                   _________________________


Long-Term Farm Assets
Farmland                                                        _________________________________
Buildings and improvements                                      _________________________________
Other long-term assets                                          _________________________________
Total long-term assets (c)                                      _________________________


Total Farm Assets (d) = (a+b+c)                                 _________________________
Nonfarm Assets (e)                                              _________________________
                                                                                                             continued
Total Assets (f) = (d+e)                                        _________________________




                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS         57
                                 LIABILITIES
                                 Current Farm Liabilities
                                 Accrued interest                                              _________________________________
                                 Accounts payable                                              _________________________________
                                 Current farm loans                                            _________________________________
                                 Principal on CCC loans                                        _________________________________
                                 Principal on term loans                                       _________________________________
                                 Total Current Farm Liabilities (g)                            _________________________




 2
                                 Intermediate Farm Liabilities (h)                             _________________________
TASK 2
                                 Long-Term Farm Liabilities (i)                                _________________________


                                 Total Farm Liabilities (j) = (g+h+i)                          _________________________
                                 Nonfarm Liabilities (k)                                       _________________________
                                 Total Liabilities (l) = (j+k)                                 _________________________


                                 Net Worth = (f-l)                                             _________________________




  58     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                    DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 2T.18                                                                   Worksheet 2T.18: Current Whole-Farm
                                                                                    SWOT (http://misadocuments.in-
                                                                                    fo/2T.18CurrentSWOT.pdf)
CURRENT WHOLE-FARM SWOT
Summarize the internal strengths and weaknesses as well as the external opportunities and threats for your business as
it exists today. Consider all aspects of your business marketing, operations, human resources and finances.

INTERNAL FACTORS
Strengths                                                     Weaknesses
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________




                                                                                                                                    2
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________                          TASK 2
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________


EXTERNAL FACTORS
Opportunities                                                 Threats
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________
_________________________________________                     _ _________________________________________




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    59
                                      PLANNING TASK THREE:
                                      Vision, Mission and Goals
                                      T     his planning task is, perhaps,
                                            the most enjoyable of those in-
                                            cluded in the Planner. It offers
                                      an opportunity to dream—to imagine
                                      your future and develop goals for the
                                      farm business. The work you do in
                                      this planning task will help you com-
                                      plete the business overview, mission
                                      statement and goals sections of your
                                      business plan.




 3
TASK 3

  LOOK FOR THESE
                                      FUTURE VISION
                                                                                        Nate Walter with calves. (Angie Walter)


                                      Begin crafting your future vision by describing what going organic means to you. Try an-
                                      swering these fundamental questions:

                                      • Why are we transitioning?
  STORY PANEL ICONS
                                      • What will our farm or farm business look like during transition?
            A cow represents          • When will we become certified and for which fields?
            excerpts from
                                      • What crops will we include in our rotation or what will we process?
  Minnesota dairy farmers
  Nate and Angie Walter.              • Who will be doing which tasks?
                                      • What will we be doing after certification; will the farm look different?
           A corn stalk               • Where will we market certified organic crops, livestock and other products?
           represents excerpts        • What kind of debt will we carry during transition? How will this change after certification?
  from Minnesota grain
  producers Bryan and                 Use Worksheet 3T.1: Preparing a Future Vision to begin envisioning your future.
  Theresa Kerkaert.                   See the story panels for examples of future visions from the Walters and Kerkaerts. If
                                      you prefer pictures to words, use the work space provided to draw a map of your farm as
                                      it looks now, during transition and after certification. If you choose to use visuals, depict
          A jar of pickles            buffers and describe which conservation practices might benefit your farm. This map can
          represents excerpts         be useful when preparing an OSP or OSPH.
  from New Jersey processor
  Vitaly Brukhman.
                                         FUTURE VISION
                                         It is the year 2035. Walter Dairy is one hundred years old and run by Levi with his
                                         father, Nate, helping out wherever needed. There are 120 cows and more than 400
                                         acres. The new tractor purchased in 2015 has 8,000 hours on it. Levi is considering building a 240-cow
                                         barn with robots and purchasing 320 acres across the road. Angie and Laureen enjoy running the
                                         farm store—first opened in 2014. Laureen’s husband drives some tractors for us. Our grandkids enjoy
                                         helping feed the calves. We can finally say, “We did it. Let’s take a two-day vacation!”




  60          ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
  FUTURE VISION
  In five years Kerkaert Organic Farm will have obtained long-term leases for all rental
  land with an option to buy approximately 480 acres. In 15 years we will own/farm
  enough land to start incorporating our three sons into the operation, if they desire.


MISSION STATEMENT
Next, begin drafting a mission statement for your certified organic farm business. A mis-
sion statement “describes the fundamental purpose of your business, what you do, why
you do it, and for whom you do it. It identifies your products, services and customers.”
(Agriculture Business Plan Workbook, p.4.) Your mission statement might be personal in
nature—intended to guide your own management—or a more formal statement to future
customers. See the story panels for mission statement examples.


Use Worksheet 3T.2: Farm Business Mission Statement to record your mission




                                                                                                                                    3
statement.

                                                                                                                                   TASK 3
  MISSION STATEMENT
  I believe I was born to farm. I will do what is in my power to see that this dairy
  farm fulfills another generation’s dreams; to show that a family farm can still exist
  and that plenty of food can be grown using organic methods.



  The mission of Bubbly Jen’s Farm is to serve a community of people living in the NJ/NY
  region who are interested in eating diverse, nutritious, organically grown/prepared food
  to improve their health and quality of life.




GOALS
Finally, wrap up Planning Task Three: Vision, Mission and Goals by drafting goals for your
farm business. Goals are statements that reflect the “what” and “who” pieces of your future
vision; they describe what your farm will look like after transition and who will be involved
in the day-to-day operations. Goals do not describe the “how” components of your future
business—you will address these in Planning Task Four: Strategic Planning. See the story
panel for an example of a goal statement.



  GOALS
  Our long-term goal is to own enough tillable acres to have a self-sustaining farm oper-
  ation that will be a source of retirement income for us and a resource to pass down to
  our children for their financial security.




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    61
                                      As you draft short- and long-term goals for the farm business using Worksheet 3T.3:
                                      Goals, it is a good idea to include supporting documentation for your goals. For exam-
                                      ple, if your goal is to market organic beef, it would not hurt to include a few statements
                                      explaining why you are excited and optimistic about this goal: “Organic beef sales have
                                      been up 15 percent at grocery stores in our region over the past two years. Based on reports
                                      from farm publications, we expect demand for organic beef to keep growing, and therefore
                                      we see organic beef as a good opportunity. We see ourselves adding this enterprise to the
                                      farm mix within three years.”



                                                DIG DEEPER
                                      You identified personal and farm business goals in this planning task. It is also a good idea
                                      to ask other members of your planning team to do the same. Ask family and other plan-
                                      ning team members to set short- and long-term goals for the farm business. Then sit down
                                      and compare notes! Do you share the same goals? Would you prioritize your goals differ-
                                      ently? Worksheet 3.5: Prioritizing Goals is available on page 95 in the Guide to help
                                      with this task.




 3
TASK 3
                                                PUT IT IN WRITING!
                                      When ready, record brief vision, mission and goal statements in the sections provided in
                                      the Executive Summary of AgPlan or using a word processing program. The executive
                                      summary should communicate to lenders, business partners or other readers (including
                                      your family) where you are headed with the farm business and what it will look like in the
                                      short term (during transition) and long term (after certification). You may find it necessary
                                      to revisit and revise your mission statement or goals after finishing your business strate-
                                      gies in Planning Task Four: Strategic Planning.



                                      RESOURCES
  WORKSHEETS ARE NOW                  • AgPlan. 2010. Center for Farm Financial Management, Regents of the University of
  AVAILABLE ONLINE                      Minnesota. https://agplan.umn.edu.

  Visit www.misa.umn.edu/Publi-       • Goal Setting for Farm and Ranch Families. 2004. Doye, D. Oklahoma Cooperative
  cations/OrganicTransitionPlanner      Extension Service. Visit www.oces.okstate.edu and search “goal setting for farm and
  to obtain fillable PDF worksheets     ranch families.”
  and electronic spreadsheets.        • Holistic Management: A New Framework for Decision Making, 2nd Edition. 1999.
                                        Savory, A. and J. Butterfield. Island Press. www.islandpress.org.
                                      • How to Establish Goals: A Group Project for Farmers and Their Families. September
                                        1998. Lamb, J., Minnesota Project, the Whole-Farm Planning Interdisciplinary Team,
                                        and the Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture. www.misa.umn.edu/
                                        Publications/index.htm#business.




  62          ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                          DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 3T.1                                                                          Worksheet 3T.1: Preparing a Future
                                                                                          Vision (http://misadocuments.info/3T.
                                                                                          1FutureVision.pdf)
PREPARING A FUTURE VISION
Choose a timeframe of one, five, 10 years or more. Next, develop a description of your business and personal future. What will
your farm or business look like during transition and after certification? How about the next five or 10 years? Or, if you prefer,
write a story or draw a map. Dream a little!
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                                                                                                                      3
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________                                TASK 3
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________



                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS     63
                                                                                                    DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 3T.2                                                                         Worksheet 3T.2: Farm Business Mission
                                                                                                    Statement (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                                    info/3T.2MissionStatement.pdf)
           FARM BUSINESS MISSION STATEMENT
           Use the questions below to begin sketching a brief mission statement that communicates your values, management philosophy
           and future vision. Have each member of your planning team complete this worksheet, then share your statements and discuss
           any similarities and differences. Going through this process as a team will generate more ideas and will result in a common mission
           statement that all planning team members support. Remember to write your final statement in present tense and keep it positive.


           What business are we in? What products or services do we provide?
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




 3
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

TASK 3
           I would like our business to be known for the following in the future (e.g., What purpose? What qualities?):
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Our business mission statement will communicate to (lenders? customers?):
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Based on the answers above, our mission statement is:
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




  64     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                             DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 3T.3                                                                             Worksheet 3T.3: Goals
                                                                                             (http://misadocuments.info/
                                                                                             3T.3Goals.pdf)
GOALS
Use the space below to record your short-, intermediate-, and long-term goals. These can be personal as well as business goals.
We recommend that each person on your planning team completes this worksheet. When finished, discuss and prioritize goals
with your planning team members. You might begin by identifying goals that you all share. In the space provided, list your top
three to five goals by priority.


Short-term goals (the next three years):
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                                                                                                                    3
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

                                                                                                                                   TASK 3
Intermediate goals (four to five years):
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


Long-term goals (beyond five years):
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


Priorities (top three to five goals):
1. ____________________________________________________________________________________________________
2.____________________________________________________________________________________________________
3.____________________________________________________________________________________________________
4.____________________________________________________________________________________________________
5. ____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    65
                                      PLANNING TASK FOUR:
  LOOK FOR THESE
  STORY PANEL ICONS                   Strategic Planning and
            A cow represents
            excerpts from
  Minnesota dairy farmers
                                      Evaluation
                                     I
  Nate and Angie Walter.
                                        n this task, you will create business strategies for transitioning and certifying your
           A corn stalk                 farm. Strategies form the core of your business plan and address questions about
           represents excerpts          how you will get from here (pre-transition) to there (organic certification). We will
  from Minnesota grain                provide strategy examples throughout this planning task, but remember that the strat-
  producers Bryan and                 egies you develop should be unique to your own resources, goals and mission.
  Theresa Kerkaert.
                                      Planning Task Four addresses the following sections of your business plan:
          A jar of pickles
          represents excerpts         Operations
  from New Jersey processor                •   Production opportunities
  Vitaly Brukhman.                         •   Operations strategy
                                           •   Licenses and organic certification
                                           •   Resource needs and acquisition
                                           •   Operations risk management




 4
TASK 4                                Marketing
                                           •
                                           •
                                           •
                                               Marketing opportunities
                                               Marketing strategy
                                               Licenses and organic certification
                                           •   Marketing risk management

                                      Human Resources
                                           •   Human resource opportunities
                                           •   Planning and management team
                                           •   Licenses and safety regulations
                                           •   Human resource strategy
                                           •   Human resource risk management

                                      Finances
                                           •   Financial opportunities
                                           •   Financial strategy
                                           •   Financial projections
                                           •   Capital requests
                                           •   Financial risk management

                                      You may find that as you complete research and develop strategies for one section of your
                                      plan, marketing for example, it may impact or necessitate changes to strategies in other
                                      sections of the plan, for example operations. Strategy development is an iterative process
                                      calling for you to revisit and refine as you go. See Figure 4T.1: Strategy Development
                                      Process.



  66          ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
FIGURE 4T.1: STRATEGY DEVELOPMENT PROCESS


                                                             OPERATIONS
                                                             STRATEGIES


              FINANCE                                                                                           MARKETING
             STRATEGIES                                                                                         STRATEGIES



                                                         HUMAN RESOURCE
                                                           STRATEGIES


Strategy development is an iterative process, where decisions in one area can cause you to revisit other areas. (Gigi DiGiacomo)



OPERATIONS
We suggest that you begin this planning task by developing one or two big picture, or
whole-farm, strategies. Whole-farm strategies serve as a good reminder of how you intend
to accomplish goals and can be used as a starting point from which to generate specific op-




                                                                                                                                                  4
erations, marketing, human resource and finance strategies. They also serve as a commu-
nicator for your business overview in the written plan—describing how and when you will
transition as well as your rationale for doing so. Use Worksheet 4T.1: Whole-Farm                                                                TASK 4
Strategies to record your whole-farm strategy. Examples of whole-farm strategies are
provided in the story panels.



   WHOLE-FARM STRATEGY
   Gradually transition land, then transition cows in third year. Strategy Rationale:
   Work through organic learning curve, supply feed needs from farm and gradually
   identify management opportunities for son.


   Purchase organic vegetables for processing into naturally fermented, ethnic products
   targeted at Russian-speaking communities while transitioning land and developing
   production capacity. Strategy Rationale: Develop recipes and markets using purchased
   inputs while learning to grow my own organic vegetables for processing.




OPERATIONS - Production Opportunities
It is important to identify production opportunities, as they can steer your strategy decisions
and help convince partners and investors that your idea is grounded in real prospects.

Brainstorm short- and long-term production opportunities that may be unique to your
operation or are characteristic of changes in the agriculture sector as a whole. The most
compelling opportunities will be those that are unique to your farm business. Some of the



                                                           ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    67
                                    OPERATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
                                    My neighbor has offered to sell me organic feed during transition at a discounted
                                    price. This will allow me to meet livestock feed needs while showing a positive
                                    cash flow. I will have to repay my neighbor for the difference between the discounted rate and going
                                    organic rate once I am certified.


                                    This plan focuses on the opportunity to gain stable, continuous access to land in 2016
                                    through a five-year lease with a right of first refusal to purchase the land at the end
                                    of the lease. We assume the land we rent will have been in conventional production
                                    through 2015 and so will need to be transitioned.


                                    BJF has many production opportunities in the coming year. These include the short-term
                                    use of Rutgers Commercial Kitchen lab to experiment with recipes and processing; use of
                                    one neighbor’s greenhouse to start seedlings; and rental of two acres of another neigh-
                                    bor’s certifiable land. A longer-term production opportunity is the expansion of BJF to
                                    include 30 acres of nearby land that is expected to come up for sale within the next few years, if
                                    needed.



                                 opportunities recorded by farmers participating in the Tools for Organic Transition Project




 4
                                 included the option of renting certified land from a neighbor, the ability to grow a partic-
TASK 4                           ular commodity due to soil type and the availability of a certified dairy herd. Additional
                                 examples of operational opportunities are depicted in the story panels.

                                 Space is provided on Worksheet 4T.2: Operations Strategy Summary to draft con-
                                 cise, positive statements describing production opportunities. Support any opportunities
                                 with research and written commitments if possible.



                                 OPERATIONS - Operations Strategy
                                 You have dreamed about the future, outlined goals, inventoried resources and explored
                                 opportunities associated with going organic. Now, it is time to develop your operations
                                 strategy; to identify how you will make it all happen. Your operations strategy should brief-
                                 ly address the following items (many of which can be used for your OSP or OSPH):
                                      1. Crop and livestock production activities
                                      2. Value-added processing
                                      3. Land, facilities, equipment and other input needs
                                      4. Feed requirements
                                      5. Production estimates
                                      6. Inventory management and quality control
                                 Begin your operations strategy development by reviewing the basics of organic production
                                 management. See Text Box IT.1: The National Organic Program and Certification Basics
                                 on page 12. If you are still feeling a bit uncertain about what the organic transition might
                                 mean for you, check out the Rodale Institute’s online Organic Transition Course (http://
                                 rodaleinstitute.org/farm/organic-transition-course/) or ATTRA’s organic farming website
                                 (https://attra.ncat.org/organic.html) to learn more about production basics.



  68     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
  OPERATIONS STRATEGY
  This plan assumes that in 2015 we will initiate transition on 82 acres currently under
  conventional production and rent an additional 20 acres of adjacent land coming out
  of CRP that can be certified immediately. In 2016 we will rent a farm with 480 acres of tillable land
  that has been under conventional management.


Once you are ready, brainstorm short-term (transition, the first three years) and long-term
(post-certification, years four and five) operations and processing strategies.

A common strategy is to run a split operation in which a portion of the farm or processing
is managed organically and the remainder is managed conventionally. Some farmers and
educators advocate initially transitioning only a small amount of farm acreage—that with
the best soil quality, moisture levels and pest control—while managing the remainder of
the farm conventionally. Once the initial parcel of land is certified and market premiums
are available, then you would transition the remainder of your farmland.5 This strategy has
benefits, such as the ability to learn as you go on limited acreage. However, this strategy
also will require that you invest time and, sometimes, money in services and equipment to
prevent commingling and contamination of crops and products at all stages, from planting
to the final sale.

Or, like the Kerkaerts, your plan might include transitioning land under long-term lease as




                                                                                                                                       4
you build skills and assets before purchasing your own land that you will certify. See their
operations strategy in the story panel.                                                                                              TASK 4
Processors, too, often use a split-operation strategy. They will dedicate one day per week or
the first processing run of the day to certified organic products. They then process several
runs or batches as conventional, and clean out all equipment before switching to the next
organic run.

Another management strategy is to transition everything at once—all of your land, live-
stock or processing. This “all in” strategy can make planning, management and record-
keeping simpler. The drawback to this strategy, however, is that it exposes you to greater
yield and price risk by forcing you to experiment with everything at once.

Record your operations strategy ideas on Worksheet 4T.2: Operations Strategy
Summary in the strategy description section at the top of the worksheet. You will com-
plete the remainder of the worksheet later.

Regardless of whether you transition all or some of your land, carefully consider the timing
of planned operations. For example, if you currently produce field crops or fruits and veg-
etables, time your input applications (seed, pesticide and fertilizer) so that it is possible to
certify in the third year just before harvest. This will allow you to capture market premi-
ums in the third year of transition rather than having to wait until your fourth-year har-                  5 Menalled, F., C. Jones, D.
vest. Likewise, if you are a livestock producer with field crops, consider transitioning your                 Bushena, and P. Miller. March
cropland for two years before beginning to transition animals. This will allow you to certify                 2012. From Conventional to
                                                                                                              Organic Cropping: What to
land and animals simultaneously. If you were to transition animals first, before your land
                                                                                                              Expect During the Transition
was certified, you would be required to purchase expensive organic feed and obtain access
                                                                                                              Years. Montana State Universi-
to certified pasture. See Figure 4T.2: National Organic Program Livestock Standards for                       ty Extension. http://msuexten-
more information about feed requirements.                                                                     sion.org/store.



                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS       69
                                       FIGURE 4T.2: NATIONAL ORGANIC PROGRAM LIVESTOCK STANDARDS

                                       National Organic Program Livestock Standards (NOP § 205.237 and § 205.240)
                                       Ruminant animals must be grazed throughout the entire grazing season for the geographical region, which
                                       shall be not less than 120 days per calendar year. Due to weather, season, and/or climate, the grazing season
                                       may or may not be continuous. … All ruminants under the organic system plan [must be provided] with an
   CROP ROTATION
                                       average of not less than 30 percent of their dry matter intake from grazing throughout the grazing season.
   STRATEGY
   Our standard rotation is
   blue corn followed by oats
   under-seeded with alfalfa,          See the Resources section for additional strategy ideas or to learn more about NOP man-
   followed by alfalfa. In some        agement requirements; it includes listings for print information, online transition courses
   situations we substitute            and certifiers (see Accredited Certifying Agents). Check out the Organic Trade Associa-
   wheat or flax for oats, and         tion’s Regional Guide. It is searchable by location and lists events, organizations, publica-
   we have the flexibility to          tions and people with expertise on organic management. Field days, conferences and other
   extend our rotation to four         events are excellent opportunities to learn about strategies that other farmers are using
   years if the alfalfa is in good     and have found successful.
   condition.
                                       Crop and Livestock Activities
                                       After settling on one or more general production strategies, brainstorm crop and livestock
                                       enterprises to include in your rotation as well as any conditions that might affect rotation
                                       plans (such as livestock feed requirements). Be sure to review the NOP regulations on crop




 4
                                       rotation presented in Figure 4T.3: National Organic Program Crop Rotation Standards
                                       and check out the story panel to see the Kerkaerts’ crop rotation strategy. When ready,
TASK 4                                 record your crop production plans for transition and certification on Worksheet 4T.3:
                                       Crop and Livestock Enterprises.

                                       Next, using the list of potential enterprises, create multi-year field maps reflecting crop
                                       rotations or grazing schedules. This exercise is similar to the one you did in Planning Task
                                       Two: Current Situation, only now you are mapping the future. Use Worksheet 4T.4:
                                       Transitional Farm Map or a blank piece of paper to create a map for each year in your
                                       rotation, if you are growing crops. For transitional cropping maps, depict buffers, conser-
                                       vation acreage, permanent vegetation, orchards, woodlands and buildings. If your opera-
                                       tion includes livestock, note your fencing, watering lines, housing and grazing schedules.
                                       You should also include field notes about soil types as well as pest, weed and disease man-
                                       agement practices, which you can base on soil tests and the inventory work that you did in
                                       Planning Task Two: Current Situation. Also, include any expected changes in herd size and



                                       FIGURE 4T.3: NATIONAL ORGANIC PROGRAM CROP ROTATION STANDARDS

                                       National Organic Program Crop Rotation Practice Standards (§ 205.205)
                                       The producer must implement a crop rotation including but not limited to sod, cover crops, green
                                       manure crops and catch crops that provide the following functions that are applicable to the operation:
                                       (a) Maintain or improve soil organic matter content;
                                       (b) Provide for pest management in annual and perennial crops;
                                       (c) Manage deficient or excess plant nutrients; and
                                       (d) Provide erosion control.




  70           ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
FIGURE 4T.4: TRANSITION AND CERTIFICATION FARM MAPS, WALTER, 2011-2014
                  Transition Year 1, 2011                                                                                 Transition Year 2, 2012
                                                                   Buffer                                                                                              Buffer



                                                                     Corn                                                                                                 Hay
                                                                              Hay                                                                                                 Hay
  All fields = clay loam.                                                              Hay                    All fields = clay loam.                                                     Hay
  CEC = 40                                      Hay        Hay                                                CEC = 40                                Hay       Corn
                                                                   Corn                                                                                                Corn
                                                                            Pasture                                                                                             Pasture

                                                                   Pasture                                                                                              Pasture




                                                Buffer                                                                                                 Buffer
                                    Pasture                                                                                                 Pasture
        Hay       Corn       Hay                                                    Farmstead                    Hay        Hay      Hay                                                Farmstead




                 Transition Year 2, 2013                                                                                 Certified Organic, 2014
                                                                    Buffer                                                                                             Buffer



                                                                      Hay                                                                                                Hay
                                                                               Hay                                                                                                Hay
   All fields = clay loam.                                                              Hay                All fields = clay loam.                                                        Corn
   CEC = 40                                      Corn       Corn                                           CEC = 40                                   Corn      Hay
                                                                    Hay                                                                                                Hay
                                                                             Pasture                                                                                           Pasture

                                                                    Pasture                                                                                            Pasture




                                                  Buffer                                                                                              Buffer
                                      Pasture                                                                                              Pasture
        Corn       Hay        Hay                                                    Farmstead                  Corn       Hay       Hay                                                Farmstead




pasture management. If you are growing
fruits and vegetables that allow for succes-
                                                                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                                                                                                                                    TASK 4


sion planting, we suggest that you create
seasonal rather than yearly maps. All of
the information that you record here can
be used in your OSP. Look at Figure 4T.4:
Transition and Certification Farm Maps,
Walter, 2011-2014 to see how the Walter
family plotted their crop rotation when
planning their transition.

Processed Products and Services
If you plan to offer services or add value
through any type of processing (see Text
Box 4T.1: Processing Defined for the
USDA’s definition of processing), you have
more planning and mapping to do!

For example, processed products that are
intended for sale as certified organic must
be handled in a certified facility (NOP §
205.100 and § 205.101) and are subject
to packaging and labeling requirements



                                                                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS                    71
                                    TEXT BOX 4T.1

                                    PROCESSING DEFINED
                                    Processing is defined by the USDA as: cooking, baking, curing, heating, drying, mixing, grinding,
                                    churning, separating, extracting, slaughtering, cutting, fermenting, distilling, eviscerating, preserving,
                                    dehydrating, freezing, chilling or otherwise manufacturing, and includes packaging, canning, jarring or
                                    otherwise enclosing food in a container.
                                    Source: Do I Need To Be Certified Organic? June 2012. National Organic Program, Agricultural
                                    Marketing Service, USDA.



                                 (NOP §§ 205.300-305 and §§ 205.605-606). We will get you started here, but strongly rec-
                                 ommend reading the Guide for Organic Processors by Pamela Coleman. This publication,
                                 listed in the Resources section, is a great place to begin your strategy research if you plan
                                 to process and certify organic.

                                 One of the first things you will need to consider when developing a processing strategy
                                 is how you will process. Use Worksheet 4T.5: Organic Processing Map to create a
                                 processing flow chart and facility map. These are much like field maps in that they visually
                                 describe where you will process and how you will process. Flow charts and facility maps




 4
                                 are required for an OSPH and typically include building dimensions, processing stations


TASK 4
                                  FIGURE 4T.5: BJF FLOW CHART




                                      Harvest herbs


                                           Store
                                       refrigerated


                                      Wash, chop,                                    Ferment              Sanitize jars
                                                                  Mix                at room                                          Store
                                         scale                                                            and package
                                                              ingredients          temperature                                    refrigerated
                                      ingredients                                                           pickles


                                     Store at room
                                      temperature                                                                               Deliver pickles
                                                                                                                                 to retailer or
                                                                                                                                direct to end
                                                                                                                                      user
                                        Receive
                                    cucumbers and
                                    other purchased
                                      ingredients




  72     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
  PROCESSED PRODUCTS
  BJF will eventually process and sell a range of naturally fermented foods and drinks as well
  as jams, sauces, dressings and frozen soups. We will begin with the following naturally
  fermented products:
       1. Pickles                      5. Kombucha
       2. Sauerkraut                   6. Ginger ale
       3. Tomatoes                     7. Pickle juice
       4. Kvass                        8. Stinging nettle juice

  All of these products can be processed using much of the same inputs, equipment and facilities, so it
  will be fairly easy to add any of the above foods and drinks to the BJF product line as business grows.



(e.g., washing, cutting, cooking, packing, etc.), equipment, bathroom(s), and storage and
distribution areas. See the BJF flow chart in Figure 4T.5: BJF Flow Chart for an example
and note that it is a bit rudimentary. Like BJF owner Vitaly Brukhman, you can add more
detail as you continue to explore processing strategies.

Next, use Worksheet 4T.6: Processed Products and Services to list products and
services that you would like to produce and certify. Use the same worksheet to describe




                                                                                                                                         4
the type of processing required for each value-added product or service (e.g., dehydration,
fermentation, baking). If known, record the location of processing facilities and options for
establishing processing and service-related infrastructure on the farm. For an example, see                                             TASK 4
Vitaly Brukhman’s story panel on processed products.

Land, Facilities, Equipment and Inputs
When beginning to transition, 72 percent of farmers purchased new equipment, 28
percent hired custom service providers and 24 percent purchased new land, according to
surveys from the Tools for Organic Transition Project.6

Consider how your overall transition strategy (e.g., split-crop operation versus whole-
farm transition) and specific management plans will affect your need for land, facilities,
equipment, breeding livestock, storage and production inputs. Begin by drafting a list of
short-term (transition) and long-term (post-certification) needs related to your facilities,
equipment and inputs. Space is provided for this on Worksheet 4T.3: Crop and Live-
stock Enterprises and Worksheet 4T.6: Processed Products and Services. Then,
compare this list to your current inventory of available resources to identify gaps.

Once you have a good feel for short- and long-term resource gaps, begin identifying strat-
egies for how you will fill land, facility, equipment and input needs. These strategies might
include purchasing new or used equipment, contracting services or developing strategic
partnerships to access feed, equipment or processing facilities.

Strategic partners are important to any business—they may allow you to take advantage                        6 Tools for Transition Proj-
of opportunities, inform a new idea or finance needed investments. See the story panel on                      ect. Tools for Transition:
                                                                                                               Intake Survey Results.
strategic partners from the Kerkaerts’ business plan.
                                                                                                               Updated 2012. eOrganic.
                                                                                                               http://eorganic.info/tools-
                                                                                                               fortransition/reports.



                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS            73
                                    STRATEGIC PARTNERS
                                    We formed an alliance with an established organic farmer who supplied equipment in
                                    exchange for manure spreading. (We own a manure hauling/spreading business.) This
                                    strategic alliance allowed us to experiment with organic transition without having to make substan-
                                    tial investments in new equipment until we were ready.


                                 Reflect on your operations strategy. Does it make sense to fill any equipment gaps through
                                 strategic alliances? What are the advantages and disadvantages of entering into a formal
                                 or informal agreement? Would it make more sense to finance inputs, equipment and other
                                 capital assets? We discuss capital financing in the Finances strategy section.

                                 If you remain uncertain about how best to address resource needs, see pages 138-142 in the
                                 Guide to identify additional strategy alternatives for accessing land, equipment and inputs.
                                 All of the strategies mentioned are viable options when transitioning. One possible exception
                                 concerns land rental. Renting and transitioning acreage can be risky unless you are able to
                                 sign longer-term leases where returns on investments can eventually be captured.

                                 Use Worksheet 4T.2: Operations Strategy Summary to document land, facility,
                                 equipment, breeding livestock and input needs, and acquisition strategies. As you do so, be
                                 sure to check that inputs are approved by the NOP. The Organic Materials Review Institute




 4
                                 (OMRI) maintains a comprehensive directory of materials and allowable inputs for organic
                                 production that are compatible with the NOP National List of Allowed and Prohibited
TASK 4                           Substances. The Non-GMO Sourcebook is another excellent resource listing suppliers of
                                 non-GMO products and services that are particularly helpful during transition. See the
                                 Resources section for more on the OMRI Products List and the Non-GMO Sourcebook.

                                 Inventory Management and Quality Control
                                 Certification and, ultimately, income will be determined by how well you manage invento-
                                 ry and control quality to protect the organic integrity of your crop, livestock and processed
                                 products. Inventory management begins in the field and ends when products are loaded on
                                 a truck for delivery to buyers.

                                 As with conventional crop and livestock products, you need to have a plan for storing
                                 products and protecting quality. Storage containers, packaging materials and pest control
                                 practices for transitional and organic products are regulated by NOP, so be sure to check
                                 the rules for allowable materials and practices (NOP § 205.271 and § 205.272).

                                 Additionally, if marketing a specialty transitional crop where premiums are dependent on
                                 the load being “clean” (GMO-free) or if maintaining a split operation after certification,
                                 you will need to take extra steps to safeguard product quality. You will need to prevent
                                 commingling with non-organic (or GMO) products, protect organic products from coming
                                 into contact with prohibited substances, and create the traceable audit trail required by
                                 certifiers and many buyers. We discuss audit trails in the Human Resource strategy section
                                 under recordkeeping.

                                 After becoming certified, if you are maintaining a split operation and expect to store crop
                                 and livestock products, it is common to dedicate separate equipment and storage for con-
                                 ventional, transitional and organic use. As explained by Mary-Howell Martens of Lakev-



  74     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
iew Organic Grain in New York: “If you are not using dedicated organic harvesting and
handling equipment, your certifier will expect you to maintain a cleanout log, showing that
equipment was thoroughly cleaned and purged of conventional grain before any organic
grain was introduced.”7

These same rules apply when co-packing, renting processing equipment and using custom
hire services for combining, cleaning, trucking and storing grain. Carolyn Lane, vice pres-
ident of Nature’s Organic Grist in Minnesota, warns that custom service providers often
do not take responsibility for proper cleanout when moving from conventional to organic
operations. Therefore, she suggests working with a trusted service operator or hiring a
certified organic farmer to provide needed services.

For more information about how to maintain product quality and prevent commingling,
check out the NOP guidance sheets Commingling and Contamination Prevention in
Organic Production and Handling and Can GMOs Be Used in Organic Products?. Both
articles are listed in the Resources section.

Production Estimates
Next, use Worksheet 4T.7: Production Estimates, Crops and Worksheet 4T.8:
Production Estimates, Livestock to record your expected yields or livestock produc-
tion during the short-term transition period (the first three years) and during the long-
term, post-certification period (years four and five).




                                                                                                                                                                              4
Crop yield and livestock output estimates come from your own records and from published
research. If this is your first time transitioning, be aware that yields and output have been
shown to decline when making the switch to organic management, due primarily to an
                                                                                                                                                                          TASK 4
increase in weed populations. See Table 4T.1: Organic Yield Penalties for a look at yields
observed in seven studies comparing conventional and organic row crops.

TABLE 4T.1: ORGANIC YIELD PENALTIES

 Organic Yield Penalties from Selected Transition Studies, 1986-2008 (all values are percent)
                                                    Corn        Soybeans        Wheat      Hay/Alfalfa
 Delate and Cambardella                               8.2          0.4            —            —
 Porter et al. (No. 1)                                 9            19            —             8
 Porter et al. (No. 2)                                 7            16            —             0
 Creamer et al.                                       —             —             11.2         —
 Hanson et al.                                       28.9            0            23.1        22.2
 Dabbert and Madden                                   20            20            20           20
 McBride and Greene                                   —             34            —            —
                                                                                                                                                7 Martens, M. H. September
 Average                                             14.6          14.9           18.1        12.6                                                28, 2004. Smoothing the
 Source: Clark, S. and C. Alexander. February 2010. The Profitability of Transitioning to Organic Grain Crops in Indiana. Purdue Agricultural     Path to a Profitable Harvest
 Economics Report. Purdue University.
                                                                                                                                                  Home. Rodale Institute.
                                                                                                                                                  www.rodaleinstitute.org.
Panel A in Figure 4T.6: Conventional Versus Organic Enterprise Observations in Min-
                                                                                                                                                8 FINBIN Farm Financial
nesota, Corn and Figure 4T.7 Conventional Versus Organic Enterprise Observations in
                                                                                                                                                  Database. Center for Farm
Minnesota, Dairy depict more recent corn yield and dairy productivity data as reported by                                                         Financial Management,
Minnesota farmers and their farm business management instructors.8 This data suggests                                                             University of Minnesota.
more substantial yield penalties than those reported in Table 4T.1: Organic Yield Penal-                                                          www.finbin.umn.edu.



                                                            ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS                               75
                                  FIGURE 4T.6: CONVENTIONAL VERSUS ORGANIC ENTERPRISE OBSERVATIONS IN MINNESOTA, CORN

                                                                                            Panel A: Average Yields
                                                                    200

                                                                      150


                                                 bushels per acre
                                                                      100
         Conventional
                                                                            50
         Organic
                                                                             0
                                                                                  2009   2010       2011         2012            2013

                                                                                            Panel B: Average Prices
                                                                            16

                                                                            12


                                                             $ per bushel
                                                                             8

                                                                             4




 4
                                                                             0
                                                                                  2009   2010       2011          2012           2013

TASK 4                                                                                     Panel C: Expenses per Acre
                                                                       800

                                                                       600


                                                     $ per acre
                                                                       400

                                                                        200

                                                                             0
                                                                                  2009   2010        2011         2012           2013

                                                                                          Panel D: Net Return per Acre
                                                                    1,200

                                                                        900


                                                       $ per acre
                                                                        600

                                                                            300

                                                                             0
                                                                                  2009   2010        2011         2012            2013


                                  Source: FINBIN Database. Center for Farm Financial Management. www.cfffm.umn.edu. Data come from Minnesota farms enrolled in the
                                  Farm Business Management Education Program. Individual farms enrolled in the program (observations) vary each year.




  76      ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
FIGURE 4T.7: CONVENTIONAL VERSUS ORGANIC ENTERPRISE OBSERVATIONS IN MINNESOTA, DAIRY

                                                                    Panel A: Dairy Production
                               25,000




      pounds of milk per cow
                               20,000

                               15,000

                               10,000                                                                                                                   Conventional
                                    5,000                                                                                                               Organic
                                                       0
                                                            2009   2010        2011        2012        2013

                                                                   Panel B: Milk Prices Received
                                                      40




                               $ per hundred weight
                                                      30

                                                      20

                                                       10




                                                                                                                                                                        4
                                                       0
                                                            2009   2010        2011         2012       2013

                                                                     Panel C: Expenses per Cow
                                                                                                                                                                       TASK 4
                                          5,000

                                          4,000


                   $ per cow
                                          3,000

                                          2,000

                                              1,000

                                                        0
                                                            2009   2010         2011        2012        2013

                                                                   Panel D: Net Return per Cow
                                                      800
                                                      600
                                                      400

                  $ per cow
                                                      200
                                                       0
                                                 -200
                                                -400
                                                            2009   2010         2011        2012        2013


Source: FINBIN Database. Center for Farm Financial Management. www.cfffm.umn.edu. Data come from Minnesota farms enrolled in the
Farm Business Management Education Program. Individual farms enrolled in the program (observations) vary each year.



                                                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS        77
                                       ties. Organic corn yields, for example, averaged 53-72 percent of conventional corn yields
                                       during 2009-2013. Cow productivity compared similarly. Organic milk production per cow
                                       measured 55-60 percent of conventional milk production during 2009-2013.

                                       However, research and data from side-by-side, long-term field trials at the Minnesota
                                       Southwest Research and Experiment Station in Lamberton, Minn., suggest that four-year
                                       organic rotations for corn and soybeans can compete with conventional, two-year rotations
                                       on a yield basis.9

                                       We have listed a few yield-related data sources in the Resources section. If you do not find
                                       what you are looking for there, we suggest talking with farmers in your area or visiting with a
                                       certifier to explore output expectations for transitional and organic crop yields and livestock
                                       performance for your county. Experienced farmers may be able to suggest reasonable yield
                                       penalty or transition effect multipliers for your own crop or animal output histories.10

                                       If processing, we suggest doing some marketing homework first. Unlike bulk commodities,
                                       which have a guaranteed market in the conventional sector if you are unable to market or-
                                       ganically, processed products—organic or conventional—require greater investments, car-
                                       ry more regulatory risk and may not have an alternative market outlet. It is a good idea to
                                       talk with buyers (described in the Marketing section of Planning Task Four) to determine
                                       sales before finalizing processing production estimates. When ready, use Worksheet
                                       4T.9: Production Estimates, Processed Products to record the volume of product
                                       that you expect to process.




 4
TASK 4
                                       Your production estimates for processed products will likely change over time as you
                                       develop recipes, source ingredients and refine processing methods. It is not uncommon to
                                       begin by processing conventionally—for practice, so to speak—before applying for organic
                                       handling certification. See ATTRA’s Guide for Organic Processors for more ideas on how
                                       best to develop a plan for processing (listed in the Resources section).



                                       OPERATIONS - Licenses and Organic Certification
  9 Coulter, J. A., T. A. Del-         Most farmers are familiar with county, state and federal licenses and permits required for
    bridge., R. P. King, D. L. Al-     conventional management (e.g., those related to buildings, waste handling and disposal,
    len, and C. C. Sheaffer. June      health and safety, processing, etc.). Many of these same rules and regulations will apply
    13, 2014. Productivity, Eco-
                                       when going organic. Additionally, however, there are a host of license and permit obligations
    nomics, and Soil Quality in
    the Minnesota Variable-in-         that you should be aware of as a transitioning organic producer or processor. These are out-
    put Cropping Systems Trial.        lined in the NOP standards under NOP §§ 205.202-205.240 (see the Resources section).
    Proceedings from the USDA
    Organic Farming Systems            NOP standards apply to all farmers, ranchers, processors and food business owners who
    Research Conference. www.          use the organic claim, but certification is only required if you do one of the following:
    crops.org/publications/cm.
                                            • sell more than $5,000 of organic products annually (gross sales)
  10 Delbridge, T. A., G. DiGiaco-
     mo, and R. P. King. January            • handle more than $5,000 worth of bulk, unpackaged organic products (gross sales)
     10, 2015. Research Findings:           • process more than $5,000 worth of organic products (unless all products contain
     Who’s Transitioning and
                                              less than 70 percent organic ingredients)
     How in MN. Presentation
     at the Minnesota Organic               • handle (e.g., package) and sell organic products online (but not in stores) or
     Conference in St. Cloud,
                                              transport organic products
     Minn. http://eorganic.info/
     toolsfortransition/reports.




  78           ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
For more information about whether you should certify or need to develop an OSP, check
out the USDA fact sheet Do I Need to Be Certified?, listed in the Resources section. Moreover,
if you plan to process raw products, you will need to create an OSPH that describes your:
    •   handling
    •   ingredient purchases
    •   transportation of raw ingredients
    •   storage
    •   cleaning and sanitation
    •   processing flow chart and facility map
    •   pest management
    •   sales
    •   recordkeeping

Explore certifier options now if you have not already done so. See page 18 in the Intro-
duction for a discussion of certification agencies. Certification applications typically are
mailed at the beginning of your third year of transition; however, it is possible to request a
certification packet or meet with a certifier before beginning transition, during transition
or prior to processing. Reviewing your operations strategies with a certifier or organic
consultant for compliance with NOP rules will help you determine any records, licenses or
permits that you may need when implementing your strategic plan.

If early certifier meetings are unavailable or are cost prohibitive, consider attending
conferences, webinars and field days to learn more about NOP compliance. The Organic




                                                                                                                                   4
Trade Association’s Regional Guide (listed in the Resources section) chronicles events by
location. Additionally, be sure to check out the series of ATTRA publications that provide
documentation forms:                                                                                                             TASK 4
    •   Organic Field Crops Documentation Forms
    •   Organic Livestock Documentation Forms
    •   Organic Market Farm Documentation Forms
    •   Organic Orchard, Vineyard, and Berry Crop Documentation Forms
    •   Guide for Organic Processors

These ATTRA publications, as well as others, are listed in the Resources section.

Use Worksheet 4T.10: Licenses and Certification to document those regulations,
licenses and certification standards that will apply to your business, your strategy for
meeting them, and any outstanding questions that require follow up.



OPERATIONS - Risk Management
Take time now to briefly reflect on your overall production system plans, strategies for ob-
taining land, equipment and inputs, and your inventory management and quality control
strategy. What type of risks will you face? Which of these risks are unconnected to your               11 Moncada, K. M., M. P. Brakke,
transition (e.g., weather) and which risks are unique to organic transition and certification             and C. M. Fernholz. 2010.
(e.g., drift of prohibited substances, change in farm program and crop insurance benefits)?               Transitioning. In Tools for
                                                                                                          Managing Pest and Environ-
According to Tools for Managing Pest and Environmental Risks to Organic Crops in the                      mental Risks to Organic Crops
Upper Midwest, it is commonly accepted that, “Organic agriculture is inherently riskier                   in the Upper Midwest, ed. K.
than conventional agriculture because of the complexity of dealing with crop management                   M. Moncada and C. C. Sheaffer.
                                                                                                          University of Minnesota. www.
issues such as fertility, weed control and pest control. These challenges are especially evi-
                                                                                                          organicriskmanagement.umn.
dent during transitioning from conventional to organic.”11                                                edu.



                                        ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS         79
                                       Talk with certified organic farmers, Extension educators, crop insurance agents and other
                                       specialists to explore transition-related risks, particularly if you are new to farming or or-
                                       ganic management. Once you have a good feel for potential risks, use Worksheet 4T.11:
                                       Operations Risk Management to brainstorm strategies that can help you prevent or
                                       mitigate them.

                                       The relationships that you develop with representatives of accredited certifying agencies
                                       (ACAs), Extension agencies, conservation district offices and regional organic or sustain-
                                       able farming associations will become valuable risk management strategies in themselves.
                                       For example, agency and association representatives can help you determine:
                                           •   what to do if you experience chemical drift
                                           •   how to address livestock illness
                                           •   where to go for approved input sources
                                           •   how to obtain organic cost-share
                                           •   what type of records are needed for certification

                                       As an organic farmer, your risk-fighting strategies will look different from those of a
                                       conventional producer. You will rely on rotation, tillage alternatives and varietal or breed
                                       selection rather than pesticides, herbicides and antibiotics.

                                       You may also consider using multi-peril crop insurance, available for transitioning and
                                       certified crops. USDA’s Risk Management Agency (RMA), responsible for establishing
                                       insurance guidelines, revised organic-friendly, multi-peril insurance policies in April 2014.




 4
                                       The revised policies provide coverage for:
         Chemical drift is a risk
                                           • certified organic acreage
TASK 4   management issue unique
         to organic farming, and           • transitional acreage
         one you may need to
         account for. (Jerry DeWitt)       • buffer zone acreage

                                                                Multi-peril coverage extends to basic weather-related damage
                                                                (e.g., drought, hail) as well as yield losses resulting from insect
                                                                damage, weeds and crop disease in the event that recognized
                                                                organic farming practices fail to protect against such problems.
                                                                In order to qualify for transitioning or organic coverage, you must
                                                                provide the insurance agent with a certificate or written documen-
                                                                tation indicating that an organic plan is in effect. We recommend
                                                                meeting with your insurance agent and certifier prior to beginning
                                                                transition so that coverage options and required documentation
                                                                can be reviewed. Current transitional and organic insurance
                                                                guidelines are outlined in the RMA Program Aid publication No.
                                                                1912, Organic Farming Practices (see the Resources section).

                                                                If you plan to process, we strongly suggest that you explore food
                                                                safety regulations by contacting your state department of agricul-
                                                                ture, and adopt liability insurance. We do not discuss food safety
                                                                regulations in great detail here because they are complex, evolving
                                                                and apply equally to all producers, both conventional and organic.
                                                                However, you should be aware that most buyers—conventional
                                                                and organic—require that on-farm processing facilities maintain
                                                                food safety plans, that farmers follow good handling practices
                                                                (GHP) as outlined by the Food and Drug Administration and
                                                                USDA, and farmers keep records related to previous land use,



  80     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
water tests, worker hygiene, herd health, wild animals, soil amendments and manure
applications, harvest sanitation, and crisis management. See Food Safety and Liability
Insurance: Emerging Issues for Farmers and Institutions as well as the On-Farm Food
Safety Project website, listed in the Resources section, for more information.

You might also consider developing what University of Minnesota scientist George Nelson
calls “exit strategies,” or action plans for abandoning your organic transition in the event
of a catastrophic crop loss, food-borne illness outbreak or the failure of other risk manage-
ment strategies. We label these “recovery strategies” on Worksheet 4T.11: Operations
Risk Management.



         OPERATIONS - DIG DEEPER
You should feel fairly comfortable with your transition strategy for operations before mov-
ing forward to explore marketing, human resources and finances. However, if you would
like to do a little more exploring to determine optimal production capacity, equipment
sizes and management practices, there are excellent resources available to help you do
so. Another option is to review pages 143-144 in the Guide (including Worksheet 4.16:
Estimating Output and Capacity) where you can explore the impact of different yield
and production output scenarios. If you are new to farming or still unsure about what to
include in your transitional rotation, do not worry too much about getting things just right
at this point. You can always return to your operations strategy after talking with buyers,




                                                                                                                              4
reviewing labor options and running a cash flow.

                                                                                                                             TASK 4
         OPERATIONS - PUT IT IN WRITING!
Head to the Operations section in AgPlan or to your business plan word document. Begin
documenting your transition strategy by listing production opportunities. Next, include a
description of your overall operations management strategy. If you are considering more
than one strategy, copy this worksheet and complete it for each strategy.

Describe changes in your current operation that will be necessary for your transition strategy
to be successful, specifically noting land, facilities, equipment and inputs that you may need
in the Resource Needs and Acquisition section. If you plan to process, include a flow chart
depicting product flow and processing methods, recipes, and a list of needed investments.
In other words, summarize information that will help a lender or investor understand your
plan. Next, complete the Licenses and Organic Certification section of your business plan
(there is space provided in AgPlan). Finally, outline potential risks and your risk manage-
ment strategy using information from your risk management worksheet. Space is provided
for this purpose in the AgPlan outline under Operations Risk Management.

Do not let this strategy summary get too long and do not spend much time polishing your
language, as you will likely return to it and make changes after you have explored market-
ing, human resource and finance strategies. If using a word processing program, you might
find it easiest to simply turn the information recorded on Worksheet 4T.2: Operations
Strategy Summary into relevant strategy statements for your business plan.

At this point, we also encourage you to take a step back and ask yourself: Is this new oper-
ations strategy worth pursuing further? In other words, have you encountered anything
unexpected when researching transition options that might change your mind? Are you



                                       ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    81
                                 better off sticking with your current management plans or does the transition strategy look
                                 promising? If your transition strategy compares favorably to your current management sit-
                                 uation, then move right on to marketing! However, if you are not entirely convinced, you
                                 might want to review your goals and explore alternative production strategies before going
                                 too much further with your proposed transition plan.



                                 MARKETING
                                 Marketing, more than other aspects of your farm business, will require you to develop a
                                 two-pronged strategy—one strategy for the three-year transition period that is needed for
                                 most farmland and another strategy that kicks in once your land and animals are certified.

                                 You have many marketing options, including sales to other farmers, forward contracting
                                 with processors, membership and sales through natural foods cooperatives, and direct
                                 sales to retailers and wholesalers. Regardless of which general strategy you adopt, you will
                                 need to make decisions about how to price, handle, label and distribute organic products
                                 in compliance with NOP regulations (§§ 205.300-205.311). We will discuss all of these
                                 topics in this section.



                                 MARKETING - Marketing Opportunities
                                 As you did in the Operations section, take some time now, preferably with planning team




 4
                                 members, to identify immediate (i.e., transitional) and longer-term (i.e., organic) market-
                                 ing opportunities. You might do this by talking with commodity buyers, visiting retailers
TASK 4                           or farmers’ markets, attending a trade show or searching the Internet. You can use the




                                    MARKETING OPPORTUNITIES
                                    Members of Organic Valley Cooperative receive a $2 per hundredweight premium
                                    for transitional milk and approximately $28 per hundredweight for organic milk.
                                    This member price is fairly steady and guaranteed for the volume of milk we can deliver. Marketing
                                    to Organic Valley Cooperative will provide us with a stable income and access to better prices than
                                    those afforded in the conventional market.


                                    I have been invited by the manager of the Princeton Farmers’ Market to sell naturally
                                    fermented products such as pickles, tomatoes and cabbage. This opportunity only
                                    applies to my fermented products—he is not interested in raw vegetables or herbs.
                                    The Princeton market is exclusive and currently has 23 vendors, only one of whom sells
                                    pickles that are processed using vinegar.


                                    Market trends have been consistently positive for organic crops compared to conven-
                                    tional crops. The demand for organic products has grown significantly over the past
                                    20 years, and it continues to grow at a double-digit rate. USDA reporting suggests
                                    that the conversion of land to organic production has slowed over the past few years,
                                    especially for the field crops we produce. We believe there will continue to be significant organic
                                    price premiums in the future as supply continues to lag behind demand.




  82     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
space provided on Worksheet 4T.12: Marketing Strategy
Summary to document general market trends that support
your future vision, goals and operations strategies.

Next, outline unique marketing opportunities. These might
relate to your proximity to urban areas—think direct marketing,
farm dinners, homesteading classes—or to livestock producers
in need of certified organic feed. Other examples of marketing
opportunities are depicted in the story panels. The possibilities
are endless. Keep in mind that the more unique the opportuni-
ty, the more promising it may be for your business.



MARKETING - Marketing Strategy
You are now ready to begin developing a marketing strategy for
your transitional and certified organic commodities, products
and services. Your marketing strategy should address:
    • products and services
    • buyers and sales
    • pricing
    • post-harvest handling, processing, packaging, labeling
                                                                                                            Farm dinners can be a
      and distribution                                                                                      strong marketing opportu-




                                                                                                                                          4
    • sales revenue                                                                                         nity when you go organic,
                                                                                                            especially if you are near
                                                                                                            an urban area. (Rachel
Products and Services                                                                                       Olsen Photography)
                                                                                                                                         TASK 4
Begin by first recalling what you will have available to market during transition based on
the rotation schedule and production estimates you developed on Worksheet 4T.7: Pro-
duction Estimates, Crops, Worksheet 4T.8: Production Estimates, Livestock and
Worksheet 4T.9: Production Estimates, Processed Products. It is always best to
research market demand prior to planting, but in this publication we assume that you will
develop your operations strategy and rotation schedule first. Next, identify the competitive
advantages—or unique characteristics—associated with each product or service.

Your business’ overall chances of success improve with competitive advantages. We
define a competitive advantage as anything that enables you to generate more sales and
earn a greater profit (e.g., by differentiating your product or producing at a lower cost
than competitors). Think about what type of competitive advantages your marketing and
operations strategies will generate. See the story panel on competitive advantages from
Vitaly Brukhman. Then, record your ideas on Worksheet 4T.12: Marketing Strategy




  COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGES
  There are 13 producers of fermented products who sell at BJF-targeted farmers’ markets
  and retail stores. All competitor products are either produced outside the state of New
  Jersey, are not certified organic and/or are not naturally fermented. There is no one in the BJF target
  market offering organically certified, naturally fermented, locally produced pickles, sauerkraut,
  tomatoes and specialty beverages. Nor is any one company specifically targeting these products to
  ethnic communities.




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS          83
                                        Summary and be sure to include these ideas in your business plan—lenders, investors
                                        and business stakeholders will pay close attention to this information.

                                        Buyers and Sales
                                        Organic markets operate quite differently from conventional markets, owing to reduced
                                        volume and price transparency. If you currently market conventional crops, for example,
                                        you may be used to selling on the spot to a local elevator post-harvest. You can still do this
                                        during transition, unless you are seeking a premium for non-GMO or transitional grains.
                                        (If interested in marketing transitional crops for a premium, contact buyers to find out
                                        which varieties they seek, their purchasing capacity and other sales criteria, such as writ-
                                        ten contract terms.)

                                        After becoming certified, however, you will need to identify buyers and explore alternative
                                        marketing strategies, such as direct sales to other farmers or forward contracting with a
                                        broker or organic handler (e.g., processor), since traditional cash markets do not exist for
                                        certified organic commodities. You may even want to consider niche markets for low-glu-
                                        ten grains, specialty beans, processed products, international exports (often requiring
                                        country-specific certification) and services.

                                        Written marketing contracts for both transitional and certified products can provide a
                                        greater sense of stability and allow for more accurate business planning.12 In fact, your
                                        lender may require a written contract as a guarantee of the going organic market price.




 4
                                        Nationally in 2007 (latest available data), 46 percent of all organic transactions were
                                        conducted using written contracts.13 Check out the Farmers’ Guide to Organic Contracts
TASK 4                                  (listed in the Resources section) even if you are already familiar with marketing contracts
                                        for traditional commodities. You will need to be aware of how contract terms can affect
                                        organic management practices and NOP compliance. See Text Box 4T.2: Checklist for
                                        Organic Contracts for questions to review when signing an organic contract.

                                        The bottom line is, once certified, you will have a bit more legwork to do to find a buyer
                                        and arrange the sale. You can use Worksheet 4T.12: Marketing Strategy Summary
                                        to document buyer requests, estimated purchasing capacity, market trends and your own
                                        competitive advantages. There are many opportunities in the organic marketplace! If, after
                                        talking with buyers, you decide to make adjustments to your short- or long-term rotation
                                        schedules and livestock numbers, capture those changes on Worksheet 4T.7: Produc-
                                        tion Estimates, Crops; Worksheet 4T.8: Production Estimates, Livestock; and
                                        Worksheet 4T.9: Production Estimates, Processed Products.
  12 Heyman, A. N. August 2012.
     Farmers’ Guide to Organic
     Contracts. Farmers’ Legal          Pricing
     Action Group. www.flaginc.         Your pricing strategy, like your overall marketing strategy, will likely be different during
     org/publication/farm-
                                        the short-term transition (the first three years) and upon certification (the fourth and fifth
     ers-guide-to-organic-contracts.
                                        years). During transition you will be able to market products conventionally, accepting
  13 Dimitri, C., L. Oberholtzer, and   bulk commodity prices. You also may have the option of pursuing modest premiums for
     M. Wittenberger. December          what buyers call “identity preserved” or specialty products that include, but are not limited
     2010. The Role of Contracts
                                        to, grass-fed and humanely raised for livestock, non-GMO, integrated pest management
     in the Organic Supply Chain:
     2004 and 2007. USDA - Eco-
                                        and chemical-free for grains and oilseeds, and transitional for feed grains.
     nomic Research Service. Visit
     www.ers.usda.gov and search
                                        Once certified, your pricing options become more diverse and more promising. Minneso-
     for “contracts in the organic      ta organic corn prices, for example, averaged 149 percent to 247 percent of conventional
     supply chain.”                     corn prices during 2009-2013 (see Panel B, Figure 4T.6: Conventional Versus Organic



  84           ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
  TEXT BOX 4T.2

  CHECKLIST FOR ORGANIC CONTRACTS
  Contract Interaction with NOP Regulations:
    • How does the contract address certification and enforcement?
    • How does the contract handle pesticide residues and prohibited substances?
    • How does the contract handle GMOs?
    • Does the contract set out specific isolation buffer or anti-contamination requirements?
    • Does the contract address access to pasture or the outdoors for livestock or poultry?
    • How are organic seed rules handled?
    • Must the farmer plant a particular type of seed, such as buyer-provided seed?
    • Does the contract place restrictions on the farmer’s use of buyer-provided seed,
       or the resulting crop?
    • Does the contract give the buyer access to organic records (or certifier records)?
    • Does the contract address “split operations,” or non-organic crops or animals?
    • Does the contract provide support for transitioning to organic production?

  Contract Stipulations Beyond Organic:
    • Does the contract require practices above and beyond NOP regulations?
    • Must the farmer satisfy marketing claims in addition to certified organic?
    • Must the farm look “pleasing?”
    • Are unspecified “best management practices” required?




                                                                                                                                               4
    • Can the buyer inspect the farm?
    • Does the contract incorporate separate buyer-created policies? Or laws?
    • Does the contract address food safety practices?                                                                                        TASK 4
  Source: Excerpted from Heyman, A.N. August 2012. Farmers’ Guide to Organic Contracts. Farmers’ Legal Action Group. www.flaginc.
  org/publication/farmers-guide-to-organic-contracts.



Enterprise Observations in Minnesota, Corn on page 76). Similarly, Minnesota organic
milk prices averaged 137 percent to 192 percent of conventional milk prices over the same
five-year period (see Panel B, Figure 4T.7: Conventional Versus Organic Enterprise Ob-
servations in Minnesota, Dairy on page 77).

Contact buyers to learn more about pricing options. It is also a good idea to review avail-
able price histories, since the information that you obtain from buyers only reflects current
conditions, thus representing a snapshot in time. Organic grain price histories, though
limited, are compiled and reported twice monthly by the USDA’s Agricultural Market
News in the National Organic Price Report. This and other pricing tools, available for a
variety of commodities, including some fruits and vegetables, are listed in the Resources
section. (See the Rodale Institute’s Organic Price Index and the Mercaris Ceres Pricing
Tool.) Once you are aware of price histories and pricing options, determine which strategy
or combination of strategies make sense for you given available storage, access to trans-
portation and your interest in marketing.

If you plan to market a value-added organic product or are considering selling direct to
retailers and consumers, be sure to check out pages 106-133 in the Guide. Direct market
pricing strategies are discussed there in detail.

Finally, after talking with organic buyers and learning more about available prices, you
may decide that it makes sense to revise your rotation schedule to take advantage of



                                                        ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    85
                                 high-value crops during your first year of certification, or to plan for feed needs during the
                                 third year of livestock transition. If this is the case, return now to the operations strategy
                                 worksheets and make the necessary revisions before continuing.

                                 Post-Harvest Handling, Processing, Packaging, Labeling and Distribution
                                 In addition to production practices, organic regulations address handling, packaging,
                                 labeling and distribution of crops and livestock products. Therefore, your business plan
                                 should include a well-thought-out strategy to address these critical issues.

                                 If you plan to sell into conventional markets while transitioning, you will not need to
                                 create specialized handling and distribution strategies for the short term. However, if
                                 your marketing strategy hinges on the sale of specialty products during transition, such as
                                 non-GMO grain, you will need to develop handling and distribution plans similar to those
                                 required for the movement of certified organic products.

                                 The same issues discussed in the Operations Strategy section under Inventory Manage-
                                 ment and Quality Control apply to handling and distribution of transitional and certified
                                 organic commodities and processed products. It will be your responsibility to ensure that
                                 crops, livestock products and other items for sale are not contaminated or commingled
                                 with non-organic or GMO products when marketing as transitional and certified organic
                                 (NOP § 205.272).

                                 Finally, when labeling processed products or other items for retail,




 4
                                 USDA permits the use of three terms for certified organic products:
                                     • 100 percent organic
TASK 4                               • organic (i.e., at least 95 percent of ingredients are certified
                                        organic)
                                     • made with organic ingredients (i.e., at least 70 percent of
                                        ingredients are certified organic)
                                 Organic labeling rules are complicated and should be reviewed care-
                                 fully when planning and budgeting for your marketing strategy. See Marketing - Licenses
                                 and Certification on page 88 for more information.

                                 Sales Revenue/Gross Income
                                 At this point, you should have a good idea of what you will have available to sell (products
                                 and services), how much you will have to sell (yield and output), who your buyers are, how
                                 much they may purchase, and what price they are willing to pay for your products and
                                 services. Using this information, complete Worksheet 4T.13: Projected Enterprise
                                 Sales. Sales estimates in combination with cost estimates will help you determine pro-
                                 jected income and cash flow later on in this planning task, and will allow you to evaluate
                                 the trade-off between potential yield or output reductions and potential price premiums.
                                 Figure 4T.8: Conventional Gross Returns Versus Organic Gross Returns, Corn depicts
                                 the gains for organic farms from corn sales throughout the Midwest. It shows that despite
                                 organic corn yields measuring 55-75 percent of conventional yields (Panel A in Figure 4T.6
                                 on page 76), price premiums of approximately $1.50-$2.50 per bushel (Panel B in Figure
                                 4T.6 on page 76) lead to higher overall gross farm revenue.

                                 Organic dairy premiums, on the other hand, do not completely outweigh the effect of lower
                                 milk production during all years measured (Figure 4T.9: Conventional Gross Returns
                                 Versus Organic Gross Returns, Dairy). In the Finances section of this planning task, we
                                 will look at what happens to profitability when expenses are considered.



  86     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
FIGURE 4T.8: CONVENTIONAL GROSS RETURNS VERSUS ORGANIC GROSS RETURNS, CORN


                                                        Gross Returns1, Corn
                  2,000

                  1,500


     $ per acre
                  1,000

                   500

                     0
                          2009              2010                2011               2012              2013
                                                                                                    Conventional
1 Gross returns are calculated as price times yield.                                                Organic

Source: FINBIN Database. Center for Farm Financial Management. www.cfffm.umn.edu. Data come from Minnesota farms enrolled in the
Farm Business Management Education Program. Individual farms enrolled in the program (observations) vary each year.




FIGURE 4T.9: CONVENTIONAL GROSS RETURNS VERSUS ORGANIC GROSS RETURNS, DAIRY


                                                       Gross Returns1, Dairy
                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                                              TASK 4


                  5,000

                  4,000


    $ per cow
                  3,000

                  2,000

                  1,000

                      0
                          2009              2010               2011               2012               2013

1 Gross returns are calculated as milk sold plus income from dairy calves, cows                      Conventional
  transferred out, cull sales and other income, minus expenses for purchased
  animals, cows transferred in, inventory changes and dairy replacement costs.                       Organic

Source: FINBIN Database. Center for Farm Financial Management. www.cfffm.umn.edu. Data come from Minnesota farms enrolled in the
Farm Business Management Education Program. Individual farms enrolled in the program (observations) vary each year.




                                                        ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    87
                                       MARKETING - Licenses And Certification
                                       Whether you raise commodities or plan to process, you will have to do a fair amount of
                                       research into required marketing-related licenses and certification.

                                       Organic commodity buyers, for example, often require sellers to provide a “clean truck affi-
                                       davit” proving that the vehicle used to transport grain and other commodities was properly
                                       cleaned before hauling specialty or organic loads. In addition to the clean truck affidavit
                                       (copies are available from certifiers and buyers), most buyers will expect you to provide the
                                       following with each delivered load or immediately after arrival:14
                                            • Copy of current organic certificate, if delivering an organic crop
                                            • Product listing, or an addendum to certificate showing crop(s) or product(s) pro-
                                              duced
                                            • Bill of lading listing farmer, buyer, product and lot number. This is your proof of
                                              shipment. Your certifier or buyer can provide a blank bill of lading if you need one.
                                            • Transaction certificate (TC), if delivering a certified organic product. This is issued
                                              by your certifier to verify the sale for auditing. The TC contains a serial number and
                                              “documents the details of a transfer of ownership of a certified organic product,
                                              such as the date, the parties involved in the trade, the commodity traded, the quan-
                                              tity, the lot number of the product, and the organic certificate number under which
                                              the operation was certified.”15 A TC is not required by all buyers.

                                       If you plan to process products and market them as certified organic you will need to




 4
                                       develop an OSPH and apply for additional certification through an approved certifier.
                                       Handling regulations are similar in intent to production regulations. They stipulate that
TASK 4                                 processing, packaging and distribution procedures present no risk of contamination from
                                       non-organic products, synthetic fungicides, preservatives or fumigants.

                                       Finally, labeling requirements are complicated and are treated in NOP regulations §§
                                       205.300-205.311. We recommend that you very carefully review organic labeling and
                                       handling regulations with a certifier. Certifiers are required to review and approve any
                                       packaging and labels before they can be sold at the retail level. It will be important to plan
                                       for these as part of your marketing strategy. See the Resources section for USDA handling
                                       and labeling guidelines and fact sheets as well as the Organic Handler Certification Sup-
                                       port Package from the California Certified Organic Farmers organization and the Guide
                                       for Organic Processors from ATTRA.

                                       Marketing Risk Management
                                       If you are an experienced conventional producer, you likely are familiar with market vola-
  14 Based on telephone interview      tility and the price risk that comes with it. There are many strategies available to minimize
     with Carolyn Lane, Vice Pres-     price risk, including the use of contracts to lock in returns and storage to ride out market
     ident of Operations, Nature’s
                                       volatility. As an organic producer you can use most of these same tools. You have the
     Organic Grist, June 27, 2013.
                                       option of contracting based on price, field or yield. In addition, as a milk or specialty grain
  15 Riddle, J. and L. Gulbranson.     producer, you may have the option of joining a cooperative that offers purchasing and
     February 2011. Minnesota          pricing guarantees. Likewise, you can store grain in anticipation of price movement.
     Guide to Organic Certifica-
     tion. Minnesota Institute for     You also may face some unfamiliar risks having to do with product quality, handling,
     Sustainable Agriculture and
                                       packaging, processing and labeling. For more information, review the NOP sales-relat-
     University of Minnesota Ex-
     tension. www.misa.umn.edu/
                                       ed regulations § 205.300-205.311. Finally, if you are planning to contract grain or other
     Publications/MNGuidetoOr-         products, be sure to review the organic contract checklist in Text Box 4T.2: Checklist for
     ganicCertification.               Organic Contracts. Contracts do offer an opportunity to manage risk by locking in or



  88           ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
securing a price. However, contracts also bring with them delivery obligations and NOP
compliance risks, also outlined in Text Box 4T.2. See Farmers’ Guide to Organic Contracts
in the Resources section for more information.

Use Worksheet 4T.14: Marketing Risk Management to identify price and NOP
compliance risks. Then brainstorm measures to prevent or address risks once they occur.
Do not forget about strategic alliances discussed earlier—these are often one of the best
tools for managing risk!

Clearly, there is a lot to consider. Ask questions, visit with other farmers, attend trade
shows where buyers are present and visit with certifiers. Moreover, talk things over with
your planning team. These are great ways to refine your marketing strategy. Then use
Worksheet 4T.12: Marketing Strategy Summary to sketch out a plan for each major
commodity or enterprise that you expect to sell during transition and during your first two
years of certification. Do not overlook the Business Plan Input section at the end of the
worksheet. Summarizing your marketing plans for each product or service here will make
your work in AgPlan much easier when you are ready to begin writing.



         MARKETING - DIG DEEPER
Planning to direct market? If so, you will need to do a lot more work to identify your cus-
tomers and the products that they may be interested in buying. Pages 106-131 in the Guide
address direct-market issues such as customer preferences, competition, distribution,




                                                                                                                             4
packaging, pricing and promotion. It will be critical to explore questions related to these
topics if you intend to sell directly to retailers or customers.
                                                                                                                            TASK 4
         MARKETING - PUT IT IN WRITING!
Use AgPlan or a word processing program to record your marketing strategies. Use in-
formation from each of the marketing worksheets in Planning Task Four to complete the
following sections of your marketing plan:
    •   Marketing Opportunities
    •   Marketing Strategy
    •   Licenses and Organic Certification
    •   Marketing Risk Management

Alternatively, you can choose to draft your own outline or simply summarize key ideas that
describe your overall marketing strategy in the appropriate marketing sections of AgPlan—
there are lots of options! Take a look at the completed transition plans in the Appendix for
more ideas on how to prepare the marketing strategy section on your business plan.

Eventually, we suggest including copies of marketing contracts or other written sales
agreements as appendices in your business plan, because most lenders will expect to see
them. For this purpose, AgPlan allows you to easily import Word, Excel and FINBIN doc-
uments. Once complete, carefully review your written marketing strategy and supporting
documents. Is it compatible with the operations strategy that you developed earlier? For
example, are there viable markets for the crops in your rotation? Or are there opportu-
nities to market alternative crops? If so, does your rotation and planting schedule need
tweaking? Recall that strategy development is an iterative process. It is not unusual to
adjust as you go.



                                      ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    89
                                                                     HUMAN RESOURCES
                                                                     Organic farming is management intensive. Field trials, national
                                                                     and local surveys, as well as anecdotal feedback from farmers
                                                                     suggest that organic farming requires more field work, more
                                                                     recordkeeping and more time on the phone (e.g., tracking down
                                                                     input suppliers and buyers). In fact, 32 percent of all Tools for
                                                                     Transition Project survey respondents who converted from
                                                                     conventional production reported hiring additional labor when
                                                                     transitioning to organic.16 For these reasons, it is worth taking
                                                                     this next assignment seriously.


                                                                     HUMAN RESOURCES -
                                                                     Human Resource Opportunities
                                                                 Do you have the opportunity to shadow another farmer or
                                                                 processor? Does a family member possess unique skills that can
                                                                 be applied to your plans to market a processed product? Do you
                                                                 know someone who is looking for an organic farm internship?
                                                                 Or do you have a child who is graduating from college and wants
               (Mandy Rodrigues)                                 to farm? Or, perhaps, like Bryan and Theresa Kerkaert, you have
                                       an excess capacity of labor due to external changes in rental contracts. See the human
                                       resources story panels for examples.




 4
TASK 4
                                          HUMAN RESOURCE OPPORTUNITIES
                                          Loss of a significant portion of our rented land represents a significant challenge and
                                          opportunity for our farm business. We currently have excess labor and management
                                          capacity. Acquisition of more land through a long-term lease with an option to buy will give us an
                                          opportunity to better use our labor and management resources.



                                       Human resource opportunities may make all the difference in your farm business’ success-
                                       ful transition to organic production and marketing. Take time now to document the unique
                                       skills offered by family members and to brainstorm other human resource opportunities
                                       that will lend your business a competitive advantage. You can record your ideas on Work-
                                       sheet 4T.15: Human Resource Strategy Summary.



                                       HUMAN RESOURCES - Management, Planning and Workforce
                                       If you are an experienced farmer or business owner, you already have a wealth of infor-
                                       mation and knowledge under your belt. It is important to capture this information in
                                       your business plan. Use Worksheet 4T.16: Acquired Knowledge to document your
  16 Tools for Transition Project.     organic management knowledge or experience. If you are not sure what to include, return
     Tools for Transition: Intake
                                       to Worksheet 2T.10: Are You Ready to Manage Organically? for a few ideas. If
     Survey Results. Updated 2012.
     eOrganic. http://eorganic.info/   you are new to farming, document business expertise and other experiences that exemplify
     toolsfortransition/reports.       management skills. Additionally, experienced or not, you might want to use Worksheet



  90           ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
  ACQUIRED KNOWLEDGE
  BJF will be managed by owner Vitaly Brukhman. While new to farming, Brukhman has
  experience as an entrepreneur and has operated a successful IT consulting business. In
  2013-2014, Brukhman began cultivating his agricultural production skills, acquiring hands-
  on experience growing radishes and mustard greens on a half-acre while completing a beginning
  farmer education program with NOFA-NJ. During the spring/summer of 2014, Brukhman participated
  in four courses as part of the Organic Processing Institute’s School for Organic Processing Entrepre-
  neurs to gain a better understanding of organic processing and handling requirements. During that
  same time, he conducted food product research and began small-batch production for taste testing
  and marketing. In the fall of 2014, Brukhman continued skill-building coursework: farming-related
  classes and on-farm consultation with NOFA-NJ, a class on food and drink entrepreneurship with the
  Samuel Adams Brew the American Dream series, and microbiome and nutrition studies through a
  variety of online sources.
  Additionally, Brukhman plans to enroll in the food safety manager program offered electronically
  by ServSafe, a nationally recognized training program. This course satisfies the Middlesex County
  food safety training requirements needed to obtain a New Jersey food service sanitation certificate.
  Training is valid for five years from date of completion.



4T.16: Acquired Knowledge to describe needed skills and how you plan to acquire




                                                                                                                                   4
them. For example, you might list organic workshops, webinars and field days that you
anticipate attending. Check out the story panel on acquired knowledge from beginning
farmer Vitaly Brukhman.                                                                                                           TASK 4
Next, take another look at your planning team and board of directors. Collectively, do they
have the expertise to guide you through transition, certification and any other significant
changes that you plan to make? If not, consider adding new members who can provide
honest and informed feedback about proposed short-term transition strategies and long-
term organic management strategies. These new members might include certifiers, han-
dlers, organic consultants, financial planners and experienced farmers. They will become a
very important part of your management team. See the planning team story panels.



  PLANNING TEAM
  In addition to Bryan and Theresa, the management team for Kerkaert Organic Farm
  includes:
    • Paul L., Farm Business Management advisor
    • Dale P., bank loan officer
    • Rod D., Farm Service Agency loan officer
    • Central Crop Consultants
    • Minnesota Crop Improvement Association, organic certifier
    • Jon O., organic farmer, friend, mentor
  We have all been working together for several years and believe we will continue to be a strong
  team as we grow our business.




                                            ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    91
                                      HUMAN RESOURCES - Human Resource Strategy
                                      Tasks and Recordkeeping
                                      Use Worksheet 4T.17: Management and Workforce Responsibilities to identify
                                      farm business tasks associated with production, marketing and overall management. Most
                                      of the new responsibilities or tasks will be fairly easy to identify.

                                      Recordkeeping, however, is one of those management tasks that can be overlooked or
                                      underestimated when exploring organic certification for the first time. Of all the new tasks
                                      that you will perform as an organic farmer, recordkeeping is, perhaps, the most time con-
                                      suming.

                                      Many conventional farmers use production, marketing and financial records to help them
                                      manage more efficiently. Records are equally helpful for organic management but also are
                                      required for NOP certification. NOP regulations state that farmers must keep records that
                                      “are adapted to the operation … disclose all activities and transactions … [are] maintained
                                      for not less than five years … and [are] sufficient to demonstrate compliance.”17 (NOP
                                      § 205.103) As already discussed in the operations and marketing sections, you will require
                                      records to document:
                                           •   production
                                           •   harvesting
                                           •   post-harvest handling




 4
                                           •   storage and transport
                                           •   processing
TASK 4                                     •   packaging and labeling
                                           •   sales
                                      These records help form the production audit trail, verifying that farm products have been
                                      produced, harvested and handled in accordance with NOP rules. As a farmer, you are
                                      responsible for maintaining an audit trail as long as you own the product. Unique lot num-
                                      bers, developed by you, are used to trace products through the audit trail. A lot number
                                      generally indicates the type of crop, field number or storage unit, and year of production.18
                                      See the Minnesota Guide to Organic Certification for an excellent discussion on how to
                                      establish an audit trail and create lot numbers for your farm. The publication also includes
                                      recordkeeping templates useful for establishing an audit trail. The comprehensive ATTRA
                                      publication Documenting Forms for Organic Crop and Livestock Producers walks readers
                                      through records needed for certification and provides sample templates for recordkeep-
                                      ing use. Both publications are listed in the Resources section. Also consider visiting with
  17 Documentation Forms for          a certifier, attending workshops and talking with certified farmers to learn more about
     Organic Crop and Livestock       recordkeeping options.
     Producers. March 2011. Baier,
     A. USDA and ATTRA. https://
                                      You can use Worksheet 4T.18: Recordkeeping Strategy to outline your approach to
     attra.ncat.org/organic.html.
                                      recordkeeping. A short discussion of your recordkeeping strategy within the business plan
  18 Riddle, J. and L. Gulbranson.    will provide your lender or other business partners with confidence that the transition will
     February 2011. Minnesota         be a success.
     Guide to Organic Certifica-
     tion. Minnesota Institute for    It is never too early to start! Keeping good records before implementing major changes will
     Sustainable Agriculture and
                                      establish a baseline against which you can measure progress as you transition and imple-
     University of Minnesota Ex-
     tension. www.misa.umn.edu/
                                      ment new business strategies.
     Publications/MNGuidetoOr-
     ganicCertification.




  92          ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
  TEXT BOX 4T.3

  EXAMPLES OF RECORDS NEEDED FOR ORGANIC
  CERTIFICATION
      •   Previous land use record                 • Storage/inventory logs
      •   Soil tests                               • Sales transactions
      •   Production activity log                  • Prevention of commingling and
      •   Planting and rotation records              contamination records
      •   Input material records                   • Clean transport affidavit
      •   Marketing contracts                      • Equipment cleaning log
      •   Harvest records                          • Complaint log



Workforce and Professional Services
Once you have identified new tasks to be performed, brainstorm short- and long-term
strategies for accomplishing this work. Think about who will manage the farm business
as well as how and where you will source labor to accomplish each new task. Remember,
labor may be seasonal or year-round, part-time or full-time, family or non-family, and may
come from custom service providers or other farmers who are interested in partnering to
share equipment and tasks.




                                                                                                                                 4
Use Worksheet 4T.17: Management and Workforce Responsibilities to describe
your plans for filling specific management and labor tasks throughout the transition and
during the first few years of certification. See Figure 4T.10 for a for a sample outline of
                                                                                                                                TASK 4
management and labor responsibilities.

Next, think about how these tasks will
change for each member of your farm
business during the transition period
and after certification. You can use
this worksheet to document each per-
son’s key responsibilities during tran-
sition and after certification—pairing
their responsibilities with their known
skills. It will be important to note
when they will be most busy and least
busy, which will help you identify any
bottlenecks that may occur under
your new transition plan.

Finally, return to Worksheet 4T.15:
Human Resource Strategy Sum-
mary to summarize your human
resource strategy. Be sure to address
plans for complying with NOP record-
keeping requirements.




                                          ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    93
                                 FIGURE 4T.10: MANAGEMENT AND WORKFORCE RESPONSIBILITIES, EXAMPLE
                                 You can map out your team’s responsibilities in any number of ways, an exercise that will help you anticipate poten-
                                 tial labor bottlenecks. For example a simple list will do, as on Worksheet 4T.17, or you can use a grid, as you did on
                                 Worksheet 2T.9: Current Human Resources.

                                  Person Key                    JAN    FEB     MAR APR MAY JUN JUL AUG                    SEP    OCT NOV DEC
                                         Responsibilities
                                  Jim    Cropping, grain
                                         drying, transport
                                  Lois   Grain marketing,
                                         input purchases
                                  Ann    Recordkeeping,
                                         taxes
                                      Very busy                Moderately busy              Available




                                 HUMAN RESOURCES - Human Resource Risk Management
                                 Human resources represent one of the greatest and most unpredictable risks that your
                                 farm business will face. It is nearly impossible to know when someone will be injured,
                                 whether circumstances will force a change in off-farm employment or if unforeseen health




 4
                                 issues will arise. So, while you cannot plan the business around unknowns, it is good to ask
                                 “What if?” as part of your strategy development. We suggest exploring common human
TASK 4                           resource risks associated with acquiring seasonal labor, securing buy-in from all family
                                 members on a new idea or filling knowledge gaps. Use Worksheet 4T.19: Human
                                 Resource Risk Management to identify labor and management-related risks and to
                                 explore strategies for addressing and minimizing them.



                                           HUMAN RESOURCES - DIG DEEPER
                                 Does your transition strategy rely on hired labor? If so, you will want to dig a little deeper
                                 to explore hiring and compensation as well as good communication practices. These are
                                 discussed on pages 152-153 in the Guide. Be sure to include your hiring and compensation
                                 strategy under Human Resource Strategy if using AgPlan or the human resources section
                                 of your business plan.



                                           HUMAN RESOURCES - PUT IT IN WRITING!
                                 Put your human resource strategies down on paper using a word processing program or
                                 the following sections in AgPlan: Human Resource Opportunities, Planning and Manage-
                                 ment Team, Licenses and Safety Regulations and Human Resource Strategy. If you com-
                                 pleted Worksheet 4T.16: Human Resource Strategy Summary and Worksheet
                                 4T.18: Recordkeeping Strategy this exercise should be relatively simple. Take a look
                                 at the completed transition plans in the Appendix for more ideas on preparing your human
                                 resources strategy section on the business plan.




  94     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
FINANCES
A sound financial strategy is a critical element of any business plan. This is where the rub-
ber hits the road, so to speak—when you identify whether concepts and ideas are financial-
ly feasible. If your strategies do not generate earnings or meet other basic financial goals,
then some revision will be in order.

When developing a financial strategy, begin by reviewing your current financial position:
Look at your current balance sheet, income statement and annual cash flow. You prepared
some of these in Planning Task Two: History and Current Situation. Next, we suggest
that you take another look at your recently developed operational, marketing and human
resource strategies to study how proposed changes will affect your farm’s current financial
picture. For example, how will changes in expected crop and livestock input expenses, out-
put and prices affect your current cash flow and year-end profitability? How will anticipat-
ed equipment purchases and financing needs affect net worth?

Your transition will have a greater chance of success if you go into it knowing the numbers
and having identified strategic alternatives to address any cash flow issues and capital
needs. Many farmers who participated in the Tools for Transition Project told us that the
third year of transition was the most difficult financially, but that knowing what was on the
other side—namely, the boost in farm income from organic premiums—made it possible to
get through challenging times.




                                                                                                                                  4
FINANCES - Financial Opportunities
Take some time to identify and explore financial opportunities (e.g., low interest rates,                                        TASK 4
potential investors). Some growers are fortunate enough to have “angel investors,” or
financial partners who provide capital on loan with flexible terms. These investors might
be people you know, formal business partners, family members, other business owners
or members of the community. See the financial opportunities story panel for an example
from Vitaly Brukhman’s business plan. Then, use Worksheet 4T.21: Financial Strate-
gy Summary to identify financial opportunities available to you and your farm business.


  FINANCIAL OPPORTUNITIES
  BJF has been approached by a private investor who believes in the BJF mission and who is
  interested in loaning our farm business enough money to cover all start-up expenses. We
  consider this an extraordinary financial opportunity!



FINANCES - Financial Projections
A financial strategy, just like your operations, marketing and human resource strategies,
should be forward looking; it should be based on projections of enterprise sales, net farm
income and asset growth over the next five years or more. However, because you are likely
managing a family farm, the business will also need to cover some, if not all, family living
expenses.

Begin by reviewing how much money will be needed to pay for annual family living
expenses using Worksheet 4T.20: Projected Family Living Expenses. This will




                                           ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    95
                                 set the bar for farm income requirements during transition and upon certification. You
                                 will need to generate the equivalent of family living expenses plus other projected finan-
                                 cial needs (e.g., college tuition, retirement, loan repayment) from farm income, plus any
                                 off-farm income that you or your partner expects to earn. If you do not anticipate living
                                 expenses changing much from their current level, you can skip this worksheet and use the
                                 one you prepared in Planning Task Two (Worksheet 2T.12: Family Living Expenses)
                                 to establish a baseline.

                                 After recording family living expenses, turn to farm business expenses. Use Worksheet
                                 4T.22: Projected Farm Expenses to outline direct and overhead expenses for the
                                 whole farm. The worksheet provides typical farm expenses as well as those unique to or-
                                 ganic production (e.g., certification fees).

                                 If you are unfamiliar with organic input costs, you will need to do some homework to
                                 develop expense estimates for transition and certification years. Input expense data are
                                 available for a variety of grain, oilseed, fruit, vegetable and livestock enterprises from the
                                 following sources:
                                      • Organic and Transition Crop Production Budgets for FINBIN database (for row
                                        crops and livestock enterprises), Center for Farm Financial Management,
                                        www.finbin.umn.edu
                                      • Current Costs and Return Studies (for fruits and vegetables in California),
                                        Agricultural and Resource Economics, University of California Davis,
                                        http://coststudies.ucdavis.edu/current.php




 4
                                      • Organic Crop Production Enterprise Budgets (for row crops), Iowa State
TASK 4                                  University, www.extension.iastate.edu/agdm/crops/html/a1-18.html
                                      • Organic Enterprise Budgets (for fruits and vegetables), Carolina Farm Stewardship
                                        Association, www.carolinafarmstewards.org/enterprise-budgets/
                                 See the Resources section for other expense budgets and research data. Note, however,
                                 that on-farm expenses vary considerably by region, farm size, supplier, market conditions
                                 and management practice. You will benefit from talking locally with other farmers, lenders
                                 and input suppliers to verify costs and to develop appropriate expense estimates for your
                                 farm business and transition strategy.

                                 There is space on Worksheet 4T.22: Projected Farm Expenses for one whole-farm
                                 transition strategy that you are considering. If, at this point in the planning process, you
                                 are still considering more than one whole-farm strategy, make copies of this worksheet
                                 and complete for each strategy under consideration.

                                 Electronic spreadsheets are available for projected family living expenses and projected farm
                                 expenses at http://misadocuments.info/OrganicTransitionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx.

                                 With enterprise sales and farm expense projections in hand, you are ready to develop a
                                 five-year projected income statement using Worksheet 4T.23: Projected Income
                                 Statement. This is where everything comes together—productivity, prices and input
                                 expenses. You may be surprised at some of the results. Returning to the Midwest corn and
                                 dairy data discussed earlier in this planning task, you will note that even though the organ-
                                 ic farms reported reduced yields or production, net farm income was significantly higher
                                 than that for the conventional farms. This was due to organic price premiums (see Panel
                                 B in Figure 4T.6 and Panel B in Figure 4T.7 on pages 76-77) and reduced input expenses
                                 (see Figure 4T.8 and Figure 4T.9 on page 87).



  96     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
Once you have estimated and recorded your farm’s projected farm income over the
five-year planning period (three years of transition and two years of certification), use
Worksheet 4T.24: Projected Cash Flow to develop a five-year cash flow statement.
As the authors of AgPlan note, “a projected cash flow will help you determine if your plan
can meet expenses, make debt payments and make it through the transition period.” It is
not uncommon to encounter cash shortfalls during transition, for example when expe-
riencing reduced yields or production losses prior to receiving organic price premiums.
Although it may not happen to you, it is very important to plan for the possibility that it
will. The Twelve Steps to Cash Flow Budgeting web page by William Edwards is a good
resource to help with cash flow planning (see the Resources section). It includes cash
flow tips and an Excel spreadsheet you can use to calculate a detailed cash flow for corn,
soybeans, livestock and other enterprises.

Finally, use Worksheet 4T.25: Projected Balance Sheet to estimate net worth-
                                                                                                     FINANCIAL
related gains or losses during the transition period and in year five (i.e., two years after
                                                                                                     SPREADSHEETS ARE
certification). The balance sheet is a good indicator of whether or not your farm business
                                                                                                     AVAILABLE ONLINE
is building assets over time; it depicts “everything you own, everything you owe and what            Electronic spreadsheets are
would be left if the farm had to be sold.”19                                                         available to assist with a
                                                                                                     projected net farm income,
                                                                                                     cash flow and balance sheet at
FINANCES - Financial Strategy                                                                        http://misadocuments.info/
                                                                                                     OrganicTransitionPlanner_
You are ready now to develop a financial strategy—one that builds on information
                                                                                                     spreadsheets.xlsx.
captured in your financial projections. Financial strategies outline how your whole-farm




                                                                                                                                  4
plan will be financially successful and includes your ideas for business organization, asset
acquisition and capital requests.                                                                                               TASK 4
Business Organization
It is unlikely that your farm organization status will change as a result of transition unless
your strategy involves forming new partnerships. Regardless, take a moment now to doc-
ument as part of your business plan how the farm is or will be legally organized.

Ownership options include a simple sole proprietorship, a limited liability company
(LLC) or a corporation. The business structure that you choose ultimately will affect your
liability and tax responsibilities. Most farms are organized as a sole proprietorship or
LLC. Each form of organization has its advantages and disadvantages. We suggest that
you explore these by consulting your accountant or attorney as well as other resources,
such as those available from your state’s secretary of state office and from groups such
as Farm Commons (see the Resources section). If you decide on an LLC or corporation,
you may need to create an operating agreement, depending on your state laws. This can
be a simple document or statement in your business plan describing the farm business
owners, profit distribution and contributions made by each owner to the business.

As a new farmer, you may also want to apply for a farm tax identification number, which
will allow you to qualify for deferred estate taxes, conservation easements and, most
importantly, tax exemptions on equipment purchases. Qualification criteria vary by state,
but generally anyone who sells products off-farm (i.e., does not produce exclusively for            19 Padgham, J., ed. February
                                                                                                       2014. Fearless Farm Finances:
home consumption) is eligible for a state farm tax identification number. For more infor-
                                                                                                       Farm Financial Management
mation, contact your state department of agriculture or the Internal Revenue Service.                  Demystified. Midwest Organic
                                                                                                       and Sustainable Education
                                                                                                       Service (MOSES). http://mose-
                                                                                                       sorganic.org.



                                      ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS         97
                                    ASSET ACQUISITION AND CAPITAL REQUESTS
                                    The key element of this plan is to identify and secure long-term access to a parcel of
                                    land that can be a stable basis for continuation of our farming operation. … When we
                                    have identified a specific parcel of land for the new farm we will explore the possibility of negoti-
                                    ating a lower land rent for the transition years of 2016 and 2017. In addition, this plan is addressed
                                    to our lender, Farm Credit Services, as a request for a line of credit that will be adequate to ensure
                                    access to capital during the difficult 2015 and 2016 transition crop years.



                                 Use Worksheet 4T.21: Financial Strategy Summary to document whether you have
                                 qualified for a farm tax identification number and to show how you plan to legally organize
                                 the business.

                                 Asset Acquisition and Capital Requests
                                 After compiling expense, income and cash flow projections, you may find that, in the
                                 long run, your financial outlook is bright. In order to get there, however, you may need to
                                 finance operating expenses, purchase equipment or even purchase additional land during
                                 the transition years.

                                 Return to Worksheet 4T.2: Operations Strategy Summary to review input, equip-
                                 ment and other long-term operating needs. Next, identify capital needed to finance one-




 4
                                 time start-up expenses, such as pasture fencing, as well as annual operating expenses, new
TASK 4                           equipment purchases and infrastructure improvements. Think about how you will meet
                                 any capital shortfalls. Options include financing, a business partner, an angel investor and
                                 cash reserves, among other possibilities. See the story panel to learn the Kerkaerts’ strate-
                                 gy for purchasing land and accessing additional capital.

                                 Use Worksheet 4T.26: Financial Needs and Capital Requests to record finance
                                 needs and capital requests. It is helpful to be familiar with this finance information and to
                                 have it in front of you when approaching lenders.

                                 Many traditional lenders are familiar with organic management and, depending on your
                                 situation, may be able to assist with short-term, intermediate and long-term loans. They
                                 may be able to offer advice on consolidation of debt or a line of credit that will help provide
                                 financial breathing room during the transition years.

                                 Another financing option is the USDA’s Farm Service Agency (FSA). The FSA, among
                                 other institutions, may be able to assist you with a micro loan or an operating loan during
                                 transition. FSA loans usually are available for the purchase of land, livestock, equipment,
                                 feed, seed and supplies needed to construct buildings or make improvements. Another
                                 option is to contact the USDA’s Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) regarding
                                 targeted financial and technical assistance that, at the time of this writing, is available for
                                 the development of transitional and organic Conservation Activity Plans (CAPs) through
                                 the Environmental Quality Incentives Program (EQIP). Information about CAP practices
                                 and plan development can be found under NRCS, EQIP CAP Activity Code 138. See the
                                 Resources section for FSA and NRCS contact information.




  98     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
  FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
  Our cash flow projections point to difficult years in 2015 and 2016 for our farm
  business. Our most important tool for managing these challenges and other risks as-
  sociated with the plan is the additional income we receive from our manure hauling and hog nursery
  businesses. This income is not included in the cash flow projections presented here. The right of first
  refusal to purchase the land we rent in Lyon County is also a form of risk management, since this will
  give us the right, but not the obligation, to purchase the land after the 2020 crop year. If our farming
  operation has been successful and that success is projected to continue given land prices and prof-
  itability expectations, we will purchase the land. If our farming operation has not been as successful
  as expected and/or if the outlook for future profitability is unfavorable, we will not be committed
  to continue farming that land.



FINANCES - Financial Risk Management
You have likely already addressed some of the financial risks associated with yield and
price fluctuations earlier in Planning Task Four. Now is a good time, however, to explore
specific short- and long-term finance-related risks as well as strategies for overcoming and
mitigating them. A change in corn and soybean base acres—for example, due to the inclu-
sion of small grains in transitional and organic crop rotations—can affect:




                                                                                                                                    4
    • FSA loans
    • crop insurance
    • government program payments                                                                                                  TASK 4
Other potential financial risks include fluctuations in interest rates, input costs and inade-
quate cash flow. Use Worksheet 4T.27: Financial Risk Management to identify risk
for your farm business.

With risks on the table, begin brainstorming risk management options. For example, can
you build up reserves in advance of an anticipated cash flow shortfall? Or will you explore
finance options, such as short-term lines of credit or intermediate loans available through
a local banker, the FSA or another lending institution? You may not be able to answer
these questions or address financial risks until after meeting with a lender and presenting
your business plan. However, it is good to be aware of potential risks before meeting with
your lender and other potential investors or business partners.

See the financial risk management story panel for a look at how the Kerkaerts plan to
buffer themselves against two significant financial risks: 1) the risk of a cash flow shortfall
during transition, and 2) the risk of transitioning rented land.



         FINANCES - DIG DEEPER
If you are considering purchasing or renting additional farmland, we recommend turning to
Worksheet 4.26: Farmland Affordability in the Guide to determine how much land
you can afford and at what price. We also encourage you to read the profile (see page 15) and
business plan prepared by Bryan and Theresa Kerkaert in the Appendix to learn more about
the challenges of transitioning land under a short-term lease.



                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    99
                                           FINANCES - PUT IT IN WRITING!
                                 The finances section of your business plan is critical. Write a brief financial strategy
                                 summary under the Finances heading if using AgPlan or in your own outline if using a
                                 word processing program. Address specific financial opportunities as well as strategies for
                                 business organization and capital requests. Space is provided in AgPlan for each of these
                                 topics. Next, use the AgPlan attachment tool to import projected balance sheets, cash flow
                                 and income statements. (AgPlan will accept Word, Excel and FINBIN documents.) Lend-
                                 ers and other business partners or investors will expect to see these documents.

                                 Carefully review your written financial strategy and supporting documents. Is your whole-
                                 farm strategy financially viable? Does your operation generate earnings, for example,
                                 during transition? If not, do you have a financial plan for bridging the gap? If your whole-
                                 farm strategy is showing signs of financial trouble during this planning phase, you are
                                 strongly encouraged to return to those operations, marketing and human resource strate-
                                 gies already developed and to revise them as needed. Remember, strategy development is
                                 an iterative process—it is not unusual to tweak as you go!



                                 SWOT ANALYSIS FOR STRATEGY ALTERNATIVES
                                 Before finalizing your whole-farm transition strategy, return to the SWOT analysis tool
                                 introduced in Planning Task Two: History and Current Situation (see Worksheet 2T.18:
                                 Current Whole-Farm SWOT). Ask yourself, When I have completed my transition,




 4
                                 how will I describe my farm business strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats?
                                 This will take a bit of imagination, but it is a useful exercise and serves as one final check
TASK 4                           point when developing a robust transition strategy. For example, a farmer considering a
                                 split operation might develop the following whole-farm SWOT to anticipate their situation
                                 after having certified some of their land:

                                      • Strengths: In addition to the strengths that I brought to transition, I have demon-
                                        strated that I can successfully produce and market organic grains. My operation is
                                        now more diversified by including organic and conventional acreage.
                                      • Weaknesses: We will be using more resources (storage, labor) than otherwise
                                        necessary to manage production, segregate product and market both conventional
                                        and organic crops. I have not reached an organic volume that allows me to take full
                                        advantage of organic marketing opportunities.
                                      • Opportunities: We will be able to take advantage of prices in both conventional and
                                        organic markets; we will be diversifying to reduce production and marketing risks.
                                        Conventional prices are currently strong, so I can get a good return on these crops
                                        and finance the transition of additional land.
                                      • Threats: By waiting to transition all of our cropland, we may miss out on opportu-
                                        nities to transition livestock and sign long-term contracts; organic milk contracts
                                        may no longer be offered by the time we get there.

                                 Use Worksheet 4T.28: Whole-Farm SWOT for Certified Operations to compare
                                 your anticipated post-certification SWOT analysis to the SWOT you prepared in Planning
                                 Task Two: History and Current Situation (Worksheet 2T.18: Current Whole-Farm
                                 SWOT). How do the new, proposed strategies compare with what you are already doing?
                                 Will your current operations (i.e., you keep doing what you are doing) look different in five
                                 years? Will strengths and opportunities have changed?



  100    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
TEST AND FINALIZE STRATEGIES
Now that you have some solid strategies on the table, it is time to test them for compatibil-
ity with your goals and for overall feasibility.




                                                                                                                              4
You may have identified potential variations in your strategic operations, marketing,
human resource and financial plans throughout the planning process. In some cases, these
alternative strategies will be compatible or inter-related. Or, some strategies you identified
                                                                                                                             TASK 4
may compete with one another. Return to Worksheet 4T.1: Whole-Farm Strategies.
You have learned a lot since first answering these questions. Has anything fundamental
changed since you first jotted down your whole-farm strategy description and rationale?
Have any of your ideas changed based on the operations, marketing, human resource and
finance research that you have completed during this planning task? You may have refined
your whole-farm strategies already as you worked through Planning Task Four. If not, do
so now if necessary.

Next, test your whole-farm transition strategy (or strategies) by scoring it using the “best
fit” descriptors outlined in Figure 4T.11: Best Fit Tests and repeated on Worksheet
4T.29: Scoring and Deciding on a Final Transition Strategy. Begin by scoring
your current or “base plan.” Next, score each whole-farm transition strategy that you are
considering. This worksheet is particularly useful when planning as a team or with family.
By having each member of your planning team complete Worksheet 4T.29: Scoring
and Deciding on a Final Transition Strategy independently, you will be able to iden-
tify any potential conflicts among family early on, before moving forward. Your transition
plan should be something that everyone—you, family members and partners—generally
support.




                                       ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    101
                                 FIGURE 4T.11: BEST FIT TESTS

                                 STRATEGY “BEST FIT” TESTS
                                 Vision Consistency Test. How well does the proposed strategy fit with your whole-farm and personal vision?
                                 If the strategy does not lead toward your personal and business vision or embrace the core values of your
                                 planning team, it should be rejected. Success and enthusiasm will be low and the plan is unlikely to succeed.
                                 Goodness of Fit Test. How well does the proposed strategy fit with your external analysis of the industry
                                 and internal analysis of your farm? Does the proposed strategy explain how it will build on your business’
                                 current strengths and opportunities while managing for weaknesses and threats? Recall your SWOT analy-
                                 ses in Planning Task Two and Planning Task Four.
                                 Building for the Future Test. How well does the proposed strategy build for the future and satisfy your
                                 goals? Does your strategy generate resources, such as soil quality and financial equity, that will be available
                                 to the next generation? If a strategy uses but does not generate or protect resources, it should receive a
                                 low score for this test.
                                 Feasibility and Resource Test. How realistic are your transition and long-term resource needs (identified
                                 on Worksheet 4T.26: Financial Needs and Capital Requests)? In other words, are resources available to
                                 implement your whole-farm strategy? For example, is your soil type appropriate for the crops in your
                                 planned rotation? Can people be hired to fill labor gaps? Will the operation generate earnings during tran-
                                 sition? Can financing be obtained if needed? Ask yourself, Can the business survive the transition period?
                                 Importance Test. How well does the proposed strategy address the important or critical planning issues
                                 that you identified on Worksheet IT.1: Why Transition? Does your strategy focus on these important




 4
                                 issues? If not, then it should be rejected.
                                 Confidence Test. How high is the confidence of your planning team in the success of your transition
TASK 4                           strategy? How high is the risk that conditions will change for the worse, making it more difficult for your
                                 plan to succeed?

                                 Source: Olson, K. 2001. A Strategic Management Primer for Farmers. No. 13524, Staff Papers. Department of Applied Economics, University
                                 of Minnesota.




                                              PUT IT IN WRITING!
                                 You are almost there! Summarize the transition strategy that best fits your critical plan-
                                 ning issue, vision and goals in the Transition Plan Summary section of AgPlan or a word
                                 processing program. Another option is to summarize strategies in the individual Opera-
                                 tions, Marketing, Human Resources and Finances sections of AgPlan. Most of this infor-
                                 mation can come directly from your completed strategy summary worksheets. Carefully
                                 describe your anticipated financial position throughout transition and during the first few
                                 years of certification, summarizing information from Worksheet 4T.23: Projected
                                 Income Statement, Worksheet 4T.24: Projected Cash Flow, Worksheet 4T.25:
                                 Projected Balance Sheet and Worksheet 4T.26: Financial Needs and Capital
                                 Requests. Finally, cite examples from your current- and transition-related SWOT analy-
                                 ses (Worksheet 2T.18 and Worksheet 4T.28, respectively) that support your strategic
                                 plan of action.

                                 As you put pen to paper, try to describe your strategy (or strategies) as a compelling,
                                 inspiring and believable story about how the future can unfold on your farm. There will be
                                 challenges ahead, so you should be excited and confident about making the change. This
                                 should come across in your written plan.



  102    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
RESOURCES
• Agriculture Business Plan Workbook. 2012. AgPlan. Center for Farm Financial Man-
  agement, University of Minnesota. https://agplan.umn.edu. For print copies, contact
  the Center for Farm Financial Management at (612) 625-1964 ext. 0 or cffm@umn.edu.
• Basic Accounting: Guidance for Beginning Farmers. 2012. Lewis, H. ATTRA. Visit
  https://attra.ncat.org and search “basic accounting.”                                             WORKSHEETS ARE NOW
• Borrowing in a Risky Environment. October 28, 2008. Klinefelter, D. and D. McCork-                AVAILABLE ONLINE
  le. Texas A&M Agrilife Extension. Visit www.agrilifebookstore.org and search “e-478.”             Visit www.misa.umn.edu/Publi-
• Business Organization Comparison Chart. February 20, 2015. Armstrong, R. Farm                     cations/OrganicTransitionPlanner
  Commons. www.farmcommons.org.                                                                     to obtain fillable PDF worksheets
• Can GMOs Be Used in Organic Products? May 2013. National Organic Program, USDA                    and electronic spreadsheets.
  - Agricultural Marketing Service. Visit www.ams.usda.gov and search “can GMOs be
  used in organic products.”
• CERES Pricing Tool. 2015. Mercaris Corporation. www.mercariscompany.com.
• Crop Insurance Works for Organic Producers. August 12, 2008. USDA - Risk
  Management Agency. www.rma.usda.gov/pubs/2011/organic_producers.pdf.
• Do I Need to Be Certified Organic? June 2012. National Organic Program, USDA -
  Agricultural Marketing Service. www.ams.usda.gov/services/organic-certification/
  need-be-certified.




                                                                                                                                4
• Documentation Forms for Organic Crop and Livestock Producers. March 2011. Baier,
  A. USDA and ATTRA. https://attra.ncat.org/organic.html.
• EQIP Organic Initiative. 2013. USDA - National Resources Conservation Initiative.
                                                                                                                              TASK 4
  Visit www.nrcs.usda.gov and search “EQIP organic initiative.”
• Estimating Costs of Pasture and Hay Production. March 2012. Barnhart, S. and M. D.
  Duffy. Iowa State University. www.extension.iastate.edu/agdm/crops/html/a1-15.html.
• FAQ: Conservation Planning with Transitioning to Organic Producers. November
  2012. USDA - Natural Resources Conservation Service. Visit www.nrcs.usda.gov and
  search “transitioning to organic producers.”
• FINPACK software website. Center for Farm Financial Management. www.cffm.umn.
  edu/FINPACK/producers.aspx.
• FY 2013 EQIP Conservation Activity Plan (CAP). 2013. USDA - Natural Resources
  Conservation Service. Visit www.nrcs.usda.gov and search “EQIP conservation activity
  plan.”
• Farm Business Management Program website. Minnesota Colleges and Universities.
  www.fbm.mnscu.edu.
• Farm Service Agency website. United States Department of Agriculture. www.fsa.usda.gov.
• Farmers’ Guide to Organic Contracts. August 2012. Heyman, A. N. Farmers’ Legal
  Action Group. www.flaginc.org/publication/farmers-guide-to-organic-contracts.
• Guidance: Commingling and Contamination Prevention in Organic Production and
  Handling. May 9, 2011. National Organic Program, USDA - Agricultural Marketing Ser-
  vice. Visit www.ams.usda.gov and search “commingling and contamination prevention.”
• Guide for Organic Processors. November 2012. Coleman, P. ATTRA and USDA
  Agricultural Marketing Service. https://attra.ncat.org/organic.html.



                                     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS        103
                                 • LLC Creation Checklist. 2013. Armstrong, R. Farm Commons. www.farmcommons.org.
                                 • Minnesota Guide to Organic Certification. February 2011. Riddle, J. and L. Gulbran-
                                   son. Minnesota Institute for Sustainable Agriculture and University of Minnesota
                                   Extension. www.misa.umn.edu/Publications/MNGuidetoOrganicCertification.
                                 • National List of Allowed and Prohibited Substances. USDA - Agricultural Marketing
                                   Service. Visit www.ams.usda.gov and search “national list of allowed and prohibited
                                   substances.”
                                 • National Organic Grain and Feedstuffs - Bi-Weekly. April 29, 2015. Agricultural
                                   Market News Service, USDA. www.ams.usda.gov/mnreports/lsbnof.pdf.
                                 • Non-GMO Sourcebook. 2015. Roseboro, K., ed. Updated annually.
                                   www.nongmosourcebook.com.
                                 • On-Farm Food Safety Project website. FamilyFarmed.org. http://onfarmfoodsafety.org.
                                 • Organic Certification of Farms and Businesses Producing Agricultural Products. No-
                                   vember 2012. Baier, A. and L. Ahramjian. ATTRA. https://attra.ncat.org/organic.html.
                                 • Organic Crops. USDA - Risk Management Agency. www.rma.usda.gov/news/currentis-
                                   sues/organics.
                                 • Organic Farmers: Steps to Success. n.d. Minnesota Department of Agriculture.
                                   www.mda.state.mn.us/~/media/Files/food/organicgrowing/successtool.ashx.
                                 • Organic Farming Practices. April 2014. USDA - Risk Management Agency.




 4
                                   www.rma.usda.gov/pubs/rme/2014organicsfactsheet.pdf.
                                 • Organic Handler Certification Support Package. 2014. California Certified Organic
TASK 4                             Farmers (CCOF). www.ccof.org.
                                 • Organic Materials Review Institute Products List. 2014. OMRI.
                                   www.omri.org/omri-lists/download.
                                 • Organic Processing Institute website. Organic Processing Institute.
                                   www.organicprocessinginstitute.org.
                                 • Organic Transition Course. 2012. Moyer, J. Rodale Institute.
                                   http://rodaleinstitute.org/farm/organic-transition-course.
                                 • Part 205—National Organic Program. December 21, 2000. USDA. In Subchapter M,
                                   Chapter 1, Subtitle B, Title 7. US Government Publishing Office. www.ecfr.gov.
                                 • Profitability of Transitioning to Organic Grain Crops in Indiana. February 2010.
                                   Clark, S. and C. Alexander. Department of Agricultural Economics, Purdue University.
                                   www.agecon.purdue.edu/extension/pubs/paer/2010/february/alexander.asp.
                                 • Rental Agreements for Farm Buildings and Livestock Facilities. February 2013. North
                                   Central Farm Management Extension Committee. http://aglease101.org/doclib/docs/
                                   NCFMEC-04.pdf.
                                 • Smoothing the Path to a Profitable Harvest Home. September 28, 2004. Martens, M.
                                   H. Rodale Institute. www.rodaleinstitute.org.
                                 • Starting the Transition. In Pathway to Organic for Producers. Organic Trade Associa-
                                   tion. www.howtogoorganic.com/index.php?page=starting-the-transition.
                                 • The United States Regional Guide. Organic Trade Association.
                                   www.howtogoorganic.com/index.php?page=united-states.




  104    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
• Tools for Managing Pest and Environmental Risks to Organic Crops in the Upper
  Midwest. 2010. Moncada, K. M. and C. C. Sheaffer, Eds. University of Minnesota.
  www.organicriskmanagement.umn.edu.
• Twelve Steps to Cash Flow Budgeting. April 2014. Edwards, W. Department of Eco-
  nomics University Extension, Iowa State University. Visit www.extension.iastate.edu
  and search “C3-15.”
• USDA Accredited Certifying Agents (ACAs). April 23, 2015. National Organic Program,
  USDA - Agricultural Marketing Service. Visit www.ams.usda.gov and search “accredited
  certifying agents.”




                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                           TASK 4




                                     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS   105
                                                                                                    DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 4T.1                                                                         Worksheet 4T.1: Whole-Farm
                                                                                                    Strategies (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                                    info/4T.1WholeFarmStrategies.pdf)
           WHOLE-FARM STRATEGIES
           Use the space below to articulate one or two whole-farm strategies that you may be considering (e.g., transitioning gradually
           versus transitioning all at once). We have provided space for two whole-farm strategies, but you may have more than two alter-
           natives in mind. Think of these short descriptions as something you would share with someone who asks, What are you thinking
           of doing? Next, describe the rationale behind each whole-farm transition strategy. Reflect on your current situation, goals and
           future vision. Recall conversations that you have had with your planning team and review the SWOT analysis that you created on
           Worksheet 2T.12: Current Whole-Farm SWOT Analysis. Keep this information in front of you when exploring specific operations,
           marketing, human resource and finance strategies in Planning Task Four: Strategic Planning.

           Strategy name: _________________________________________________________________________________________

           Strategy description (What are you thinking of doing?):
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




 4
TASK 4     Strategy rationale (Why are you thinking of doing it?):
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

           Strategy name: _________________________________________________________________________________________

           Strategy description (What are you thinking of doing?):
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

           Strategy rationale (Why are you thinking of doing it?):
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

  106    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                      DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.2                                                                      Worksheet 4T.2: Operations Strategy Sum-
                                                                                      mary (http://misadocuments.info/4T.2Op-
                                                                                      erationsStrategySummary.pdf)
OPERATIONS STRATEGY SUMMARY
Complete this operations worksheet for your preferred whole-farm transition strategy whether you plan to grow commodities,
raise livestock or process products. Begin with a brief description of production opportunities. If you are uncertain about what to
write here, try asking yourself, Why is this a particularly good time to transition? Next, describe your three- to five-year opera-
tions strategy. When doing so, summarize information about your crop rotation, grazing schedule and processing plans as well as
associated resource needs during the first five years. Next, describe resource needs and how you will fill any resource gaps—iden-
tify acquisition strategies for needed land, buildings, machinery, equipment, breeding livestock and inputs. Afterward, explain your
plans for certifying the farm. List which certifier(s) you plan to contact as well as any other special permits and licenses that may
be needed to implement your operational strategy.

If your operations strategy appears viable at this stage in planning, summarize all of the information from this worksheet in two to
three paragraphs under “Business Plan Input.” This information can be transferred to AgPlan in the Operations section when ready.
If you are not convinced of this proposed transition strategy, this may be a good time to put on the brakes and review your goals
and explore alternative strategies.

Opportunities (List industry-wide opportunities and those that are unique to your farm):
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                                                                                                                                    4
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________                                           TASK 4
Strategy Description (Describe how you will transition your land, animals or processing operations):
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

Resource Needs and Acquisition Strategies (How will you fill gaps or access needed inputs?):
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

Legal Obligations (e.g., organic certification, licenses, permits needed):
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                                                                                                        continued
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS                   107
           Feasibility (Does your operations strategy seem viable?): ______ (If “yes,” prepare your business plan input statements below. If
           “no,” list the problems or hurdles below, then revise your operations strategy accordingly. If there are significant problems, you
           may want to return to the strategy alternative(s) listed on Worksheet 4T.1: Whole-Farm Strategies and begin again.)
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

           Business Plan Input: (Summarize operations opportunities, your strategy and how it addresses opportunities, resource needs,



 4
           resource acquisition plans and legal obligations. Record in AgPlan when ready.)
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
TASK 4     _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

           Does this strategy still look like the best option, or should you consider an alternative?
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




  108    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
  WORKSHEET 4T.3                                                                        DOWNLOAD THE PDF
                                                                                        Worksheet 4T.3: Crop and Livestock
                                                                                        Enterprises (http://misadocuments.in-
                                                                                        fo/4T.3CropandLivestockEnterprises.pdf)
CROP AND LIVESTOCK ENTERPRISES
Use the space below to brainstorm which crop and livestock enterprises you would like to include in your organic rotation as well
as any production conditions or needs that might influence your ability to include them in rotation plans. Next, list new buildings,
equipment and other inputs that will be required to manage these crop and livestock enterprises according to organic certification
requirements as well as any anticipated new skills that will be necessary to learn or to address through hired help, consultants, etc.

              Enterprise			                           New Production Needs			                              New Skills

1. _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
 _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
 _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________


2._____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
 _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
 _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________


3. _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
 _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________



                                                                                                                                          4
 _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
                                                                                                                                         TASK 4
4.______________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
 _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
 _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________


5. _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
 _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
 _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________


6._____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
 _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
 _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________


Identify areas where you need to learn new skills to manage new enterprises using organic methods:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________



                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS        109
                                                                                                       DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 4T.4                                                                            Worksheet 4T.4: Transitional Farm
                                                                                                       Map (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                                       info/4T.4TransitionalFarmMap.pdf)
           TRANSITIONAL FARM MAP
           Use the space below to create a map for each year in your rotation and grazing schedule so that you have a sequence of maps
           representing your three years of transition plus the first two years of certification. This exercise is similar to the one you did in
           Planning Task Two: Current Situation, only now you are mapping the future. Depict field rotations, buffers, conservation measures
           and erosion practices. If your operation includes livestock, be sure to note fencing, watering lines, housing and grazing schedules.
           You may also want to include field notes on your map about soil types as well as pest, weed and disease management practices
           (e.g., tillage and cultivation practices), and expected changes in herd size and pasture practices. More than one worksheet or sheet
           of paper may be needed.




 4
TASK 4




  110    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                            DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.5                                                                            Worksheet 4T.5: Organic Process-
                                                                                            ing Map (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                            info/4T.5OrganicProcessingMap.pdf)
ORGANIC PROCESSING MAP
Use the space below or a separate piece of paper to create a processing flow chart and facility map. These diagrams are much
like field maps in that they visually describe where you will process and how you will process. Flow charts and facility maps are
required for an OSPH and typically include building dimensions, processing stations (e.g., washing, cutting, cooking, packing, etc.),
equipment notes, bathroom locations, and storage and distribution areas. At this point in your research, your facility map and
processing flow chart may be a bit rudimentary. Do not worry. You can refine your maps by adding more detail as you continue to
develop your processing strategy.




                                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                                                                        TASK 4




                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS        111
                                                                                                     DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 4T.6                                                                          Worksheet 4T.6: Processed Products
                                                                                                     and Services (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                                     info/4T.6ProcessedProductsServices.pdf)
           PROCESSED PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
           List value-added products and services that you plan to process (e.g., organic bread). Next, in the second column, describe the
           type of processing required for each value-added product or service (e.g., dehydration, fermentation, baking). In the third column,
           list processing needs such as equipment and the type of facilities that will be required to complete all processing tasks. Finally, if
           known, record the location of existing processing facilities or options for establishing processing and service-related infrastructure
           for your farm.

            Products/Services		                                  Type of Processing		                            Needed for Processing
           				                                                 (equipment, facilities)		
           1. _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
            _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
            _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________


           2._____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
            _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
            _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________




 4
           3. _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________

TASK 4      _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
            _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________


           4.______________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
            _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
            _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________


           5. _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
            _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
            _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________


           6._____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
            _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________
            _____________________________ ________________________________________ ___________________________


           Record the location and distance of existing processing facilities if processing off-site or describe your on-farm facilities:
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


  112    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                     DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.7                                                                     Worksheet 4T.7: Production Estimates,
                                                                                     Crops (http://misadocuments.in-
                                                                                     fo/4T.7ProductionEstimates,Crops.pdf)
PRODUCTION ESTIMATES, CROPS
Use the space below to record changes in your estimated crop output for each field over the five-year planning period. Field
numbers should correspond with your farm map(s). Create additional copies of this worksheet as needed. Summarize your crop
production plans in three to four sentences for the “Business Plan Output Summary” below.
		
                                          TRANSITION                                           CERTIFIED

Field No._______        Year 1              Year 2              Year 3               Year 4              Year 5

Enterprise		 ___________                ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________
No. of acres          ___________       ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________
Avg. yield per acre ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________
Total yield per field ___________       ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________


Field No._______        Year 1              Year 2              Year 3               Year 4              Year 5

Enterprise		 ___________                ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________
No. of acres          ___________       ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________



                                                                                                                                  4
Avg. yield per acre ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________
Total yield per field ___________       ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________
                                                                                                                                 TASK 4

Field No._______        Year 1              Year 2              Year 3               Year 4              Year 5

Enterprise		 ___________                ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________
No. of acres          ___________       ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________
Avg. yield per acre ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________
Total yield per field ___________       ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________


Business Plan Output Summary:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                           ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    113
                                                                                              DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 4T.8                                                                   Worksheet 4T.8: Production Estimates, Live-
                                                                                              stock (http://misadocuments.info/4T.8Pro-
                                                                                              ductionEstimates,Livestock.pdf)
           PRODUCTION ESTIMATES, LIVESTOCK
           Use the space below to record changes in your estimated livestock output for each enterprise over the five-year planning period.
           Create additional copies of this worksheet as needed. Summarize your livestock production plans in three to four sentences for
           the “Business Plan Output Summary” below.
           		
                                                     TRANSITION                                          CERTIFIED

                                   Year 1               Year 2               Year 3              Year 4               Year 5

           Enterprise		 ___________                 ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________
           No. of animals     ___________           ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________
           Avg. output/animal ___________           ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________
           Total output       ___________           ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________


                                   Year 1               Year 2               Year 3              Year 4               Year 5

           Enterprise		 ___________                 ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________
           No. of animals     ___________           ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________




 4
           Avg. output/animal ___________           ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________
           Total output       ___________           ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________
TASK 4
                                   Year 1               Year 2               Year 3              Year 4               Year 5

           Enterprise		 ___________                 ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________
           No. of animals     ___________           ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________
           Avg. output/animal ___________           ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________
           Total output       ___________           ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________


                                   Year 1               Year 2               Year 3              Year 4               Year 5

           Enterprise		 ___________                 ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________
           No. of animals     ___________           ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________
           Avg. output/animal ___________           ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________
           Total output       ___________           ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________

           Business Plan Output Summary:
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


  114    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                 DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.9                                                                 Worksheet 4T.9: Production Estimates, Processed
                                                                                 Products (http://misadocuments.info/4T.9Pro-
                                                                                 ductionEstimatesProcessedProducts.pdf)

PRODUCTION ESTIMATES, PROCESSED PRODUCTS
Use the space below to record your maximum processing capacity for each product over the five-year planning period. There is
enough room on this worksheet for three products. Processing capacity, or the number of processed units, is dependent on avail-
ability of raw products, other inputs, machinery, factilities, labor and market demand. “Raw input needed” refers to the primary
ingredient(s) needed for each processed product, including the quantity needed per unit of product. We have provided room for
three raw inputs for each product. If more room is needed, use a blank sheet of paper. Calculate the total number of units of each
raw input you need to reach your maximum processing capacity.

If this is your first time putting estimates to paper, provide your best guess. You can return to this worksheet later after con-
ducting further production, marketing, human resource and financial research to make revisions. When ready, summarize your
processing plans in three to four sentences for the “Business Plan Output Summary” below.

                                                   TRANSITION                                         CERTIFIED

                                    Year 1              Year 2             Year 3              Year 4             Year 5

PRODUCT NAME                   _________           _________           _________           _________         _________




                                                                                                                                      4
Units                          ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________      ____________
(a) Processing capacity
(No. of units)                 ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________      ____________
                                                                                                                                     TASK 4

(b) Quantity of raw
 input needed/unit             ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________      ____________
Total raw input (a*b)          _________           _________           _________           _________         _________


(c) Quantity of raw
input needed/unit              ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________      ____________
Total raw input (a*c)          _________           _________           _________           _________         _________


(d) Quantity of raw
input needed/unit              ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________      ____________
Total raw input (a*d)          _________           _________           _________           _________         _________ continued




                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS     115
                                                          TRANSITION                                   CERTIFIED

                                             Year 1           Year 2            Year 3            Year 4           Year 5

           PRODUCT NAME                 _________          _________         _________         __________ _________
           Units                        ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________   ____________
           (a) Processing capacity
           (No. of units)               ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________   ____________
           (b) Quantity of raw
           input needed/unit            ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________   ____________
           Total raw input (a*b)        _________          _________         _________         _________      _________


           (c) Quantity of raw
           input needed/unit            ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________   ____________
           Total raw input (a*c)        _________          _________         _________         _________      _________
           (d) Quantity of raw
            input needed/unit           ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________   ____________
           Total raw input (a*d)        _________          _________         _________         _________      _________

           PRODUCT NAME                 _________          _________         _________         _________      _________



 4
TASK 4
           Units
           (a) Processing capacity
           (No. of units)
           (b) Quantity of raw
           input needed/unit
                                        ____________

                                        ____________

                                        ____________
                                                           ____________

                                                           ____________

                                                           ____________
                                                                             ____________

                                                                             ____________

                                                                             ____________
                                                                                               ____________

                                                                                               ____________

                                                                                               ____________
                                                                                                              ____________

                                                                                                              ____________

                                                                                                              ____________
           Total raw input (a*b)        _________          _________         _________         _________      _________


           (c) Quantity of raw
           input needed/unit            ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________   ____________
           Total raw input (a*c)        _________          _________         _________         _________      _________
           (d) Quantity of raw
            input needed/unit           ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________   ____________
           Total raw input (a*d)        _________          _________         _________         _________      _________



           Business Plan Output Summary:
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________



  116    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                      DOWNLOAD THE PDF
   WORKSHEET 4T.10                                                                    Worksheet 4T.10: Licenses and Certification
                                                                                      (http://misadocuments.info/4T.10Licens-
                                                                                      esCertification.pdf)
LICENSES AND CERTIFICATION
List county, state and federal regulations that affect your farm business, then record any licenses and certifications needed to sat-
isfy these regulations. Requirements may be different for transition and for certification. Space has been provided for each. Finally,
describe your plans for addressing the regulations and note any outstanding questions or follow-up required. Be sure to include all
relevant regulations related to production, handling and processing, and your timeline for meeting them.


		
                                                           TRANSITION            CERTIFIED ORGANIC
 Regulatory issue               Regulations            Licenses, conditions      Licenses, conditions      Strategy for addressing
                                                             and fees                  and fees                  regulations

 Planning



 Zoning




                                                                                                                                          4
 Waste management
                                                                                                                                         TASK 4
 Health and safety



 Buildings



 Environmental



 Crop production



 Livestock production



 Processing



 Handling and storage

				



                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS         117
                                                                                               DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 4T.11                                                                   Worksheet 4T.11: Operations Risk Manage-
                                                                                               ment (http://misadocuments.info/4T.11Oper-
                                                                                               ationsRiskManagement.pdf)
           OPERATIONS RISK MANAGEMENT
           Use the space below to identify production risks for each enterprise during transition. Examples might include weather, cross
           contamination from non-organic fields, yield penalties, weeds, etc. Next, brainstorm risk management strategies that can be used
           to avoid or mitigate each risk. In some cases, you may not have a risk management solution. Leave these spaces blank and return
           to them later. Blank spaces will be a reminder of where strategy holes may exist or of issues that may need a little research. Ask
           experienced organic farmers about any uncertainties or visit with a certifier to begin exploring risk management options. Finally,
           develop some recovery strategies in the space provided to address anticipated worst-case scenarios.

           Enterprise:_ ___________________________________________________________________________________________
           Transition Risks:________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Risk Management Strategies:______________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Recovery Strategies:_____________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




 4
           Enterprise:_ ___________________________________________________________________________________________
           Transition Risks:________________________________________________________________________________________
TASK 4     _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Risk Management Strategies:______________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Recovery Strategies:_____________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Enterprise:_____________________________________________________________________________________________
           Transition Risks:________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Risk Management Strategies:______________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Recovery Strategies:_____________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

           Do any of the risks and risk management strategies identified here alter your operations strategy? If so, how? (Revise your
           operations strategy summary on Worksheet 4T.2: Operations Strategy Summary and in AgPlan if applicable.)
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




  118    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                      DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.12                                                                     Worksheet 4T.12: Marketing Strategy
                                                                                      Summary (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                      info/4T.12MarketingStrategySummary.pdf)
MARKETING STRATEGY SUMMARY
Use the space below to describe your marketing strategy for crops, livestock products and processed products or services. If
your strategy varies by crop or product—as it likely will—make a copy of this worksheet and complete one for crops and one for
products and services.

Begin by summarizing marketing trends and opportunities. Provide information from your research (e.g., information obtained
during conversations with buyers and others). Next, in three to four sentences, describe your buyers and your plans for accessing
markets. List your competitive advantage in each market and then briefly describe your whole-farm marketing strategy for crops
and products. If using AgPlan, include this information in the Marketing Strategy section.

Opportunities (List industry-wide opportunities and those that are unique to your business):
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                                                                                                                                4
Strategy Description:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                                                                                                            TASK 4
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

Buyers and Terms of Sale:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

How will you gain access to buyers or markets?
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                                                                                                    continued
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS                119
           Competitive Advantages:
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

           Legal Obligations (Will you require an OSPH?):
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

           Feasibility (Does your marketing strategy seem viable?): ________ (If “yes,” prepare your business plan input statements below. If
           “no,” list the problems or hurdles below, then revise your marketing strategy accordingly. If there are significant problems, you may
           want to return to the strategy alternative(s) listed on Worksheet 4T.1: Whole-Farm Strategies and begin again.)
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________



 4
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
TASK 4     _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

           Business Plan Input - Marketing Strategy Summary: (Summarize operations opportunities, your strategy and how it addresses
           opportunities, resource needs, resource acquisition plans and legal obligations. Record in AgPlan when ready.)

           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

           Does this strategy still look like the best option, or should you consider an alternative?
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




  120    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                       DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.13                                                                      Worksheet 4T.13: Projected Enterprise
                                                                                       Sales (http://misadocuments.in-
                                                                                       fo/4T.13ProjectedEnterpriseSales.pdf)
PROJECTED ENTERPRISE SALES
Use the space below to estimate sales revenue for each field or enterprise. Total output numbers come from production esti-
mates developed earlier (Worksheets 4T.7-4T.9). Calculate revenue only for products that you plan to sell. Do not include revenue
for products that will be utilized on the farm, such as livestock feed. Prices come from your own market research, price reports
(see the Resources section) and contracts. Add the revenue from each enterprise to arrive at total projected enterprise sales.
Make additional copies of this worksheet, if needed, to capture income from all enterprises. An electronic spreadsheet is available
to help with these calculations at http://misadocuments.info/OrganicTransitionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx.

		 TRANSITION		               CERTIFIED
							
  Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4           Year 5


Field/enterprise         ________           ________            ________            ________            ________

(a) Output for sale      ________           ________            ________            ________            ________

(b) Price per unit       ________           ________            ________            ________            ________




                                                                                                                                       4
(c1) Revenue (a*b)       _______            _______             _______             _______             _______

                                                                                                                                      TASK 4
Field/enterprise         ________           ________            ________            ________            ________

(a) Output for sale      ________           ________            ________            ________            ________

(b) Price per unit       ________           ________            ________            ________            ________

(c2) Revenue (a*b)       _______            _______             _______             _______             _______


Field/enterprise         ________           ________            ________            ________            ________

(a) Output for sale      ________           ________            ________            ________            ________

(b) Price per unit       ________           ________            ________            ________            ________

(c3) Revenue (a*b)       _______            _______             _______             _______             _______


Total projected          _______            _______             _______             _______             _______
enterprise sales
= (c1+c2+c3)




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS       121
                                                                                                 DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 4T.14                                                                     Worksheet 4T.14: Marketing Risk Man-
                                                                                                 agement (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                                 info/4T.14MarketingRiskManagement.pdf)
           MARKETING RISK MANAGEMENT
           Use the space below to identify marketing risks for each enterprise during transition. Next, brainstorm risk management strategies
           that can be used to avoid or mitigate each risk. In some cases, you may not have a risk management solution. Leave these spaces
           blank and return to them later. Blank spaces will be a reminder of where strategy holes may exist or of issues that may need a lit-
           tle research. Ask experienced organic farmers about any uncertainties or visit with a certifier to begin exploring risk management
           options. Finally, develop some recovery strategies in the space provided to address anticipated worst case scenarios.

           Enterprise:_ ___________________________________________________________________________________________
           Transition Risks:________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Risk Management Strategies:______________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Recovery Strategies:_____________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Enterprise:_ ___________________________________________________________________________________________




 4
           Transition Risks:________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
TASK 4
           Risk Management Strategies:______________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Recovery Strategies:_____________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Enterprise:_ ___________________________________________________________________________________________
           Transition Risks:________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Risk Management Strategies:______________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Recovery Strategies:_____________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

           Do any of the risks and risk management strategies identified here alter your marketing strategy? If so, how? (Revise your
           marketing strategy summary on Worksheet 4T.12: Marketing Strategy Summary and in AgPlan if applicable.)
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________



  122    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                     DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.15                                                                    Worksheet 4T.15: Human Resource Strat-
                                                                                     egy Summary (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                     info/4T.15HRStrategySummary.pdf)
HUMAN RESOURCE STRATEGY SUMMARY
Use the space below to describe human resource opportunities (e.g., a family member wants to join the business) and your
human resource strategy. Next, list your management and labor needs during the five-year planning period and summarize general
strategies that you will use to fill these human resource needs. For example, will your labor come from family, hired seasonal help
or custom-hire service providers? Pay specific attention to management experience, training and qualifications that will help you
address human resource needs. Next, list human resource-related expenses in the space provided. Examples of human resource
expenses include wages, salaries, benefits, taxes, insurance and training. You will use this information when estimating projected
cash flow and profitability for the whole farm. Finally, summarize your whole-farm human resource strategy under “Business Plan
Input.” Enter your summary under Human Resources in AgPlan, if you are using it.

Human Resource Opportunities:_ ____________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

Strategy Description:_______________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


Human Resource Needs:_ ________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                      TASK 4


Management Experience and Qualifications:_ ________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

Human Resource Expenses:__________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

Business Plan Input—Human Resource Strategy Summary:______________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________

Does this strategy still look like the best option, or should you consider an alternative?_ ______________________________
________________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS      123
                                                                                                    DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 4T.16                                                                        Worksheet 4T.16: Acquired Knowledge
                                                                                                    (http://misadocuments.info/4T.16Ac-
                                                                                                    quiredKnowledge.pdf)
           ACQUIRED KNOWLEDGE
           What knowledge, skills or experience do you bring to the farm business? Answer this question in the space below by describing
           your farming experience, efforts you have already made to learn about organic management, and anything else that feels relevant.
           Next, document how you or others involved in the business intend to fill knowledge gaps in production, marketing and other
           areas of management. Will you develop new management skills by attending events such as field days, conferences, workshops
           or networking groups, or through on-farm experience as hired labor, an intern or a volunteer? This exercise will give you and your
           lender confidence in your management strategies and overall business plan. Include this information on your human resource
           strategy summary (Worksheet 4T.15: Human Resource Strategy Summary) or in the management section of your business plan.

           Farming Experience:_____________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




 4
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________

TASK 4
           Efforts Made to Learn About Organic Management:___________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Plans to Fill Knowledge Gaps:_ ____________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




  124    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                     DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.17                                                                    Worksheet 4T.17: Management and Workforce
                                                                                     Responsibilities (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                     info/4T.17ManagementandWorkforce.pdf)
MANAGEMENT AND WORKFORCE
RESPONSIBILITIES
Use this worksheet to identify the people involved in your farming operation and their key responsibilities during transition and
after certification. In the first column, list the names of all full-time, part-time and seasonal workers who will provide labor on the
farm, including family. Use the next column to describe their key responsibilities related to operations, marketing, human resourc-
es and finance, and whether these tasks are performed daily, weekly or seasonally. In the remaining two columns, indicate when
each person’s busiest and slowest times of year are. Or if you prefer, use the grid you developed with Worksheet 2T.9: Current
Human Resources as the basis for this exercise.
This will help you identify management and labor bottlenecks that may occur during transition. Record this information, as well as
your ideas for addressing bottlenecks or needs, in the space provided at the end of this worksheet. These ideas will become your
acquisition strategies and can include hiring labor, offering internships, engaging custom operators and bartering with another
farmer, to name a few examples.

     Person                      Tasks/Key Responsibilities                Busiest Time(s) of Year       Slowest Time(s) of Year

______________            ________________________________                 ___________________             ________________

______________           ________________________________                  ___________________              ________________




                                                                                                                                           4
______________           ________________________________                  ___________________              ________________

______________           ________________________________                  ___________________              ________________
                                                                                                                                          TASK 4
______________           ________________________________                  ___________________              ________________

______________           ________________________________                  ___________________              ________________

______________           ________________________________                  ___________________              ________________

______________           ________________________________                  ___________________              ________________

______________           ________________________________                  ___________________              ________________
______________           ________________________________                  ___________________              ________________

______________           ________________________________                  ___________________              ________________


Human Resource Bottlenecks, Needs and Acquisition Strategies:
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________



                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS         125
                                                                                              DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 4T.18                                                                  Worksheet 4T.18: Recordkeeping Strategy
                                                                                              (http://misadocuments.info/4T.18Record-
                                                                                              keepingStrategy.pdf)
           RECORDKEEPING STRATEGY
           Briefly describe the type of records needed for organic certification, handling and marketing. (See Text Box 4T.3: Examples of
           Records Needed for Organic Certification.) This may vary depending on whether you will maintain a split operation or plan to
           custom hire some of the activities. Be sure to note who will be responsible for recordkeeping tasks! Finally, summarize your
           recordkeeping strategy under “Business Plan Input.” This can be added to the Management and Organization section of AgPlan.

           Records needed:________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Research you have done to learn about organic recordkeeping, audit trails and lot numbers:___________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________



 4
TASK 4
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           System you intend to use for recordkeeping (e.g., computer software, three-ring binder, shoe box):_______________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Person(s) responsible for recordkeeping:_______________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Business Plan Input - Recordkeeping Strategy Summary:________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




  126    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                      DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.19                                                                     Worksheet 4T.19: Human Resource Risk
                                                                                      Management (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                      info/4T.19HRRiskManagement.pdf)
HUMAN RESOURCE RISK MANAGEMENT
Use the space below to identify human resource risks for each major task or job during transition (e.g., field work, calving, market-
ing, recordkeeping). Next, brainstorm risk management strategies that can be used to avoid or mitigate each risk. In some cases,
you may not have a risk management solution. Leave these spaces blank and return to them later. Blank spaces will be a reminder
of where strategy holes may exist or of issues that may need a little research. Ask experienced organic farmers about any uncer-
tainties or visit with a certifier to begin exploring risk management options. Finally, develop some recovery strategies in the space
provided to address anticipated worst case scenarios.

Task:_________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Transition Risks:___________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
Risk Management Strategies:______________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
Recovery Strategies:_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


Task:_________________________________________________________________________________________________________



                                                                                                                                         4
Transition Risks:___________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________                                   TASK 4
Risk Management Strategies:______________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
Recovery Strategies:_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


Task:_________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Transition Risks:___________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
Risk Management Strategies:______________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
Recovery Strategies:_____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


Do any of the risks and risk management strategies identified here alter your human resource strategy? If so, how? (Revise
your human resource strategy on Worksheet 4T.15: Human Resource Strategy Summary and in AgPlan if applicable.)
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________



                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS       127
                                                                                               DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 4T.20                                                                   Worksheet 4T.20: Projected Family Living
                                                                                               Expenses (http://misadocuments.in-
                                                                                               fo/4T.20ProjectedFamilyLivingExpenses.pdf)
           PROJECTED FAMILY LIVING EXPENSES
           Use this worksheet to estimate future family living expenses and your necessary income contribution from the farm business.
           Space has been provided to allow for expense estimates during transition and the first two years of certification, if you anticipate
           annual changes in family living expenses (e.g., college). If you expect family living expenses to remain unchanged from your current
           expense estimates, you can skip this worksheet. An electronic spreadsheet is available to help with these calculations at
           http://misadocuments.info/OrganicTransitionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx.
           		
           FAMILY LIVING EXPENSE ($/year)                  YEAR 1              YEAR 2              YEAR 3          YEAR 4          YEAR 5
           Food and meals                            ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Medical care and health insurance         ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Cash donations                            ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Household supplies                        ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Clothing                                  ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Personal care                             ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Child/dependent care                      ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Gifts                                     ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Education                                 ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Recreation                                ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________




 4
           Utilities (household share)               ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Nonfarm vehicle operating expense         ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
TASK 4     Household real estate taxes               ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Dwelling rent                             ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Household repairs                         ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Nonfarm interest                          ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Life insurance payments                   ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Other                                     ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Total cash family living expenses         ____________      ____________       ____________      ____________      ____________
           Farm assets used for personal/
           family consumption                        ____________      ____________       ____________ ____________ ____________
           Total family living expenses
           (sum of all above) (a)                    _________          _________         _________ _________ _________

           OTHER NONFARM EXPENSES
           Income taxes                              ____________      ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________
           Furnishings and appliances                ____________      ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________
           Nonfarm vehicle purchases                 ____________      ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________
           Nonfarm real estate purchases             ____________      ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________
           Other nonfarm capital purchases           ____________      ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________
           Nonfarm savings and investments           ____________      ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________
           Other nonfarm expenditures                ____________      ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________
           Total other nonfarm expenditures (b)      __________        __________ __________ __________ __________

           Total cash family living investment and
           nonfarm capital purchases (c) = (a+b)   ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________
           Nonfarm income (d)                      ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________ ____________
           Necessary contribution from
           farm business (c)-(d)                   __________ __________ __________ __________ _________
  128    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                      DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.21                                                                     Worksheet 4T.21: Financial Strategy Sum-
                                                                                      mary (http://misadocuments.info/4T.21Fi-
                                                                                      nancialStrategySummary.pdf)
FINANCIAL STRATEGY SUMMARY
Use the space below to document financial opportunites (e.g., list potential investors, low interest rates or a recent gift of land).
Next, summarize your financial strategy for reaching farm business goals and implementing other transition strategies related to
operations, marketing and human resources. Will you rely on financing to make any needed investments that are required for the
transition? Will you build wealth (assets) and reduce debt over time? Then in the space provided, document how income, profits
and cash flow will change over time as your transition strategy is implemented. Much of this information can be found on Work-
sheets 4T.24-4T.26. Next, describe any capital needs (start-up, operating, intermediate, long-term, real estate). Then, identify a
source for addressing these finance needs (e.g., guaranteed loan from FSA, borrowed funds from bank, angel investor). Record how
you will organize the business (e.g., sole proprietorship, corporation). Finally, draft a brief summary of your whole-farm financial
strategy and include it in the Financial Plan section of AgPlan or in your own word document.


Financial Opportunities:__________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                                                                                                                                    4
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                                                                                                                TASK 4
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________


Strategy Description:____________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                                                                                                        continued
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS                   129
           			
           		                                          TRANSITION		                                     CERTIFIED

                                       YEAR 1             YEAR 2              YEAR 3              YEAR 4            YEAR 5

           Projected Income       _____________       _____________      _____________         _____________   _____________

           Projected Cash Flow    _____________       _____________      _____________         _____________   _____________

           Projected Total Assets _____________       _____________      _____________         _____________   _____________

           Capital Requests       _____________       _____________      _____________         _____________   _____________

           Capital Source         _____________       _____________      _____________         _____________   _____________



           Business Organization:_ ____________________________________________________________________________________
           ________________________________________________________________________________________________________
           ________________________________________________________________________________________________________




 4
           ________________________________________________________________________________________________________
           ________________________________________________________________________________________________________
TASK 4     ________________________________________________________________________________________________________
           ________________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Business Plan Input—Financial Strategy Summary:_ ___________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Does this strategy still look like the best option, or should you consider an alternative?_ ______________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




  130    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                           DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.22                                                                          Worksheet 4T.22: Projected Farm
                                                                                           Expenses (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                           info/4T.22ProjectedFarmExpenses.pdf)
PROJECTED FARM EXPENSES
Estimate direct and overhead expenses for transition and the first two years after certification. If you are considering more than
one whole-farm strategy, copy this worksheet or download a blank copy from the MISA website. Be sure to estimate and include:
1) annual ownership costs of machinery, equipment and buildings (i.e., depreciation, interest, repairs, taxes and insurance); and 2)
start-up costs as either one-time cash expenses or as part of annual debt or lease payments (depending on how you decide to
finance these costs). Note that we have included a line for “chemicals” to be consistent with other worksheets, but this expense
item will likely remain empty during transition and upon certification. If you prefer, an electronic spreadsheet is available to help
you with these calculations at http://misadocuments.info/OrganicTransitionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx.
			
		                                                     TRANSITION		                                          CERTIFIED

DIRECT EXPENSES                        YEAR 1              YEAR 2              YEAR 3              YEAR 4               YEAR 5
Seed                                ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Fertilization                       ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Chemicals                           ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Irrigation energy                   ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Other direct crop expenses          ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Feeder livestock expenses           ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________




                                                                                                                                        4
Feed and forages                    ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Pasture                             ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
                                                                                                                                       TASK 4
Breeding                            ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Veterinary                          ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Other direct livestock expenses     ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Crop insurance                      ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Custom hire                         ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Fuel and oil                        ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Repairs and maintenance             ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Storage                             ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Processing                          ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Certification fees                  ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Professional fees                   ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Education                           ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Office supplies                     ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Marketing                           ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Seasonal labor                      ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Interest on operating loan(s)       ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Sales taxes                         ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Other operating expenses            ___________         ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________
Total Direct Expenses (a)           _________           _________           _________           _________            _________ continued




                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS       131
           		                                                  TRANSITION		                               CERTIFIED

           OVERHEAD EXPENSES                    YEAR 1            YEAR 2            YEAR 3       YEAR 4               YEAR 5

           Utilities                          ___________      ___________       ___________   ___________       ___________
           Rent and leases                    ___________      ___________       ___________   ___________       ___________
           Hired labor                        ___________      ___________       ___________   ___________       ___________
           Owner wages                        ___________      ___________       ___________   ___________       ___________
           Depreciation                       ___________      ___________       ___________   ___________       ___________
           Farm insurance                     ___________      ___________       ___________   ___________       ___________
           Taxes (property, payroll taxes)    ___________      ___________       ___________   ___________       ___________
           Interest on intermediate loan(s)   ___________      ___________       ___________   ___________       ___________
           Interest on long-term debt         ___________      ___________       ___________   ___________       ___________
           Other overhead expenses            ___________      ___________       ___________   ___________       ___________
           Total Overhead Expenses (b)        _________        _________         _________     _________         _________

           Total Farm Expenses = (a+b)        _________        _________         _________     _________          _________




 4
TASK 4




  132    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                       DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.23                                                                      Worksheet 4T.23: Projected Income
                                                                                       Statement (http://misadocuments.in-
                                                                                       fo/4T.23ProjectedIncomeStatement.pdf)
PROJECTED INCOME STATEMENT
Use the space below to record projected farm income and expenses for the first five years of your whole-farm strategy. These
numbers come from your projected enterprise sales (Worksheet 4T.13) and projected farm expenses (Worksheet 4T.22). Then cal-
culate the net farm income for the strategy being considered by subtracting total expenses from total revenue and adding in any
inventory changes (you can use Worksheet 2T.16: Calculating Depreciation and Inventory Changes to estimate these numbers).
How does projected net farm income under your transition and organic certification strategy compare to your current farm in-
come (Worksheet 2T.14)? Note that if you are considering more than one strategy, you should copy this worksheet and complete
it for each strategy, or download additional copies from the MISA website. Electronic spreadsheets are also available to assist with
these calculations at http://misadocuments.info/OrganicTransitionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx.


					                                                TRANSITION 			                                      CERTIFIED

                                   YEAR 1              YEAR 2                YEAR 3              YEAR 4              YEAR 5
Enterprise sales (a)            ____________        ____________          ___________         ___________         ___________
Cooperative distributions (b)   ____________        ____________          ___________         ___________         ___________
Government payments (c)         ____________        ____________          ___________         ___________         ___________
Crop insurance proceeds (d)     ____________        ____________          ___________         ___________         ___________




                                                                                                                                        4
Custom hire income (e)          ____________        ____________          ___________         ___________         ___________
Other income (f)                ____________        ____________          ___________         ___________         ___________
Gross cash farm income          __________          __________            _________           _________           _________
                                                                                                                                       TASK 4
  (g) = (a+b+c+d+e+f)

Farm expenses (h)               ____________        ____________          ___________         ___________         ___________
Inventory change (i)            ____________        ____________          ___________         ___________         ___________
Net farm income                 __________          __________            _________           _________           _________
  (j) = (g-h) +/- (i)



How do your farm income projections compare to your current farm income (found on Worksheet 2T.14: Current Income
Statement)?_ __________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS       133
                                                                                                   DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 4T.24                                                                       Worksheet 4T.24: Projected Cash Flow
                                                                                                   (http://misadocuments.info/4T.24Project-
                                                                                                   edCashFlow.pdf)
           PROJECTED CASH FLOW
           Use the space below to calculate cash flow during transition and your first two years of certification. If you are exploring more
           than one transition strategy, make a copy of this worksheet and complete it for each. Begin by estimating total cash inflows and
           outflows. Then subtract outflows from the inflows. If the projected net cash flow is positive, then you should have enough cash
           on hand to cover expenses each year; you will be able to make debt payments on time. (Keep in mind that month-to-month cash
           flow may still be an issue.) If, on the other hand, net cash flow is negative, the farm business will have trouble repaying short-term
           debt. Compare this transitional cash flow plan to your current cash flow plan (found on Worksheet 2T.15: Current Cash Flow). An
           electronic version of this worksheet is available at http://misadocuments.info/OrganicTransitionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx.

                					                                            TRANSITION 			                                     CERTIFIED

                                                YEAR 1               YEAR 2              YEAR 3              YEAR 4             YEAR 5
           CASH INFLOWS
           Gross cash farm income (a)        ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________       ____________
             (g) from Worksheet 4T.23
           Nonfarm income (b)                ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________       ____________
           Capital sales (c)                 ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________       ____________
           New borrowings (d)                ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________       ____________
           Grants (e)                        ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________       ____________



 4
           Total cash inflows                __________          __________          __________          __________         __________
            (f) = (a+b+c+d+e)
TASK 4
           CASH OUTFLOWS
           Total farm expenses (g)           ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________       ____________
           Depreciation (h)                  ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________       ____________
           Total cash farm expenses          ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________       ____________
              (i) = (g-h)
           Living expenses (j)               ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________       ____________
           Taxes (income, social sec.) (k)   ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________       ____________
           Capital purchases (l)             ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________       ____________
           Principal payments (m)            ____________        ____________        ____________        ____________       ____________

           Total cash outflows               __________          __________          __________ __________ __________
             (n) = (i+j+k+l+m)

           Net cash flow (f-n)               __________ __________ __________ __________ __________

           Cumulative net cash flow        __________ __________ __________ __________ __________
           (current year + previous years)




  134    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                     DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.25                                                                    Worksheet 4T.25: Projected Balance Sheet
                                                                                     (http://misadocuments.info/4T.25Project-
                                                                                     edBalanceSheet.pdf)
PROJECTED BALANCE SHEET
Construct a projected balance sheet for your transition strategy. Then, calculate your overall change in wealth earned from farm
and nonfarm income after adjusting for living expenses and owner withdrawals. Compare the change in wealth (total assets)
after certification is complete to current wealth (calculated on Worksheet 2T.17: Current Balance Sheet). If you prefer, use the
spreadsheets found at http://misadocuments.info/OrganicTransitionPlanner_spreadsheets.xlsx to process the information needed
for your balance sheet.

			
 				                                                TRANSITION 			                                      CERTIFIED

                                    YEAR 1              YEAR 2              YEAR 3              YEAR 4               YEAR 5
ASSETS
Current Farm Assets
Cash and checking             _____________        _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________
Prepaid expenses and supplies _____________        _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________
Growing crops                 _____________        _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________
Accounts receivable           _____________        _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________
Hedging accounts              _____________        _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________



                                                                                                                                    4
Crops and feed in storage     _____________        _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________
Crops under government loan _____________          _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________      TASK 4
Market livestock              _____________        _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________
Other current assets          _____________        _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________
Total current assets (a)      ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________

Intermediate Farm Assets
Breeding livestock            _____________        _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________
Machinery and equipment       _____________        _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________
Other intermediate assets     _____________        _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________
Total intermediate assets (b) ___________          ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________

Long-Term Farm Assets
Farmland                       _____________       _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________
Buildings and improvements     _____________       _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________
Other long-term assets         _____________       _____________       _____________        _____________       _____________
Total long-term assets (c)     ___________         ___________         ___________          ___________         ___________

Total farm assets (d) = (a+b+c) ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________
Nonfarm assets (e)              ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________
                                                                                            continued
Total assets (f) = (d+e)        ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS   135
                            				                             TRANSITION 			                              CERTIFIED

                                             YEAR 1             YEAR 2             YEAR 3       YEAR 4               YEAR 5

           LIABILITIES
           Current Farm Liabilities		                                           		
           Accrued interest          _____________          _____________      _____________ _____________     _____________
           Accounts payable          _____________          _____________      _____________ _____________     _____________
           Current farm loans        _____________          _____________      _____________ _____________     _____________
           Principal on CCC loans    _____________          _____________      _____________ _____________     _____________
           Principal on term loans   _____________          _____________      _____________ _____________     _____________
           Total current
             farm liabilities (g)    ___________            ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________

           Intermediate farm
             liabilities (h)               ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________

           Long-term farm liabilities (i) ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________

           Total farm liabilities
             (j)=(g+h+i)                   ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________




 4
           Nonfarm liabilities (k)         ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________
TASK 4     Total liabilities (l) = (j+k)   ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________

           Net worth = (f-l)               ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________ ___________




  136    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                   DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.26                                                                  Worksheet 4T.26: Financial Needs and Capital
                                                                                   Requests (http://misadocuments.info/4T.26Fi-
                                                                                   nancialNeedsandCapitalRequests.pdf)
FINANCIAL NEEDS AND CAPITAL REQUESTS
Use the space below to identify and develop a plan for all finance needs associated with your transition strategy. Begin by listing
finance needs such as one-time start-up costs, annual operating expenses, and longer-term capital and real estate borrowings.
Next list the approximate value of these needs and your strategy for financing them. Finance strategies might include savings, a
private investor, grants, contract for deed, or credit.

                                            Finance Needs                                 $ Needed          Finance Strategy

One-time start-up needs ________________________________		 _______________                                 _______________
			________________________________		_______________                                                       _______________
			________________________________		_______________                                                       _______________
			________________________________		_______________                                                       _______________

Transitional needs (1-3 years) ________________________________		 _______________                          _______________
			________________________________		_______________                                                       _______________
				
Intermediate needs (4-6 years) ________________________________		 _______________                          _______________




                                                                                                                                         4
			________________________________		_______________                                                       _______________
				
Long-term needs (7-10 years) ________________________________		   _______________                          _______________              TASK 4
			________________________________		_______________                                                       _______________

Real estate needs		 ________________________________		 _______________ _______________
			________________________________		_______________ _______________


Finance Options. If you plan to seek outside financing (including government cost share payments), research the interest rates
and other financing conditions from up to three sources for each need identified. Record your findings here. Once complete, we
suggest talking with a lender, accountant or Extension educator to evaluate finance alternatives that best fit your personal criteria
and transition needs.
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________
_____________________________________________________________________________________________________



                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS       137
                                                                                                   DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 4T.27                                                                       Worksheet 4T.27: Financial Risk Management
                                                                                                   (http://misadocuments.info/4T.27Financial-
                                                                                                   RiskManagement.pdf)
           FINANCIAL RISK MANAGEMENT
           Use the space below to identify different types of financial risk during transition (e.g., profitability risks, liquidity risks, solvency
           risks). Next, brainstorm risk management strategies that can be used to avoid or mitigate each risk. In some cases, you may not
           have a risk management solution. Leave these spaces blank and return to them later. Blank spaces will be a reminder of where
           strategy holes may exist or of issues that may need a little research. Ask experienced organic farmers about any uncertainties or
           visit with a certifier to begin exploring risk management options. Finally, develop some recovery strategies in the space provided
           to address anticipated worst case scenarios.

           Type:_________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Transition Risks:________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Risk Management Strategies:______________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Recovery Strategies:_____________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




 4
           Type:_________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Transition Risks:________________________________________________________________________________________
TASK 4     _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Risk Management Strategies:______________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Recovery Strategies:_____________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Type:_________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Transition Risks:________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Risk Management Strategies:______________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           Recovery Strategies:_____________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Do any of the risks and risk management strategies identified here alter your financial strategy? If so, how? (Revise your finan-
           cial strategy summary on Worksheet 4T.21: Financial Strategy Summary and in AgPlan if applicable.)
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________



  138    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                  DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 4T.28                                                                 Worksheet 4T.28: Whole-Farm SWOT for
                                                                                  Certified Operations (http://misadocu-
                                                                                  ments.info/4T.28WholeFarmSWOT.pdf)
WHOLE-FARM SWOT
FOR CERTIFIED OPERATIONS
Describe potential internal strengths and weaknesses as well as external opportunities and threats for your farm after
certification. Consider all aspects of your farm business—marketing, operations, human resources and finances.

INTERNAL FACTORS
Strengths						Weaknesses
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________




                                                                                                                                    4
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________                     TASK 4
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________


EXTERNAL FACTORS
Opportunities					Threats
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________
_______________________________________________               ________________________________________________




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS   139
                                                                                                DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 4T.29                                                                    Worksheet 4T.29: Scoring and Deciding on a
                                                                                                Final Transition Strategy (http://misadocu-
                                                                                                ments.info/4T.29ScoringandDeciding.pdf)
           SCORING AND DECIDING ON
           A FINAL TRANSITION STRATEGY
           Assess your whole-farm transition strategy by comparing it to your current situation. You can do this by giving the transition
           strategy and current plan a grade, so to speak.

           Rate your current plan and new strategy using a score from one to five, with five being the highest. Refer to the strategy tests
           on page 102 (Figure 4T.11: Best Fit Tests) for a description of the scoring criteria. Once your transition strategy and current plan are
           scored, add the scores. It is natural to look for the strategy with the highest score, and this will be important to consider. However,
           realize that the total score is based on the assumption that all tests are weighted equally (i.e., of equal importance to you). You
           and your planning team should look at score sums as well as scores for individual tests when making a final decision about which
           direction to take the farm business.

           			                                   CURRENT SITUATION 		                             TRANSITION STRATEGY
           		
           Proposed Strategy            ________________________________                  ______________________________

           STRATEGY TESTS			                                         5 = highest score; 1 = lowest score		
           Vision Consistency                        _____________                                     _____________		



 4
TASK 4
           Goodness of Fit
           Building for Future
           Importance
           Feasibility
                                                     _____________
                                                     _____________
                                                     _____________
                                                     _____________
                                                                                                       _____________		
                                                                                                       _____________		
                                                                                                       _____________		
                                                                                                       _____________		
           Resources                                 _____________                                     _____________		
           Confidence                                _____________                                     _____________		


           Total Score                               __________                                        __________


           Based on the scores and discussion with your planning team, how does your whole-farm transition strategy compare with your
           current plan? Are you ready to implement the new strategy?
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________




  140    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
PLANNING TASK FIVE:
Present, Implement and
Monitor Your Business Plan
Y   •
        ou are almost there! You have made it through the toughest task—strategic plan-
        ning—and are now ready to pull your ideas together into a written document. In
        this planning task, you will:

        begin or complete your written business plan
                                                                                                      LOOK FOR THESE
                                                                                                      STORY PANEL ICONS
                                                                                                                A cow represents
                                                                                                                excerpts from
    •   define a recordkeeping system                                                                 Minnesota dairy farmers
    •   create monitoring checkpoints                                                                 Nate and Angie Walter.
    •   draft an implementation to-do list

                                                                                                               A corn stalk
BEGIN OR COMPLETE YOUR WRITTEN BUSINESS PLAN                                                                   represents excerpts
If you have been drafting a plan all along—recording your ideas in AgPlan or elsewhere—               from Minnesota grain
this task will be simple. However, if you have not captured your current situation, goals             producers Bryan and
or transition strategies on paper, this task will take a bit of time. We will assume here that        Theresa Kerkaert.
you are armed with completed worksheets and tested strategies but have not yet begun to
draft a business plan. If you have begun to draft your plan, keep the suggestions made here
                                                                                                              A jar of pickles
in mind as you complete, review and revise it.
                                                                                                              represents excerpts
                                                                                                      from New Jersey processor
                                                                                                      Vitaly Brukhman.
AUDIENCE
When starting from the beginning, first think about who will read your business plan. Will
you present the plan to a lender in hopes of securing financing for needed improvements?
Will you share the plan with your family or other planning team members who will become
involved with the business? In other words, who is your audience? It may be only you!

While there is no single format that must be used when writing a business plan, certain au-
                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                TASK 5


diences will expect to see certain critical pieces of information. That is why it is important
to consider your audience when writing a business plan.

For example, a lender will expect to learn about your historical operating performance,
marketing contracts, financial position, cash flow projections and capital request. Your
family or business partners may be interested in this information too, but they may be
equally interested in your history, current operations, long-term goals, marketing plan,
projected workload and management strategies. It will be up to you to decide which ele-
ments to include in your business plan.

AgPlan provides a built-in business plan outline. This formal outline is well suited for any
external audience (e.g., lenders, business partners, board of directors). You may choose to
modify this outline when using your plan only to communicate internally with family or
other planning team members.




                                       ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS          141
                                      PRESENTATION
                                      Regardless of your audience, the business plan should clearly convey your production,
                                      marketing, human resource and financial strategies for transition and beyond. Your plan
                                      should include information that supports and justifies your strategies; it should convince
                                      readers of your plan’s feasibility and identify well-thought-out management plans to ad-
                                      dress risks should internal or external conditions change. At the same time, do not overdo
                                      it. Too much detail can overwhelm your readers or compromise the real message.

                                      All readers will expect your plan to be typed; you can use a word processing program or
                                      AgPlan for this task. Graphics and photos also are appropriate so long as they illustrate
                                      ideas. You may even want to include a photo of your farm or of those involved in the farm
                                      business. Be aware that too many graphics will likely be ignored.

                                      Avoid technical language or jargon that may be unfamiliar to your audience. As Troy
                                      Wilson and David Kohl point out in Business Planning—A Roadmap for Success, “Your
                                      reader will be more impressed if s/he understands the plan.”20

                                      Sample business plans for the Walters’ transitioning dairy, the Kerkaerts’ transitioning
                                      grain farm, and Brukhman’s start-up organic processing business are presented in the Ap-
                                      pendix. You will notice that the plans differ in style, length and content. However, all three
                                      plans contain information pertinent to their business goals, strategies, planning team and
                                      investors.



                                      ONGOING RECORDKEEPING
                                      Recordkeeping is a critical component of any business, but even more so when your
                                      business plan is dependent on organic certification. We talked about the importance of
                                      recordkeeping for certification purposes in Planning Task Four: Strategic Planning. (You




 5
                                      also may wish to read the NOP regulations regarding OSP recordkeeping and monitoring:
                                      § 205.103(c) and § 205.201.) Recordkeeping also is critical for monitoring the overall suc-
TASK 5                                cess of your new business plan.

                                      In addition to those production- and marketing-related records required for certification,
                                      such as input expenses, product handling and sales, and livestock husbandry, it helps to
                                      track the following:

                                           • labor (e.g., hours per person per enterprise per month)
                                           • management (e.g., hours per month)
                                           • equipment use (e.g., hours per enterprise per month)

                                      Depending on your goals, you also may decide to track the effects of new conservation
                                      practices or other less quantitative activities. In such cases, try developing your own mea-
                                      sures. For example, if one of your goals for the farm is to improve wildlife habitat, perhaps
                                      you can observe and record bird counts in spring. Be creative and keep it simple.

                                      It is a good idea to identify someone, even yourself, to be responsible for ongoing record-
  20 Wilson, T. and D. Kohl. August   keeping and to designate time for this task. The information collected and preserved in
    1997. Business Planning – A
                                      your records will only be meaningful if maintained and put to use. Just as you are required
    Roadmap for Success. Virginia
    Cooperative Extension.
                                      to document your recordkeeping procedures in the OSP and OSPH, it is a good idea to
    www.ext.vt.edu.                   include a brief description in your business plan of your intended business recordkeeping




  142         ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
practices and the person or people responsible for this job. Do this now if you have not
already done so in Planning Task Four: Strategic Planning.



MONITORING
The records described above can be used in combination with your goals, identified in
Planning Task Three: Vision, Mission and Goals, to monitor your business successes and
to track progress toward your long-term vision. In other words, put your records to good
use; do not let them sit on the shelf collecting dust. Just as records must be maintained
regularly, they also should be reviewed often and discussed with your planning team.

One of the most effective ways to utilize your records is to pair them with monitoring
checkpoints. Monitoring checkpoints, also called critical success factors, are key events,
targets or accomplishments that must occur for your farm business to succeed. Monitoring
checkpoints are measurable; they can help you assess progress while acting as early warn-
ing signals that alert you to when, where and how your goals may need to change. After all,
no business plan ever goes exactly as intended—you should expect to make adjustments
along the way.



  MONITORING CHECKPOINTS
  This plan will be set in motion over the next year. In the fall of 2014 we will negotiate
  the long-term lease for the 102 acres of conventionally farmed and CRP land in Deuel
  County, South Dakota. We will initiate transition on this land in 2015 and have it certified in August
  or September 2017. During 2015 we will identify a larger parcel of land in or close to Lyon County,
  Minnesota, and we will negotiate a five-year lease with a right of first refusal to purchase the land at
  the end of the lease. We will initiate transition on this land in 2016 and have it certified in August or
  September 2018. All land and crops will be certified organic for the 2019 crop year, and we will reach



                                                                                                                                     5
  the decision point on land purchase at the end of the 2020 crop year.
  The following are key monitoring checkpoints for our plan:                                                                        TASK 5
      • December 2014: Have long-term lease for 102 acres in Deuel County, South Dakota in place.
      • March 2015: Identify a parcel of land in Lyon County (approximately 480 acres) and initiate
        negotiations for a long-term lease with a right of first refusal to purchase.
      • April/May 2015: Initiate transition on the 82 acres of previously conventionally farmed Deuel
        County land by planting oats under-seeded with alfalfa. Certify the additional 20 acres com-
        ing out of CRP and plant oats under-seeded with alfalfa.
      • November 2015: Finalize long-term lease for the Lyon County land.
      • April/May 2016: Initiate transition on the Lyon County land by planting oats under-seeded
        with alfalfa on the entire parcel.
      • August/September 2017: Certify 82 acres of Deuel County land.
      • January 2018: Report positive net cash flow and net farm income for 2017.
      • August/September 2018: Certify Lyon County land.
      • January 2019: Report positive net cash flow and net farm income for 2018.
      • January 2020: Report positive net cash flow and net farm income for 2019.
      • December 2020: Decide on purchase of Lyon County land.




                                              ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS   143
                                    Monitoring checkpoints are more detailed than goals but broader than to-do items. They
                                    represent milestones that occur within a defined time period. See the monitoring check-
                                    points story panel from the Kerkaerts.

                                    By contrast, an implementation to-do list for the Kerkaerts might be organized by each
                                    major monitoring checkpoint and include the name of each person responsible for com-
                                    pleting the task.

                                    Use Worksheet 5T.1: Monitoring and Worksheet 5T.2: Implementation To-Do
                                    List to record your monitoring checkpoints and to-do list for farm operations, marketing,
                                    human resources and finances. You can include both of these items as appendices in your
                                    business plan.



                                    REVIEW AND USE YOUR PLAN!
                                    Your business plan should be thought of as a dynamic document. Business planning never
                                    stops; it is a fluid process that is modified over time as your goals evolve and as internal
                                    and external conditions change (see Figure IT.1: Business Planning Process on page 17).
                                    If reviewed and adjusted as needed, future decision-making will be easier. As Minnesota
                                    organic dairy farmer Florence Minar explains, “There are times when [our family] comes
                                    up with new [business] ideas. And then someone says, ‘Does this follow our values? Is this
                                    going to help us reach our goals?’ And we go to the business plan to see. It’s all in there.”21

                                    Arrange a time—once per month, season or year—when you and your planning team can
                                    sit down together and review the business plan. When meeting, ask the difficult question:
                                    Have we been successful? Use your goals, monitoring checkpoints and financial projec-
                                    tions when answering. If you were unsuccessful in some areas, try to understand why.
                                    Review whether external events have changed within the market or industry. Explore how




 5
                                    internal circumstances may have changed within the family. Use both your successes and
                                    failures to learn and improve your business.
TASK 5
                                    Next, review your financial projections. Organic production is said to have a steep learn-
                                    ing curve, and we all know that time brings experience. This means that yield or price
                                    estimates originally included in your projections may not have been accurate. If this is the
                                    case, take time to adjust your projected output, income and cash flow based on knowledge
                                    you acquire each year.

                                    Finally, re-evaluate your business plan. You have come full circle in the planning process
                                    and it does not hurt to take stock of your goals and make other adjustments based on
                                    current resource availability and the competitive environment. If you are feeling over-
                                    whelmed, remember that planning will become easier with experience and time.
    21 DiGiacomo, G. and B.
       Nelson. 2003. Building
       a Sustainable Business:
       Cedar Summit Farm. Min-
                                              DIG DEEPER
       nesota Institute for Sus-    If you would like to read a bit more about how best to organize your business plan, see
       tainable Agriculture and     pages 223-242 in the Guide. Also, consult professional service providers—such as financial
       Center for Farm Financial
                                    advisors, certification consultants and conservation planners—when establishing your
       Management. Visit www.
       agrisk.umn.edu and search
                                    recordkeeping system. While we recommend doing much of the recordkeeping on your
       “building a sustainable      own, it is a very good idea to meet with professional service providers when getting started
       business video.”             to review your recordkeeping plans and get some advice on how best to track information.



  144       ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
Moreover, farm financial advisors can be of great help when developing financial projec-
tions. See the Resources section for some ideas on where to go for advisors.



         PUT IT IN WRITING!
Use AgPlan or a word processing program to draft your business plan. AgPlan will auto-
matically generate a business plan outline based on the sections that you have completed.             WORKSHEETS ARE NOW
Next, draft your plan according to the outline.                                                       AVAILABLE ONLINE
Develop checkpoints using Worksheet 5T.1: Monitoring. Follow this up by creating an                   Visit www.misa.umn.edu/Publi-
implementation to-do list using Worksheet 5T.2: Implementation To-Do List. Your                       cations/OrganicTransitionPlanner
monitoring checkpoints might be included in the Transition Plan Summary in AgPlan,                    to obtain fillable PDF worksheets
although it is not necessary. Likewise, your to-do list can be filed with your business plan,         and electronic spreadsheets.
but generally it is not included in the plan itself.




                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                TASK 5




                                       ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS       145
                                                                                                           DOWNLOAD THE PDF
             WORKSHEET 5T.1                                                                                Worksheet 5T.1: Monitoring
                                                                                                           (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                                           info/5T.1Monitoring.pdf)
           MONITORING
           Briefly describe your plans for checking in with your planning team to track and evaluate business progress. Then, list monitoring
           checkpoints for the business as a whole and for each functional business area (operations, marketing, human resources and fi-
           nances). You can include this monitoring plan in the Management and Organization section of your business plan if you are using
           AgPlan, or simply hang on to it as an informal reminder.


           Planning team check-in schedule (e.g., monthly, quarterly, annually?):_____________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


           Whole-farm checkpoints:_ _______________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________
           _____________________________________________________________________________________________________


                Operations checkpoints:_____________________________________________________________________________
                _________________________________________________________________________________________________
                _________________________________________________________________________________________________




 5
                _________________________________________________________________________________________________

TASK 5          Marketing checkpoints:_ ____________________________________________________________________________
                _________________________________________________________________________________________________
                _________________________________________________________________________________________________
                _________________________________________________________________________________________________


                Human resources checkpoints:________________________________________________________________________
                _________________________________________________________________________________________________
                _________________________________________________________________________________________________
                _________________________________________________________________________________________________


                Finance checkpoints:________________________________________________________________________________
                _________________________________________________________________________________________________
                _________________________________________________________________________________________________
                _________________________________________________________________________________________________




  146    ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
                                                                                          DOWNLOAD THE PDF
  WORKSHEET 5T.2                                                                          Worksheet 5T.2: Implementation
                                                                                          To-Do List (http://misadocuments.
                                                                                          info/5T.2ToDoList.pdf)
IMPLEMENTATION TO-DO LIST
Use the space below to develop an implementation to-do list for your transition and business plans. You may find it helpful to
create a to-do list for each functional area of the business (operations, marketing, human resources and finances). Regardless of
how you choose to organize your list, be sure to note who will be responsible for each task and assign a deadline for completion.
The to-do list typically is not included in a business plan; it is simply to help you organize the work ahead.

               TASK                                                  PERSON RESPONSIBLE                         DEADLINE
______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________




                                                                                                                                     5
______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________       TASK 5
______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________

______________________________________________                _________________________________            _ ________________




                                             ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    147
APPENDIX
   —
                                      APPENDIX:
 WALTER
                                      FARMER BUSINESS PLANS
   NOTE: Some financial
   figures have been removed
                                      BUSINESS PLAN: NATE AND ANGIE WALTER
   for confidentiality.               Transitioning Dairy, Minnesota
                                      (Prepared spring 2013)


                                      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
                                      Walter Dairy is located in Villard, Minn., on 240 acres of good grazing and cropping land.
                                      We are entering our final year of transition for crops and livestock. Our dairy herd of
                                      103 cows has been grazed since 2002 when we purchased the farm from family. This has
                                      made our transition to organic a fairly easy one. We are on track to begin shipping milk to
                                      Organic Valley in the fall of 2013. Financial projections indicated that we will be able to
                                      substantially improve our net worth and increase net farm income once we become certi-
                                      fied and begin receiving organic milk prices. Our business plan includes a capital request
                                      of $150,000 to finance feed and equipment purchases.

                                      Mission Statement
                                      Our mission at Walter Dairy is to produce and promote organic food while retaining our
                                      family values, honoring our history and generating a sustainable profit so that this farm
                                      can be viable for generations to come.

                                      Goals
                                      Our short-term goals for the farm business are to:
                                           1. Locate organic feed suppliers by October 2012
                                           2. Hire one part-time helper by 2013
                                           3. Secure an Organic Valley Cooperative contract by 2013
                                           4. Continue to learn about and develop organic crop management, especially fertility
                                           5. Purchase grain mixing/grinding equipment in 2013
                                           6. Raise replacement heifers to sell or expand the herd by 2014
                                           7. Increase milk production average and components by 2015

                                      Our intermediate goals for the farm are to:
                                           1. Buy a new tractor
                                           2. Improve perimeter fencing
                                           3. Tile land
                                           4. Purchase additional land to eventually supply all feed needs on-farm




   148        ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
Our long-term goals for the farm are to:
    1. Help our kids transition into the farm                                                                                 APPENDIX
    2. Acquire more land and expand the herd to support all family members                                                       —
                                                                                                                               WALTER
Transition Plan Summary
We are in our second year of organic transition for cropland and will begin our transition of
the dairy herd this fall. We expect cropland and livestock to be certified organic in October
2013. Our transition plan is to feed all crops to the herd (supplying approximately 60 per-
cent of feed needs through grazing) and to supplement with purchased organic feed. Once
becoming members of Organic Valley Cooperative, where we plan to market our milk, we
will receive a slight transition premium while transitioning the herd. This premium, howev-
er, will not be enough to offset the cost of purchased organic feed. Therefore, our transition
strategy is dependent on borrowing enough money during our third year of transition to pay
for the needed feed and other items outlined in our transition capital request.

Transition Capital Request
We are requesting a total of $150,000 in 2012 from Farm Service Agency (FSA) to pay off
existing debt (at a lower interest rate), purchase needed equipment and establish a line of
credit for organic feed purchases.

Organic feed is required during livestock transition, according to National Organic Program
rules. As we do not have enough land to supply all of our feed needs, we will need to pur-
chase 3,000 bushels of organic corn at $10 per bushel ($30,000) and 2,000 bushels of or-
ganic peas/barley at $12 per bushel ($24,000). Certified organic feed suppliers have already
been lined up. Along with the organic feed, we will need to purchase 200 bales of straw at
$35 per bale ($7,000). We would like to finance these items through a direct line of credit.

Additionally, we are requesting an intermediate loan to purchase a grinder/mixer at an
approximate price of $10,000. Currently, we have our grain custom ground but can save
some money by grinding and mixing our own ration on the farm. We also are going to need
to purchase a bale shredder at an approximate cost of $10,000. This will save on future
straw costs and reduce manure hauling.

Farm History
In 1935, Nathan’s grandparents moved to this farm with six Guernsey cows. They also had
pigs, chickens and horses. They raised 14 children and farmed through many ups and downs.

Nathan was born in 1975. His grandpa died in the field in August of that year. Nathan’s
father, Fred, took over the farm and built a new barn in November. Nathan and Fred farmed
together until 2002, when we purchased the farm at fair market value. At that time the
farm consisted of 160 acres with two houses. We milked 80 cows in the stanchion barn and
switched the cows from the free stalls to stanchions during milking. There were 40 stan-
chions and 40 free stalls. The feeding was all done with wheelbarrows in the barn and a skid
loader in the free stall area. The situation required two people in the barn during milking.

Since then, we have gradually made improvements through new buildings, equipment and
production management. In 2005, the barn was remodeled and a swing 10 New Zea-
land-style parlor was put in, allowing much of the labor to be done alone by Nate (Angie’s
time was limited as she cared for our daughter, born in 2004). We also started housing
the cattle outside year-round in 2005 because of the cost associated with building a bigger
barn and because we believed it was better for the general health of the animals. The



                                        ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS   149
                                   cows were fed using a total mixed ration instead of wheelbarrows. In 2006, we installed a
APPENDIX                           manure pit and a drive-by feeding system. During this time, the herd was expanded to 100
   —                               cows. In 2007, Levi was born. In 2010, we bought 80 additional acres, bringing our total
 WALTER                            land base to 240 acres.

                                   Land and Other Resources
                                   Land: The main farm consists of 160 acres, of which 141 acres are tillable. There is also an
                                   adjacent 78 acres, of which 72 acres are tillable.

                                   Dairy facilities: The barn was built in 1975 with an addition built in 2000. It is 55 feet
                                   by 148 feet. In 2005, a swing 10 New Zealand-style parlor and a holding area for the cattle
                                   were put in. There is also a breeding and calving pen in the barn. In 2011, a 2,700 gallon
                                   bulk tank and new milk house were installed. There is a 1.1 million gallon manure lagoon
                                   and 400 feet of drive-by feeding. There are two calf sheds and a machine shed.

                                   Houses: The farm has two houses on the property. Each is on its own one-acre parcel.
                                   The main dwelling is 24 feet by 48 feet. The other house is 28 feet by 28 feet.

                                   Land and buildings are valued at $XXX,XXX (removed for confidentiality) as of Jan. 1,
                                   2012.

                                   Ownership Structure
                                   Walter Dairy is owned and operated by Nate and Angie Walter. This business is operated
                                   as a sole proprietorship. In the future, we plan to structure the business as a limited liabili-
                                   ty corporation (LLC).



                                   OPERATIONS
                                   Current Operations
                                   We currently milk 103 cows. We have been breeding all of our replacements, using a three-
                                   way cross (Norwegian Red, Guernsey and Red Holstein) to create genetics suitable for
                                   grazing.

                                   We averaged 15,658 pounds of milk per cow in 2011, which is fairly consistent with our
                                   five-year historical average (Table 1).

                                    TABLE 1: MILK PRODUCTION HISTORY, 2007-2011
                                                        2007            2008                2009         2010            2011
                                    Number of            103             102                 98           105            103
                                    cows
                                    Milk pounds        15,981          16,605              16,775       15,439          15,658
                                    per cow

                                   Cows are fed and grazed on 140 acres of corn silage, hay alfalfa and pasture. Corn silage
                                   yields have been variable throughout 2007-2011 while hay/alfalfa yields have been im-
                                   proving (Table 2). Additional conventional livestock feed is purchased to supplement what
                                   is needed. Feed is custom ground and mixed off farm.




   150     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
 TABLE 2: CROP PRODUCTION HISTORY, 2007-20111
                                2007          2008                           2009          2010         2011                                 APPENDIX
                                                                                                                                                —
 Corn, ear (bushels per acre)     -             -                             153           174           -                                   WALTER
 Corn, silage                    62            46                             35             41          64
 Barley silage yield             16            27                              -             -            -
 Hay/alfalfa yield               3.0           3.6                            3.6           4.1           -
 1
     Values in tons per acre unless otherwise noted.

As part of our organic transition plan, we implemented a five-year rotation beginning in
spring 2012 that includes two years of corn followed by hay and small grains. We use a
12-row cultivator and flame burner for organic weed control. We have been able to rent out
this equipment to other farmers to partially cover ownership costs.

Production Opportunities
We have an opportunity to purchase organic feed and hay from a neighboring farmer in
fall 2012, which will allow us to transition our dairy herd and qualify for certification in
October 2013.

Operations Strategy
Overall, our operations strategy is to certify organic land and animals by October 2013. We
already satisfy most of the National Organic Program livestock rules; it will take very little
for us to become certified since we already supply more than 30 percent of our animals’
feed needs through grazing. We also are well practiced in natural veterinary care and have
never used the growth hormone BST.

Licenses and Organic Certification
When ready, we will certify our land and animals with the Midwest Organic Services Asso-
ciation, Inc. (MOSA). We have already been in contact with MOSA to obtain a certification
packet and to review NOP guideline compliance.

Resource Needs and Acquisition
As stated in our capital request, our strategy relies on the purchase of organic feed during
our third year of transition, as well as a grinder/mixer and bale shredder. Once certified,
we will continue to purchase organic feed, as we do not have enough land to produce the
feed needed for our herd, but we will be in a better financial position to do so by 2014
when receiving organic prices for our milk.

We will need the grinder/mixer to create our grain ration for the dairy cattle. We do not
own this equipment because we currently have our grain custom ground. The bale shred-
der will save on future straw costs and reduce manure hauling, freeing up needed labor for
organic crop production (which we have found to be more demanding than conventional
crop production).

Operations Risk Management
Our greatest operational risks include weather and chemical drift from neighboring farms.
We have taken steps to address both risks through the purchase of multi-peril crop insur-
ance and neighbor notification, respectively. In addition, we have marked our fields with
“Do Not Spray” signs.




                                                       ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    151
                                   MARKETING
APPENDIX
   —                               Current Marketing
 WALTER                            We market all of our milk to the local creamery. Conventional milk prices have varied from
                                   approximately $13 per hundredweight to $20 per hundredweight over the past five years
                                   and have been consistent with average milk prices received by other similarly sized Minne-
                                   sota dairies (Table 3).

                                    TABLE 3: HISTORIC AVERAGE MILK PRICE, 2007-20111
                                                                     2007          2008                                      2009         2010     2011
                                    Walter milk price               $18.15        $20.03                                     $13.39      $16.42   $20.49
                                    Minnesota milk price 2
                                                                    $18.92         $19.43                                    $13.05      $16.06   $20.12
                                    1
                                        Values are per hundredweight.
                                    2
                                        Average milk price reported in the FINBIN database for Minnesota dairies with 100 to 200 cows.


                                   Marketing Opportunities
                                   Organic Valley Cooperative offers a $2 per hundredweight premium to members for transi-
                                   tional milk and approximately $28 per hundredweight for certified organic milk. This mem-
                                   ber price is fairly steady and guaranteed for the volume of milk we can deliver. Marketing to
                                   Organic Valley will allow us to capture a higher price for milk and generate a stable income.

                                   Marketing Strategy
                                   Our marketing strategy includes becoming members of Organic Valley in 2013. Member-
                                   ship is achieved through the purchase of shares. As members, we will market transitional
                                   milk for a $2 per hundredweight premium above conventional milk prices during our last
                                   year of transition. In October 2013, once certified, we will begin shipping organic milk to
                                   Organic Valley at the membership rate of approximately $28 per hundredweight. We have
                                   confirmed that our farm is located on the Organic Valley milk pick-up route and expect
                                   to market 1,612,775 pounds of milk in 2014 (based on an average production of 15,658
                                   pounds per cow).



                                   HUMAN RESOURCES
                                   Current Human Resources
                                   We (Nate and Angie) provide almost 100 percent of the farm labor and management. Nate
                                   is responsible for all cropping enterprises, pasture management, herd management, some
                                   milking and marketing. Angie manages all calving, some milking and accounting. In addi-
                                   tion, Walter Dairy employs one part-time person to assist with milking and other chores.
                                   While we are managing with this small group, we would like to hire another part-time
                                   person to assist with cropping and feeding activities.

                                   Planning and Management Team
                                   In addition to some part-time help, we also rely on assistance from advisors representing
                                   the following organizations:

                                            1. Farm Business Management Program, Alexandria Technical College
                                            2. Dairy Initiatives Program, Department of Animal Science, University of Minnesota
                                            3. FSA
                                            4. Midwest Organic Services Association



   152     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
Human Resources Strategy
Our human resource strategy is to identify and hire an additional part-time assistant as                                      APPENDIX
soon as possible. We anticipate that this will cost $10,150 per year ($6.50 per hour for 30                                      —
hours). Ideally we would like to find someone who has organic dairy or cropping experi-                                        WALTER
ence, or both. We will also consider payment in kind to someone who may be interested in
building their own herd. Recruitment options include word-of-mouth, advertising through
our advisory team member organizations and placing announcements in local organic
conference programs.

We will also continue to build our own knowledge of organic management by attending the
Minnesota Organic Conference in St. Cloud annually. We have participated in this con-
ference for the past two years and have found the certification, recordkeeping and man-
agement workshops valuable. The conference also gives us the opportunity to meet other
organic and transitioning farmers who have been helpful in identifying input suppliers and
equipment resources.

Human Resources Risk Management
Our number one human resource risk is injury or illness. If Nate were to become injured or
ill for a prolonged period, we would have a difficult time managing the land and animals. A
full-time assistant, trained in all of Nate’s responsibilities, will help ease the current work-
load and, more importantly, be able to temporarily fill in for Nate if needed.



FINANCES
Net worth, income and cash flow information have been removed for confidentiality.

Financial Position
Our net farm income is projected at $XXX,XXX (removed for confidentiality) in 2012. This
projection assumes average crop and livestock productivity, financing for the new mixer/
grinder and chopper as well as refinancing of our current long-term loans through the
FSA beginning in July 2012. The 2012 net farm income projection also assumes that we
will defer payment on our proposed feed loan by one year. Our income statement, capital
purchases and loan payments are outlined in the 2012 FINPACK statement (removed for
confidentiality).

Historical Performance
Walter Dairy has been slowly but steadily improving its net worth over the five-year period
of 2007-2011 (Table 4, removed for confidentiality). In 2007, five years after purchas-
ing the farm, our net worth was at $XXX,XXX (removed for confidentiality). By 2011 we
showed an average gain of 10 percent per year.

Financial Strategy
Walter Dairy will not be able to complete its transition without a line of credit to finance
necessary feed purchases in 2012. Without this financing, a negative cash flow is projected.

Our financial strategy relies on obtaining financing for organic feed and other capital
purchases through the FSA at reduced interest rates and deferred financing. We have es-
tablished a good credit relationship with FSA over the years. Once certified, our cash flow
projections indicate that we will be able to comfortably repay loans.




                                        ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    153
                                   Financial Projections
APPENDIX                           Financial projections indicate that we will be able to substantially improve our net worth
   —                               (Table 5, removed for confidentiality), improve cash flow (Table 6, removed for confidenti-
 WALTER                            ality), and increase net farm income (Table 7, removed for confidentiality) once we become
                                   certified in the fall of 2012 and begin receiving organic milk prices. More information
                                   about these figures and accompanying farm financial standards measures are found in the
                                   2012 FINPACK analysis (Appendix A, not included in this publication).




   154     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
BUSINESS PLAN: BRYAN AND THERESA KERKAERT
                                                                                                                               APPENDIX
Recently Certified Organic Grains, Minnesota                                                                                      —
(Prepared spring 2014)                                                                                                         KERKAERT


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Business Overview
The Kerkaert Organic Farm is managed by Bryan and Theresa Kerkaert. We currently own                         NOTE: Some financial
a seven-acre farm site and manage 527 acres of crops (445 acres certified organic) on rented                 figures have been removed
land at several sites in southwestern Minnesota and eastern South Dakota. In addition, we                    for confidentiality.
own and manage a manure hauling and pumping business as well as a nursery pig barn.

This is a critical point in the history of our farming operation. In 2016 the lease will ter-
minate on 134 acres of certified organic land. If we are not able to secure long-term access
to good farmland that can be certified organic, we may not be able to continue farming.
Reduction in acreage makes it difficult to cover overhead expenses for machinery owner-
ship. The loss of leases has also disrupted the balance in our crop rotations, which results
in large year-to-year swings in cash flows.

Mission Statement
Kerkaert Organic Farm will grow healthy organic grains and feed for health conscious
consumers, while preserving the natural state of soils and waters. The farm will provide
income to support our family and to give a competitive wage to our employees.

Goals
Our long-term goal is to own enough tillable acres to have a self-sustaining farm operation
that will be a source of retirement income for us and a resource to pass down to our chil-
dren for their financial security.

Transition Plan Summary
This plan focuses on the opportunity to gain stable, continuous access to land in 2016
through a five-year lease with a right of first refusal to purchase the land at the end of the
lease. We assume the land we rent will have been in conventional production through 2015
and so will need to be transitioned. We have significant experience in managing certified
land and in transitioning land from conventional to organic production.

By 2019 we plan to be farming 893 acres of certified organic land. After difficult early transi-
tion years in 2015 and 2016, our financial position will strengthen in 2017 through 2019, and
we expect to be in a position to purchase the newly rented parcel after the 2020 crop year.

Capital and Resource Request
The key element of this plan is to identify and secure long-term access to a parcel of land
that can be a stable basis for continuation of our farming operation. This plan is written for a
potential landlord to demonstrate that we have the knowledge, skills, experience and equip-
ment to successfully transition and farm more than 400 additional acres. When we have
identified a specific parcel of land for the new farm, we will explore possibilities for negotiat-
ing a lower land-rental rate for the transition years of 2016 and 2017. In addition, this plan
is addressed to our lender, Farm Credit Services, as a request for a line of credit that will be
adequate to ensure access to capital during the difficult 2015 and 2016 crop years.



                                         ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS     155
                                   BUSINESS DESCRIPTION
APPENDIX
   —                               The Kerkaert Organic Farm is managed by Bryan and Theresa Kerkaert. We currently
KERKAERT                           own a seven-acre farm site and manage 527 acres of crops on rented land at several sites
                                   in southwestern Minnesota and eastern South Dakota. In addition, we own and manage a
                                   manure hauling and pumping business as well as a nursery pig barn. We have four sons,
                                   ages 13 to 20.

                                   Farm Business History
                                   Bryan grew up farming, raising crops, cattle and hogs with his grandpa and uncle. After
                                   graduating from college, Bryan went to work for his uncle full time, managing the crops.
                                   In 1997, we built a hog nursery on our own farm site and began to raise nursery pigs on
                                   contract. In 2001, Bryan resigned his position with his uncle and we bought the custom
                                   manure hauling business. Theresa became a stay-at-home mom, taking care of the hog
                                   nursery and managing books for the pumping business.

                                   We began farming organically in the fall of 2007 when a manure pumping customer
                                   approached us about renting his 170 acres of certified land under the condition that Bryan
                                   continue to farm it organically. At the same time, we learned about another nearby farmer
                                   who was interested in renting his 300-acre farm. We felt these rental opportunities would
                                   allow us to begin farming and to gain organic management experience.

                                   During our first year as organic managers we entered into a partnership with an expe-
                                   rienced organic grower. This gave us an opportunity to pool knowledge, equipment and
                                   other resources. Our first year farming was a struggle as the rented land had high weed
                                   pressure and low fertility, but we managed and learned a lot in the process. In the years
                                   that followed, we picked up another 700 acres of certified organic cropland, much of it
                                   coming out of the Conservation Reserve Program (CRP). This brought our total rental
                                   acreage to approximately 1,200 acres. Eventually, our organic partner decided to end the
                                   partnership and focus his time on his own organic farm.

                                   Our crop acreage remained nearly stable—between 1,100 and 1,200 acres—through 2013.
                                   Hail hit one site hard in 2010 and bad weather prevented planting on another field in 2011.
                                   In 2012, due to increasing rents on short-term leases, we shifted 626 acres out of organic
                                   production to help manage financial risks. In 2014 we suffered a major setback when we
                                   lost leases on 732 acres—mostly land that was under conventional management. Of the
                                   remaining acreage that we currently manage, 445 acres are certified organic and 82 acres
                                   are under conventional management.

                                   Bryan has operated the custom manure hauling business continuously since 2001, and it
                                   has proved to be highly complementary with the farming operation. Theresa continues to
                                   manage and operate the hog nursery on the home farm.

                                   This is a critical point in the history of our farming operation. In 2016 the lease will ter-
                                   minate on 134 acres of certified organic land. If we are not able to secure long-term access
                                   to good farmland that can be certified organic, we may not be able to continue farming.
                                   Reduction in acreage makes it difficult to cover overhead expenses for machinery owner-
                                   ship. The loss of leases has also disrupted the balance in our crop rotations, which results
                                   in large year-to-year swings in cash flows.




   156     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
Land and Other Resources
Our seven-acre home farm site is located in Clifton Township, in Lyon County, Minneso-                                        APPENDIX
ta. In 2014 we are farming 170 certified organic acres in Lincoln County, Minnesota; 134                                         —
certified organic acres in Brookings County, South Dakota; and 143 certified organic acres                                    KERKAERT
and 82 conventional acres in Deuel County, South Dakota. All of this land is rented. Our
lease on the Brookings County land will terminate after the 2015 crop year. We have a hog
nursery building on our home farm. We also own 28,000 bushels of bin storage capacity
and buildings to house farm equipment. Our farm buildings have a market value of
$XXX,XXX (removed for confidentiality).

Our equipment includes:
    • 16-row 22-inch John Deere vacuum planter
    • 28-foot 6200 International grain drill with 6-inch spacing
    • 30-foot Kovar drag, 30-foot John Deere rotary hoe
    • 16-row 22-inch row cultivator, a 7920 John Deere tractor
    • STX 425 CIH 4x4 tractor
    • 44-foot feed cultivator
    • 12 bottom plow
    • 730 DMI
    • 2188 CIH combine
    • 1022 corn head
    • 30-foot bean head
    • 40-foot summers super coulter
    • 60-foot flamer
    • 4440 John Deere tractor

Our machinery and equipment has a market value of $XXX,XXX (removed for confidenti-
ality).

Ownership Structure
Kerkaert Organic Farm is a sole proprietorship owned by Bryan and Theresa Kerkaert.



OPERATIONS
Current Operations
Our standard organic rotation is corn, then oats or flax under-seeded with alfalfa, then
alfalfa for another one or two years. The longevity of the alfalfa is dependent upon the
stand and winter kill. The conventional rotation is corn on corn followed by soybeans. We
purchase certified organic hybrid seed corn for our organic corn and certified organic seed
for our alfalfa and brown flax. We use seed from the prior year’s organic production for
oats. For the conventional corn on corn we use triple-stacked GMO seed corn.

Table 1 shows crops, acreages and yields for 2012 and 2013, as well as planted acreage and
projected yields for 2014. In 2012 all our hay was in the establishment year and was un-
der-seeded in oats. We failed to harvest oats or alfalfa on one 38-acre field that is included
in the 184-acre total. In 2013 we under-seeded alfalfa in 103 acres of oats and 71 acres of
brown flax. We did not harvest any alfalfa on those establishment fields.

Before planting we dig all of the fields twice, then plant the crop. Three to five days after
planting organic corn we drag the field, then seven days later we rotary hoe the corn. We



                                        ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    157
                                   cultivate the corn about three weeks after planting, and at the five-leaf stage or larger we
APPENDIX                           flame it. We do a final cultivation pass two days after flaming. We use RTK auto steer for
   —                               all planting and cultivating, which helps for accuracy. For conventional corn we hire the
KERKAERT                           co-op to do the spraying and fertilizer applications. For the oat and flax crops we walk for
                                   weeds after planting and after harvest; it is under-seeded with alfalfa so we do not do any
                                   fall tillage. We sell alfalfa under contract, and it is custom harvested.

                                   Production Opportunities
                                   This plan focuses on the opportunity to gain stable, continuous access to land in 2016
                                   through a five-year lease with a right of first refusal to purchase the land at the end of the
                                   lease. We assume the land we rent will have been in conventional production through 2015
                                   and so will need to be transitioned. We have significant experience in managing certified
                                   land and in transitioning land from conventional to organic production.

                                    TABLE 1. CROPS, ACREAGES AND YIELDS, 2012–20141
                                    Crop                                    2012                       2013                      2014
                                                                      Acres       Yield      Acres             Yield     Acres          Yield2
                                    Organic corn                       316         113.9
                                    Organic blue corn                  312          87.6          73           53.4       311             80
                                    Organic oats                       184         48.9          103            84
                                    Organic brown flax                                            71           15.8
                                    Organic alfalfa hay                184       2.9 tons        174          0 tons
                                    (establishment)
                                    Organic alfalfa hay (established)                            180          2.4 tons    134           3.5 tons
                                    Conventional corn                   82         178.8         540            146.3
                                    Conventional soybean                                                                  82              40
                                    Land rented out                    170          NA
                                    1
                                        Yield values in bushels unless otherwise noted.
                                    2
                                        Yields for 2014 are projections.


                                   Operations Strategy
                                   This plan assumes that in 2015 we will initiate transition on the 82 acres currently under
                                   conventional production and rent an additional 20 acres of adjacent land that is coming
                                   out of CRP and can be certified immediately. In 2016 we will rent a farm with 480 acres of
                                   tillable land that has been under conventional management. Also in 2016, our lease on 134
                                   acres of certified organic land that we have farmed for several years will terminate.

                                   a. Production System. Our standard organic rotation is blue corn, followed by oats
                                      under-seeded with alfalfa, followed by alfalfa. In some situations we will substitute
                                      wheat or flax for oats, and we have the flexibility to extend the rotation to four years if
                                      the alfalfa stand is in good condition.
                                          In 2015 we will sign a long-term lease for the 82 acres that we currently manage con-
                                          ventionally plus an additional 20 acres that will be coming out of CRP. We will start
                                          transition on the 82 acres in 2015 and will be able to certify the 20 acres immediately.
                                          The 82 acres will certify in August or September 2017. We will plant oats under-seeded
                                          with alfalfa on all this land in 2015, leave it in alfalfa in 2016 and plant the entire 102
                                          acres in organic blue corn in 2017.




   158     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
   We plan to initiate transition on the new farm immediately, in 2016, and we should
   be certified in August or September of 2018. We plan to harvest an organic blue corn                                        APPENDIX
   crop in 2018, but oats and hay harvested that year will be sold as conventional. We will                                       —
   divide the new farm into three approximately equal-sized blocks. In 2016 all the land                                       KERKAERT
   will be planted in oats under-seeded with alfalfa. In 2017 all this land will be kept in hay
   in order to reduce weed pressure and build soil fertility. In 2018 the block (160 acres)
   with the least weed pressure will be planted in blue corn and the other two blocks (320
   acres) will be left in hay; the blue corn will be harvested after certification and so will be
   certified organic. In 2019 all land will be certified. The land previously in blue corn will
   be planted to oats under-seeded with alfalfa. One of the blocks previously in hay will be
   planted to corn, and the other block will be left in hay. This establishes the rotation for
   subsequent years.
b. Resource Needs and Acquisition. We are assuming that the rent on the new farm
   will be $200 per acre. This is currently a competitive rate for good farmland in Lyon
   County. With recent declines in conventional commodity prices, land rental rates could
   decline. Having a long-term lease with an option to purchase the land at the end of
   the lease is important enough to justify a relatively high rental rate. We have adequate
   machinery and equipment to farm the new parcel along with the land we currently rent.
c. Production Estimates. Table 2 presents planning assumptions for crop yields, acre-
   age and total production over the next five years under the assumption that we are able
   to retain all our rented organic acreage and the new 480-acre farm. The organic corn is
   food grade blue corn grown under contract. Note that both oats and alfalfa are planted
   in years when oats are under-seeded with alfalfa, but we assume no alfalfa production
   in that first year.
d. Inventory Management and Quality Control. We own 28,000 bushels of certified
   organic bin storage and we can rent up to an additional 50,000 bushels of storage. Hav-
   ing farmed organically since 2007, we have demonstrated experience with the manage-
   ment practices and record keeping procedures required for organic certification.

Licenses, Permits and Certification
Our organic certifier is the Minnesota Crop Improvement Association (MCIA). We have a
good working relationship with them. As we currently have on our rented organic land, we
will establish 50-foot buffer strips around the outer borders of fields on the purchased land
in order to reduce the risk of cross contamination with neighboring non-organic fields.
Crops harvested from the buffer strips will be sold as conventional commodities at the
local elevator.

Operations Risk Management
We will continue to insure all crops except alfalfa hay with crop insurance purchased
through Farm Credit. We currently take out revenue insurance for corn at the 75 percent
level and will continue to do so if it makes sense. We currently take out production insur-
ance at the 65 percent level for small grain.




                                         ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    159
                                                MARKETING
APPENDIX
   —                                            Current Marketing
KERKAERT                                        We obtain forward contracts at profitable prices to help lock in our current year cash flow
                                                and to assure the bank of the value of the products we produce. We are in regular contact
                                                with eight wholesale commodity brokers to research and finalize our contracts.

                                                Marketing Opportunities
                                                Market trends have been consistently positive for organic crops compared to conventional
                                                crops. The demand for organic products has grown significantly over the past 20 years,
                                                and it continues to grow at a double-digit rate. USDA reporting suggests that the conver-
                                                sion of land to organic production has slowed over the past few years, especially for the
                                                field crops we produce. We believe there will continue to be significant organic price pre-
                                                miums in the future as supply continues to lag behind demand. Nevertheless, we assume
                                                some reductions in organic prices in the coming years.




                TABLE 2. CROP YIELD, ACREAGE AND OUTPUT PROJECTIONS 2015-2019
                Crop               Projected         2015          2016           2017          2018          2019
                                 yield per acre
                                                Acres Output1 Acres Output Acres Output Acres Output Acres Output
                Previously Certified
                Corn-O2              80 bu       134    10,720 155    12,400  156    12,480               155    12,400
                Oat-O                 70 bu      311    21,770                155    10,850 156    10,920
                Hay-O-e               0 ton      331        0                 155       0   156        0
                Hay-O                3.5 ton                   156      546                 155     542.5 176       616
                Nearby 102 Acres
                Oat-T                 70 bu      82      5,740
                Hay-T-e               0 ton      82         0
                Hay-T                3.5 ton                    82      287
                Corn-O               80 bu                                    102     8,160
                Oat-O                 70 bu      20      1,400                              102     7,140
                Hay-O-e               0 ton      20         0                               102        0
                Hay-O                3.5 ton                    20       70                               102       357
                New Farm
                Oat-T                 70 bu                    480 33,600
                Hay-T-e               0 ton                    480        0
                Hay-T                 5 ton                                   480     2,400 320     1,600
                Corn-O                80 bu                                                 160    12,800 160    12,800
                Oat-O                 70 bu                                                               160     11,200
                Hay-O-e               0 ton                                                               160        0
                Hay-O                 5 ton                                                               160      800
                1
                    Output figures are projected yield per acre times the number of acres.
                2
                    O = organic, T = transitional, e = established.




   160     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
Marketing Strategy
We will continue to market our organic crops under forward contract arrangements. This                                       APPENDIX
gives us access to attractive pricing opportunities and reduces price risk. The blue corn                                       —
contracts are based on acres of production rather than on a specific quantity. The contract-                                 KERKAERT
ing company will purchase everything we produce at the agreed upon price.

a. Pricing. For planning purposes we assume prices of $14.50 per bushel for organic
   blue corn, $6.50 per bushel for organic oats and $240 per ton for organic alfalfa hay in
   2014. We reduce planning prices for organic blue corn to $13 per bushel in 2015 and to
   $12.50 per bushel thereafter. The planning price of organic oats falls to $6 per bushel
   in 2015 and $5.50 per bushel thereafter, and the planning price for organic hay is set
   at $200 per ton starting in 2015. Planning prices for transition oats and hay are $3 per
   bushel and $150 per ton, respectively. Finally, we assume one ton of straw production
   per acre of organic and transition oats, with a value of $100 per ton. These are conser-
   vative price estimates relative to prices received in 2012 and 2013.
b. Sales Revenue Projections. Table 3 presents annual revenue projections based on
   the production estimates in Table 2 and the planning prices just presented. Note that
   revenue declines significantly during the initial transition years of 2015 and 2016. Rev-
   enue increases to above the 2014 revenue level in 2017-2019 as newly transitioned land
   is certified.


Table 3. Sales Revenue Projections 2015-2019
Removed for confidentiality

Marketing Risk Management
As already noted, our marketing risk management strategy is based on forward contract-
ing. This helps us maintain stable, long-term relationships with key customers and allows
us to project revenues, subject to yield uncertainty. In the future, as the market for organic
commodities grows and becomes more liquid, we may explore the use of revenue insur-
ance products, which are just being made available for organic crops.



HUMAN RESOURCES
Current Human Resources
We have been farming organically since 2007. In addition, Bryan has managed a success-
ful manure hauling business since 2001 and Theresa has raised contract nursery pigs since
1997. In our current farming operation, Bryan provides some labor for crop production
activities and supervises five other employees who provide labor for both the farming oper-
ation and the manure hauling business. Bryan also does marketing and monitors financial
performance of the farm business. Theresa maintains production and financial records
for the business and advises Bryan on management decisions in addition to providing the
labor and management for the nursery pig operation.

Human Resource Opportunities
Loss of a significant portion of our rented land represents a significant challenge and an
opportunity for our farm business. We currently have excess labor and management ca-
pacity. Acquisition of more land through a long-term lease with an option to buy will give
us an opportunity to better use our labor and management resources. Even with the added




                                       ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    161
                                   land, we will be farming fewer acres than we farmed from 2007 through 2013. This means
APPENDIX                           we will be able to more intensively manage the land we will have.
   —
KERKAERT                           Planning and Management Team
                                   In addition to Bryan and Theresa, the management team for Kerkaert Organic Farm
                                   includes:
                                        •   Paul Lanoue, Farm Business Management advisor
                                        •   Dale Paluch, bank loan officer
                                        •   Rod DeGraff, FSA loan officer
                                        •   Centrol Crop Consultants
                                        •   MCIA, organic certifier
                                        •   Jon Olson, organic farmer, friend and mentor

                                   We have all been working together for several years and believe we will continue to be a
                                   strong team as we grow our business.

                                   Human Resource Strategy
                                   Our human resource strategy will remain unchanged as we expand our farming operation
                                   through a land purchase. We have already demonstrated the ability to manage a large,
                                   complex cropping operation that conforms to organic standards. The complementarity
                                   between our manure hauling business and our farm operation has been and will contin-
                                   ue to be one of our keys to success. Required skills for employees are similar in the two
                                   businesses and, with effective management, the combination of the two businesses makes
                                   it possible for us to more fully use our employees’ skills. We also plan to continue using the
                                   planning and management advisory team we have formed over the past several years.

                                   Human Resource Risk Management
                                   Bryan and Theresa both make essential contributions to the success of the business. We
                                   have life insurance policies for both that will cover liabilities in case either of us passes
                                   away.



                                   FINANCES
                                   Current Financial Position and Historical Performance
                                   Table 4 summarizes historical balance sheet data for our farm operation for 2012-2014,
                                   and Table 5 summarizes historical income statement data for 2012 and 2013. These report
                                   data for the years we have been enrolled in the Farm Business Management program.
                                   More detailed statements are included in Appendix 1 (removed for confidentiality).

                                   As the income statement data show, 2013 was a difficult year for us. As reported in Appen-
                                   dix 1, we had land rent expenses of more than $206,000. We also had low yields, especial-
                                   ly for alfalfa hay, due to dry weather conditions for much of the growing season. Finally,
                                   conventional corn prices dropped significantly, from over $6.40 per bushel in 2012 to less
                                   than $4.15 per bushel in 2013. Nevertheless, our net worth remained relatively stable,
                                   falling by less than 10 percent despite a net farm income loss of $XX,XXX (removed for
                                   confidentiality).

                                   Table 4. Historical Balance Sheet Data, 2012-2014 (Market Valuation of Assets)
                                   (Removed for confidentiality)




   162     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
Table 5. Historical Income Statement Data, 2012 and 2013
(Removed for confidentiality)                                                                                                APPENDIX
                                                                                                                                —
Transition/Certification Strategy                                                                                            KERKAERT
FINPACK financial projections are presented in Appendix 2 (removed for confidentiality)
for our farming operation under the assumption that we transition the 82 acres we cur-
rently farm conventionally and certify an added 20 acres of land coming out of CRP. We
project a positive net farm income and net cash flow for 2014, but cash flows are consis-
tently negative in the years that follow. This is not sustainable.

FINPACK financial projections are presented in Appendix 3 (removed for confidentiality)
for our farming operation under the assumption that we rent 480 acres of land in Lyon
County starting in 2016 with a five-year lease and a right of first refusal on land purchase
at the end of the lease. The assumed rent is $200 per acre. As noted earlier, we will initiate
transition to organic production in 2016 and will have all the land certified in August or
September 2018. We will continue to farm rented land in Deuel County, South Dakota and
Lincoln County, Minnesota.

a. Asset Management. Under this plan our total crop acreage will increase to 893 acres
   in 2016. We have adequate machinery to farm this much land and we do not expect to
   make any major capital purchases through the 2020 crop year. The newly rented 480
   acres will be available for purchase at the end of the 2020 crop year.
b. Financial Projections. Key financial indicators from the more comprehensive
   financial projections in Appendix 3 (removed for confidentiality) are presented in
   Table 6. The early transition years of 2015 and 2016 will be challenging, with negative
   cash flows, net farm income near zero and significant declines in net worth. However,
   working capital remains above $XXX,XXX (removed for confidentiality) even in these
   difficult years. Performance recovers quickly in 2017 and by 2019 we will have built up
   working capital to more than $XXX,XXX (removed for confidentiality) and increased
   our term debt coverage ratio to 2.17. With another strong year expected in 2020, which
   is beyond our planning horizon, we should be in a strong financial position to make a
   land purchase.

Capital and Resource Request
The key element of this plan is to identify and secure long-term access to a parcel of land
that can be a stable basis for continuation of our farming operation. This plan is written
for a potential landlord to demonstrate that we have the knowledge, skills, experience and
equipment to successfully transition and farm more than 400 additional acres. When we
have identified a specific parcel of land for the new farm, we will explore possibilities for
negotiating a lower land rental rate for the transition years of 2016 and 2017. In addition,
this plan is addressed to our lender, Farm Credit Services, as a request for a line of credit
that will be adequate to ensure access to capital during the difficult 2015 and 2016 crop
years.

Risk Management
Our cash flow projections point to difficult years in 2015 and 2016 for our farm business.
Our most important tool for managing these challenges and other risks associated with the
plan is the additional income we receive from our manure hauling and hog nursery busi-
nesses. This income is not included in the cash flow projections presented here. The right
of first refusal to purchase the land we rent in Lyon County is also a form of risk manage-




                                       ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    163
                                   ment, since this will give us the right but not the obligation to purchase the land after the
APPENDIX                           2020 crop year. If our farming operation has been successful and that success is projected
   —                               to continue given land prices and profitability expectations, we will purchase the land. If
KERKAERT                           our farming operation has not been as successful as expected or if the outlook for future
                                   profitability is unfavorable, we will not be committed to continue farming that land.




   164     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
BUSINESS PLAN: VITALY BRUKHMAN
                                                                                                                              APPENDIX
Beginning Organic Processor, New Jersey                                                                                          —
(Prepared fall 2014)                                                                                                         BRUKHMAN


BUSINESS DESCRIPTION
Bubbly Jen’s Farm (BJF) is a small, start-up agricultural business that plans to produce                   NOTE: Some financial
naturally fermented, certified organic, ethnic foods such as sauerkraut, pickles, tomatoes                 figures have been removed
and specialty beverages. BJF is located in Middlesex County, New Jersey on 1.75 acres and                  for confidentiality.
is owned and operated by Vitaly Brukhman, a Moldovan-American first-generation immi-
grant. BJF will launch its commercial processing enterprise in 2015 and gradually scale up
production as demand grows and capital becomes available.


MISSION
The BJF mission is to serve people living in the New York/New Jersey region who are
interested in eating diverse, nutritious, organically grown and prepared foods to improve
their health and quality of life.


GOALS
BJF goals are modest to begin with, but grow significantly by year six. Short-term goals
include the development and testing of recipes, the identification of a cost-efficient pro-
cessing facility, the certification of the home farm and neighboring acreage, and breaking
even on processed products. Longer-term goals include the acquisition of more land for
vegetable production, expansion of the processing enterprise and the generation of income
to exceed all living expenses from the farm and processing business.


OPERATIONS
BJF is a micro-farm of 1.75 acres located in Middlesex county New Jersey (the larger
rectangle in Figure 1). Adjacent to BJF is another half-acre of neighboring land available to
rent (the smaller rectangle in Figure 1).

FIGURE 1: BJF SITE




                                       ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS     165
                                        Production and Transition Opportunities
 APPENDIX                               The half-acre of neighboring land has been idle for the past 12 years and might qualify im-
    —                                   mediately for organic certification per informal consultation with a staff member from the
BRUKHMAN                                Northeast Organic Farming Association (NOFA) who visited the site in the spring of 2014.
                                        This is a tremendous opportunity, potentially allowing BJF to immediately begin growing
                                        herbs needed for processing while transitioning its own fields for future use in vegetable
                                        and herb production. The owners of the neighboring land have given BJF verbal approval
                                        to farm the half-acre parcel in 2015.

                                        Additional growing facilities are available at another location—up to 9,000 square feet of
                                        heated greenhouse space and up to 6,700 square feet of non-heated hoop house space.
                                        Both facilities are about 10 miles away from the BJF farmstead and offer future opportuni-
                                        ties to extend the growing and processing seasons. The terms of use associated with these
                                        additional facilities are currently under discussion with the owner.

                                        Operations Strategy
                                        BJF will start small, growing high-value organic herbs on rented land in years one and two
                                        while transitioning 1.75 acres of owned land and, eventually, at leased facilities. With the
                                        exception of home-grown herbs, BJF will purchase all remaining inputs needed to initially
                                        process three naturally fermented products: sauerkraut, pickled cucumbers and tomatoes.
                                        Natural fermentation is one of the oldest forms of preserving food.22 It is a method of preser-
                                        vation that produces lactic acids in sour foods through the cultivation of desirable micro-
                                        organisms. Fermentation is also a method used for pickling vegetables and other foods.


                                                    Years 1-2                          Years 3-5                     Years 6+
                                         Transition home farm and raise       Certify 1.75-acre home farm,   Expand product offerings
                                        high-value certified organic herbs   begin produce production and    and continue to scale up
                                           on neighboring land. Process           scale up processing.             processing.
                                        fermented sauerkraut, dill pickles
                                                  and tomatoes.



                                        Processing begins with the purchase of raw ingredients and ends with the distribution or
                                        sale of final products.

                                        Over time, as BJF owner Vitaly Brukhman hones his production skills on transitioning
                                        land, he hopes to become competitive with other commercial produce growers and process
                                        organic produce from his own fields. In the meantime, BJF does not anticipate any difficul-
                                        ty sourcing organic produce locally. According to the National Organic Program website,
                                        New Jersey has 62 organic produce growers.

                                        Processing will occur in a certified commercial kitchen. There are several commercial
                                        kitchens in New Jersey available for hourly and daily rental. Most of the available commer-
                                        cial kitchens, however, are not certified organic. The closest certified organic commercial
     22 Microbiology in Food            kitchen, The Food Innovation Center North, is located about 10 miles away in Piscataway,
        Systems: Teacher Informa-
                                        N.J., and is currently cost prohibitive. Therefore, during years one and two (2015-2016),
        tion Sheet. Institute of Food
        Technologists. Visit www.ift.
                                        BJF will develop hands-on processing skills and sample product at a restaurant kitchen.
        org and search “microbiolo-     A temporary lease agreement has been negotiated with Tre Piani Restaurant in Princeton,
        gy in food systems.”            N.J., for weekly use of their space. At the same time, BJF will explore the construction of



   166         ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
an on-farm cold-storage facility to minimize dependency on external facilities for stor-
ing final products. By year three, BJF hopes to either have identified a long-term, bud-                                          APPENDIX
get-friendly processing solution within 10 miles of the farm through strategic partnerships                                          —
or to have acquired a mobile, certified kitchen-truck.                                                                           BRUKHMAN
Processing, based on sales potential, will begin with 2,200 pints of product per year in
2015 and grow to 10,000 pints by 2020 (Table 1: Estimated Processing Capacity).

 TABLE 1: ESTIMATED PROCESSING CAPACITY
  Year          Units of Pickled Vegetables
    1                       2,200
    2                       2,200
    3                       3,200
   4                        4,200
   5                        5,500
   6+                      10,000

Processing will occur 20 weeks per year during the produce harvest and post-harvest sea-
sons (July-November). BJF will use one person to process one day per week, 10 hours per
day during years one and two. Processing capacity will grow in subsequent years through
an increase in the number of days or processing staff, or both.

Licenses and Organic Certification
BJF will require several licenses and forms of certification related to production and pro-
cessing of fermented organic products (handling and retailing licenses are discussed in the
marketing section of this plan).

Organic certification (regulated by the USDA) is required for the rented and owned land on
which herbs will be grown. The rented land is not currently certified but Brukhman has been
in touch with the New Jersey Department of Agriculture and NOFA New Jersey (NOFA-NJ)
to explore certification potential and to develop an organic plan for owned land.

In addition to organic certification for the rented land, BJF will pursue organic certifica-
tion for the value-added processing enterprise with a New Jersey certifier and the New
Jersey Department of Agriculture. Also, BJF will explore the need for a wholesale food
processor license (available through the Middlesex County Department of Health) and
handling licenses (available from township health departments) required by the farmers’
markets where BJF intends to sell its processed products.

BJF is not required to register the business with FDA unless initial test batches indicate a
pH level above 4.6 or recipes include the addition of acid, in which case those BJF prod-
ucts will be subject to the acidified foods regulations.23 Initial product development results
suggest that BJF products will all have a pH level well under 4.0. Most of the products
have shown a pH level of 3.2-3.8.
                                                                                                        23 Draft Guidance for Industry:
                                                                                                           Acidified Foods. September
Operations Risk Management                                                                                 2010. US Department for
Our business will face three significant risks:                                                            Health and Human Services
                                                                                                           - FDA. Visit www.fda.gov and
a. Success as an organic produce grower. We are beginning farmers and expect our                           search “guidance for industry:
   learning curve to be steep during the first few years. We have done our best to educate                 acidified foods.”



                                         ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS        167
                                         ourselves on produce growing practices (see Human Resources), but realize that noth-
 APPENDIX                                ing substitutes for hands-on experience.
    —                                 b. Access to certified kitchen space. Perhaps our greatest challenge/risk will be the
BRUKHMAN                                 identification of a certified organic commercial kitchen within close proximity to the
                                         farm for long-term use. We are confident that cost-effective processing opportunities
                                         will emerge, as there has been a surge in the creation of shared-use and commercial
                                         kitchens over the past few years. We do not require specialized equipment for process-
                                         ing—simply a stove, space to pack and store jars during fermentation, and space for
                                         cold-storage of the final packed product (which could occur at BJF if available).
                                      c. Quality control and food safety. Only the freshest ingredients will be purchased for
                                         processing, and will be inspected before processing to ensure that they are free of rot
                                         and mold. Once processed, all products will be tested for safe consumption (pH levels
                                         not to exceed those recommended by the US Department of Health and Human Ser-
                                         vices Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition) and inspected for signs of spoilage.
                                         Spoilage most commonly occurs during the initial ferment and during cold storage.
                                         Spoilage guidelines are available for fermented products. If spoilage is detected, BJF
                                         will review and document any known causes and adjust its quality control procedures
                                         as appropriate.


                                      MARKETING
                                      BJF products will be marketed at culturally well-matched farmers’ markets, farm stores,
                                      food cooperatives, small specialty retailers and via e-commerce websites. BJF will target
                                      educated, health-conscious consumers over the age of 20 living in the Northeast region
                                      (and businesses who supply them), with a special emphasis on the estimated 17,000
                                      Russian-speaking and Japanese-speaking households who are traditional consumers of
                                      fermented products and who, according to U.S. Census data, report significantly higher
                                      annual incomes than average New Jersey consumers.24

                                      Marketing Opportunities
                                      BJF is located near a densely populated area exhibiting strong demand for good food
                                      purveyors and opportunities to market local, organic, naturally-fermented ethnic products.
                                      Our research suggests that demand for these types of products has been growing. Nation-
                                      ally, 79 percent of consumers would like to buy more local food and, when buying, almost
                                      six in 10 consumers say that it is important that their food be locally sourced, grown or
                                      made.25 The National Restaurant Association’s 2014 Culinary Forecast lists locally grown
                                      and organic produce, farm/estate branded products, fermented products, pickled vege-
  24 United States 2010 Census.       tables and regional ethnic cuisine on their “Top Trends” list.26 Regionally, Real Pickles (a
     US Census Bureau. www.           leading producer in the Northeast market) states in their annual report: “For several years
     census.gov/2010census.
                                      now, demand for our products has continued to increase year-to-year beyond our expec-
  25 A Fresh Look at Organic and      tations. Raw fermented pickles have long been an obscure category even in natural foods
     Local. 2012. Sullivan Higdon     markets, but now it seems that they’re really starting to catch on!”
     & Sink FoodThink. http://shs-
     foodthink.com/white-papers.      Marketing Strategy
                                      BJF has a three-pronged marketing strategy that parallels its production strategy.
  26 What’s Hot: 2014 Culinary
     Forecast. 2014. National
                                      Naturally fermented product samples—processed in a commercial restaurant kitchen—will
     Restaurant Association.
     Visit www.restaurant.org
                                      be provided at no cost to neighbors, friends and church/synagogue groups through taste
     and search “2014 culinary        tests. The purpose of the taste tests is to generate feedback on recipes and to test our
     forecast.”




   168        ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
marketing message: “Sharing naturally fermented goodness with the people of Central
Jersey, their neighbors, and guests!” Planned taste test events include:                                                        APPENDIX
                                                                                                                                   —
    a. Friends and family BBQ. Four-pint jars of product will be provided to each family,                                      BRUKHMAN
       couple or individual. Everyone who receives samples will be asked to complete a
       questionnaire about product taste and price. They will also be asked to share sever-
       al of the gifted jars and surveys with friends (to expand the taste test circle).
    b. Retail manager sampling. We will present one to three jars of product(s) and ques-
       tionnaires to decision-makers at retail stores, including farm stores, food coopera-
       tives and specialty stores.
    c. County fair taste test. We will taste test BJF products at county fair events, collect-
       ing direct feedback on recipes from fair goers. There are four county fairs within
       Middlesex County and Monmouth, Mercer and Bergen counties.

Beginning in 2015, BJF will begin marketing up to 2,200 pints to neighbors, friends,
church/synagogue groups, farmers’ market and fair goers, and independent specialty/eth-
nic retailers. BJF will identify one to three farmers’ markets that are open throughout the
winter, allowing year-round income generation. There are seven such farmers’ markets in
Middlesex County—six of which are located within 20 miles of BJF.




           Years 1-2                           Years 3-5                        Years 6+
   Begin taste testing products       Scale up marketing to reach        Expand product offerings
    processed in a commercial       retailers within 50 miles of farm.    according to customer
 restaurant kitchen immediately.                                          demand and perceived
   Sell at various direct-to-con-                                             opportunities.
      sumer markets in 2015.




Eventually, in years three through six, BJF will expand its customer base to include larger
retailers such as food cooperatives and restaurants in addition to the specialty stores.
There are many opportunities for expansion. New Jersey is home to 11 food cooperatives,
21 specialty food stores and 19 restaurants representing Japanese or Eastern European
and American cuisine. BJF will also target Russian- and Japanese-speaking consumers
who live in Middlesex, Mercer and Monmouth counties (approximately 15,400 people) via
community websites, ethnic food stores and ethnic, third-party yellow pages websites.

Processed products can be priced profitably at $7 retail and $4 wholesale. Market research
suggests that these prices are very competitive. Table 2 lists BJF prices by market channel
(retail versus wholesale) alongside a range of current prices for fermented products. Prices
represent products with a variety of quality attributes, which explains the large spread in
value. Some products, for example, are naturally fermented, some are certified organic
and some are fermented using vinegar (lowest quality). BJF products will be differentiated
from these products and perceived as a high-quality, gourmet product.




                                         ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS     169
                                     TABLE 2: PRICES FOR FERMENTED PRODUCTS
 APPENDIX                            Fermented product                BJF price ($)          Market price – low   Market price – high
    —
BRUKHMAN                             Pint (16 oz) – retail                 $7                       $2                  $8.29
                                     Pint (16 oz) – wholesale              $4                      $1.25                  $4
                                     Beverages (16 oz) – retail           $2.50
                                     Beverages (16 oz) – wholesale         $2


                                    Using the prices in Table 2, BJF estimates that wholesale and retail sales from its three
                                    main product lines—sauerkraut, pickles and tomatoes—will generate $10,540 during the
                                    first year. By year six, BJF modestly projects gross sales of $47,500.

                                    BJF will also consider product expansion beyond year six (introducing Kvass and other
                                    naturally fermented beverages) as well as services such as canning courses, food-truck
                                    packaged lunch sales and farm dinners, depending on customer feedback and perceived
                                    opportunities. These product expansion opportunities have not been factored into the
                                    sales estimates above.

                                    Competitive Advantages
                                    There are 13 producers of fermented products who sell at BJF-targeted farmers markets
                                    and retail stores. All competitor products are either produced outside the state of New Jer-
                                    sey, are not organic or are not naturally fermented. There is no one in the BJF target mar-
                                    ket offering organically certified AND naturally fermented AND locally produced pickles,
                                    sauerkraut, tomatoes and specialty beverages, nor is there any other business specifically
                                    catering organic naturally fermented craft foods and drinks to the large local Russian and
                                    Japanese ethnic markets.

                                    Licenses and Organic Certification
                                    As noted, BJF will need to obtain organic certification for our land. In addition to this
                                    certification, BJF will need to:

                                         a. Hire or undergo training to become a certified food manager and obtain a New Jer-
                                            sey food service sanitation certificate. These are required to sell processed products
                                            according to the New Jersey Department of Health Food and Drug Safety Program.
                                            Training options are discussed in Human Resources Strategy.
                                         b. Register for a retail food handler license with the State of New Jersey and explore
                                            the need for a retail mobile food handler license (depending on inspector review
                                            and target markets).
                                         c. Apply at targeted farmers’ market(s) for stall space.

                                    BJF products will not require additional food safety inspections according to the New
                                    Jersey Department of Agriculture, which lists naturally fermented products as “safe.” Nor
                                    will BJF require a Hazardous Analysis Critical Control Point plan (HACCP) under federal
                                    regulations due to BJF business size (less than 10 employees) and projected sales volume
                                    (less than 10,000 units of each product).




   170      ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
Marketing Risk Management
BJF has three general marketing risks:                                                                                        APPENDIX
                                                                                                                                 —
    a. Difficulty reaching target customers and educating consumers who are unfamiliar                                       BRUKHMAN
       with natural fermentation. We will work hard to establish our brand with Russian
       and Japanese communities through the methods outlined in our Marketing Strategy.
    b. Inability to scale up during years 3-6 to satisfy retailers who will have specific prod-
       uct volume and delivery expectations. BJF will develop superior service and com-
       munication to anticipate and address these issues should they arise. At the same
       time, BJF will brand itself as a gourmet, specialty product with limited distribution.
    c. Food safety. As described, a HACCP plan is not required for our business due to our
       size and scale, according to FDA regulations. However, BJF will participate in food
       safety training (see Human Resources Strategy), develop a plan for monitoring food
       safety (see Marketing Strategy) and will plan to purchase product liability insurance
       to protect itself against any consumer claims associated with food safety.


HUMAN RESOURCES
BJF is a small, family-run business with a strong support network of advisors and consul-
tants. BJF will rely primarily on family labor during the first two years. Gradually, as the
business grows and sales mature, BJF will offer year-round, part-time employment as well
as seasonal, part-time internships.

Management and Skills
BJF will be managed by owner Vitaly Brukhman. While new to farming, Brukhman has
experience as an entrepreneur and has operated a successful IT consulting business. In
2013-2014, Brukhman began cultivating his agricultural production skills, acquiring
hands-on experience growing radishes and mustard greens on a half-acre while complet-
ing a beginning farmer education program with NOFA-NJ. During the spring/summer of
2014, Brukhman participated in four courses as part of the Organic Processing Institute’s
School for Organic Processing Entrepreneurs to gain a better understanding of organic
processing and handling requirements. During that same time, he conducted food prod-
uct research and began small-batch production for taste testing and marketing. In the
fall of 2014, Brukhman continued skill-building coursework: farming-related classes and
on-farm consultation with NOFA-NJ, a class on food and drink entrepreneurship with the
Samuel Adams Brew the American Dream series, and microbiome and nutrition studies
through a variety of online sources.

Additionally, Brukhman plans to enroll in the food safety manager program offered elec-
tronically by ServSafe, a nationally recognized training program. This course satisfies the
Middlesex County food safety training requirements needed to obtain a New Jersey food
service sanitation certificate. Training is valid for five years from date of completion.

Advisory Committee
A committed group of educators, entrepreneurs, farmers and friends have volunteered to
serve and/or act as advisors to BJF. Brukhman will meet with BJF Advisory Committee
members semi-annually to review progress, troubleshoot problems and identify new op-
portunities. BJF’s advisory committee includes:




                                       ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS     171
                                         Spouse, Katrin K.
 APPENDIX                                Daughter, Jennifer B.
    —                                    Potential Investor, Dennis P.
BRUKHMAN                                 Farming Educator, Justine C.
                                         Organic, Non-GMO Movement Activist, Theresa L.
                                         Food Entrepreneur, Michael S.
                                         Restaurant Operator, Jim W.
                                         Experienced Organic Produce Grower, Serguei E.
                                         Food Processing Professional and Educator, Paul T.
                                         Wild Food Foraging, Herbal Medicine and Nutritionist, Dan F.
                                         Fermentation Revivalist, Sandor K.
                                         Herbal Medicine Practitioner, Virginia A.
                                         Japanese Culture/Natural Sciences Educator, Seth D.
                                         Permaculture Educator, Wanda K.
                                         Business Accounting Professional, Robert S.

                                    Human Resource Strategy
                                    BJF will operate full-time during the New Jersey vegetable harvest and post-harvest
                                    seasons (July-November). During this time, BJF will purchase and process a year’s worth
                                    of product. During the BJF start-up phase, marketing will occur on a part-time basis
                                    year-round and will gradually progress to a full-time job by year six. Dill production, land
                                    transition and, eventually, organic produce production will be managed on a part-time,
                                    seasonal basis. BJF has prepared a calendar of activities and estimated labor needs (re-
                                    moved for confidentiality).

                                    As BJF owner/operator, Brukhman will perform all management, marketing, processing
                                    and production activities in years one and two. BJF will hire part-time labor and interns
                                    (from a community group interested in organic production) to assist with processing,
                                    marketing and produce production during years 3-5. Additional hired labor will be needed
                                    beginning in year five during the processing period as BJF expands its activities.

                                    BJF will recruit part-time help through farm listservs, student groups and word-of-mouth.
                                    When hiring, BJF will seek individuals with an interest in organic management and food
                                    preparation.

                                    Licenses and Insurance
                                    BJF will purchase a worker’s compensation policy for hired employees to protect against
                                    liability should a staff member become ill or injured at work, as well as a commercial
                                    insurance policy. The commercial policy will include endorsements for liability related to
                                    direct-marketing sales through food services, farmers’ markets, roadside stands and on-
                                    farm tours.

                                    Human Resource Risk Management
                                    The greatest risk to BJF’s success will be illness or injury that prevents Brukhman from
                                    doing the work. Brukhman has adequate health insurance and plans to explore disability
                                    insurance. Upon hiring an assistant, BJF will train that person to take over marketing and
                                    processing responsibilities in the event of illness or injury to any staff member, especially
                                    Brukhman.




   172      ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
FINANCES
BJF’s short-term financial goal is to generate approximately one-quarter of family living
                                                                                                                                APPENDIX
                                                                                                                                   —
expenses from product sales. Financial projections suggest that this is feasible by year three.                                BRUKHMAN
In the meantime, BJF will require financing to cover expenses and start-up investments.

Financial Opportunities
BJF has been approached by a private investor who believes in the BJF mission and who is
interested in supporting BJF during its start-up phase. (Loan amount and terms removed
for confidentiality.)

Financial Strategies
BJF will show a positive cash flow and a sustainable profit equal to one-quarter of its oper-
ator’s living expenses within three years of start-up. In the meantime, BJF will require an
infusion of capital (in addition to the private investment) to finance management salary,
overhead costs and start-up expenses associated supplies, equipment, labor and management.


            Years 1-2                          Years 3-5                        Years 6+
  Finance salary, overhead costs,     Continue to finance direct and    Pay down loans. Generate
  and start-up expenses through        overhead expenses through       profit equal to annual living
  private savings, investor financ-   investor and lender financing.     expenses from farm and
      ing and lender financing.                                            processing business.



Capital Request
BJF is requesting a revolving line of credit and an intermediate loan to finance its start-up
and growth (values removed for confidentiality). The direct line of credit will be used to
finance the majority of start-up needs in years one and two:

    a. Seeds
    b. Growing supplies
    c. Fermentation starter cultures
    d. Electronic pH meter (approximately $100)
    e. Certification fees
    f. Harvesting tools and crates
    g. Washing equipment
    h. Coolers and bags for transporting produce
    i. Boxes for transporting jars

In years 3-5, BJF anticipates needing to finance:
    a. Direct expenses listed above as well as processing fees related to commercial
       kitchen rent and hired labor
    b. A hoop house for equipment and product storage




                                         ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS     173
                                    The following items have been calculated and removed for confidentiality:
 APPENDIX                                a. Projected costs
    —                                    b. Projected net income
BRUKHMAN                                 c. Projected cash flow

                                    Licenses and Insurance
                                    BJF will require several food processing and handling licenses as already noted. In addition,
                                    BJF will register as a business with the State of New Jersey and apply for the following:

                                         a. New Jersey tax identification number
                                         b. Property insurance to protect again theft of products and equipment stored at the
                                            commercial kitchen, etc.

                                    Financial Risk Management
                                    BJF has carefully researched and calculated expenses related to cost of production and
                                    processing, sales potential and income. Estimates have been reviewed by a financial advi-
                                    sor for accuracy and adjusted to present the most conservative financial scenario.

                                    BJF will meet regularly with advisors to closely monitor its cost estimates, among other
                                    things, during its first three years to determine if longer-term projections are accurate.
                                    We fully expect that BJF will be able to reach its long-term financial goals but are willing
                                    to abandon our plan or modify it if the first three years do not go as anticipated. A contin-
                                    gency plan has been developed for investor and lender repayment should the processing
                                    business fail. (Plan removed for confidentiality.)




   174      ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
GLOSSARY
Assets. Resources owned by or owed to the business. Current assets are cash and other
assets that can be easily converted to cash, such as accounts receivable, crop inventories
and livestock inventories. Non-current assets are those that are more difficult to convert
to cash and which are used to generate long-term profits. Examples of non-current assets
include breeding livestock, machinery, equipment, buildings and land.
                                                                                                                              GLOSSARY

Balance sheet. A financial statement summarizing assets, liabilities and net worth indi-
cating the financial condition of the business at a specific point in time (e.g., January 1).

Bill of lading. A document issued by the person responsible for transport of products,
which details the merchandise being shipped and gives title of that shipment to a specified
party (i.e., the buyer).

Buffer zone. An area located between a certified production operation or portion of a pro-
duction operation and an adjacent area that is not maintained under organic management.

Cash flow statement. An estimate of all cash receipts and all cash expenditures that are
expected to occur during a certain period of time (e.g., month, quarter, year). A cash flow
statement allows a business to identify when and if money will be needed and where it will
come from to avoid short-term shortages of cash.

Clean truck affidavit. Document required of producers and handlers who are respon-
sible for the transport of organic products, declaring that the transport vehicle was found
to be clean from foreign odors, residues, conventional products and other substances that
would compromise organic integrity.

Critical planning issue. The primary reason or driver for making a change in a business.

Enterprise budget. An estimate of all income and expenses associated with a particular
enterprise. The enterprise budget is used to estimate the profitability of the enterprise and
to compare the profitability of various enterprises.

Depreciation. Used to account for a reduction in the value of an asset (machinery, build-
ings) with the passage of time, due in particular to wear and tear.

Fixed costs. Expenses that do not vary with changes in output for the production period
under consideration. Examples include real estate taxes, depreciation and interest on land.

Genetically modified organisms (GMOs). An organism produced through genetic
engineering in which genetic material (genes) of living cells have been moved or modified.
The use of GMOs is prohibited at all stages of organic production and processing, and
organic farmers and processors must show that their products are protected against GMO
contamination at all times.

Gross farm revenue or gross farm income. The total income, both cash and non-
cash, received from an enterprise or business before any expenses are paid.

Income statement. A summary of income, expenses and profit or loss from farming
operations during the calendar year.




                                        ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    175
                                   Liabilities. Debts owed by the business. Current liabilities are debts that will come due
                                   within one year. Non-current liabilities are debts that come due in a time period longer
                                   than one year.

                                   Liquidity. The ability of a business to generate sufficient cash to meet total cash demands
                                   without disturbing the ongoing operation of the business. Liquidity is examined by com-
                                   paring current assets to current liabilities.

GLOSSARY                           “Made with” organic label. At least 70 percent of the product must consist of certified
                                   organic ingredients (excluding salt and water). Any remaining agricultural ingredients are
                                   not required to be organically produced but must be produced without excluded methods
                                   (e.g., genetic engineering, ionizing radiation or sewage sludge). Non-agricultural products
                                   must be specifically allowed according to the National List. Product labels must state the
                                   name of the certifying agent on the information panel and cannot include the USDA organ-
                                   ic seal anywhere on packaging. The ingredient panel must identify organic ingredients
                                   with an asterisk or other mark.

                                   Mission statement. Describes the fundamental purpose of the business in a couple of
                                   sentences. Most mission statements briefly describe products and services offered and
                                   often include business owner values or beliefs.

                                   Monitoring checkpoint. Also called critical success factors. Key events, targets or ac-
                                   complishments that must occur for your farm business to succeed. Monitoring checkpoints
                                   are measurable to help a business owner assess progress toward goals while acting as early
                                   warning signals that business strategies may not be successful.

                                   National List of Allowed and Prohibited Substances (“National List”). List of
                                   substances that may and may not be used in organic crop and livestock production, as well
                                   as processed organic products. The USDA National Organic Standards Board must review
                                   every substance on the list every five years.

                                   Net farm income. Gross farm income from operations plus the gain (or minus the loss)
                                   from the sale of capital assets and change in base values of breeding livestock. Net farm
                                   income represents a return to operator’s labor, management and equity.

                                   Net return. Gross farm income minus farm expenses plus any changes in inventory.

                                   “100 percent organic” label. All ingredients must be certified organic. All processing
                                   aids must be organic. Product labels must state the name of the certifying agent on the in-
                                   formation panel. May include the USDA organic logo and the “100 percent organic” claim.
                                   Must identify organic ingredients with an asterisk or other mark.

                                   “Organic” label. All ingredients must be certified organic except where specified on the
                                   National List. Up to five percent of non-organic ingredients (excluding water and salt)
                                   from the National List are allowed. Product labels must state the name of the certifying
                                   agent on the information panel. May include the USDA organic logo and “organic” claim.
                                   Must identify organic ingredients with an asterisk or other mark.

                                   Organic System Plan (OSP). An Organic System Plan is required annually by certifi-
                                   cation agencies to demonstrate compliance with National Organic Program rules. An OSP
                                   documents past management practices as well as current practices, including those related
                                   to input/ingredient purchases, transportation of raw ingredients, storage, cleaning and
                                   sanitation, processing, pest management, sales and recordkeeping.



   176     ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
Organic System Plan for Handlers (OSPH). An Organic System Plan for Handlers
is required annually under National Organic Program rules when processing or packing
organic products that you intend to label and market as organic. Processing includes
livestock slaughter, cooking, baking, heating, curing, canning, drying, mixing, grinding,
churning, separating, extracting, cutting, fermenting, distilling, preserving, dehydrating,
freezing and the repackaging of bulk foods into smaller containers for resale. The OSPH
is similar to the OSP in requiring you to describe the type of handling that you practice
and to document current ingredient purchases, transportation of raw ingredients, storage,
cleaning and sanitation, processing, pest management, sales and recordkeeping.                                                GLOSSARY

Overhead costs. Costs that are connected to your business but are not directly related
to the type and quantity of products produced, like office supplies and utilities. A type of
fixed cost.

Profitability. A measure of business health. Profitability is calculated by subtracting all
farm business expenses from the total income your farm business generates.

Solvency. A measure of business health. A business is solvent if total assets are greater
than total liabilities, and is insolvent if liabilities exceed assets.

Split operation. An operation that manages some enterprises or fields organically and
others conventionally.

Transaction certificate (TC). A document issued to the buyer by a certifier to verify the
origin and organic status of products sold by organic operations. The TC is the proof that
the product sold/purchased was grown in accordance with organic standards. A TC is also
sent to the seller to include with their audit trail documents.

Variable costs. Expenses that vary with output for the production period under consid-
eration. Examples include hired labor, seed, fuel, feed, herbicide, insecticide and fertilizer.



GLOSSARY REFERENCES
• About the National List. n.d. National Organic Program, USDA - Agricultural Market-
  ing Service. www.ams.usda.gov/AMSv1.0/NOPPetitionedSubstancesDatabase.
• Farm Analysis Terms. January 2010. Hofstrand, D. Iowa State University Extension
  and Outreach. Visit www.extension.iastate.edu and search File File “C1-05.”
• Forms, Documents and Sample Letters for Organic Producers. 2005. Kuepper,
  G., J. Riddle, J. Ford, C. Bowman, and M. Moynihan. ATTRA. Visit www.attra.ncat.org/
  organic.html.
• Important Farm Business Terms Defined - Finance. October 2005. Langemeier, M.
  and Jones, R. Farm Management Guide: MF-477. Kansas State University.
• Labeling Organic Products. October 2012. National Organic Program, USDA - Agricul-
  tural Marketing Service. Visit www.ams.usda.gov and search “labeling organic products.”
• Twelve Steps to Cash Flow Budgeting. April 2014. Edwards, W. Iowa State University
  Extension and Outreach. Visit www.extension.iastate.edu and search “C3-15.”
• Understanding Profitability. December 2009. Hofstrand, D. Iowa State University
  Extension and Outreach. Visit www.extension.iastate.edu and search “C3-24.”




                                        ORGANIC TRANSITION: A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS, RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS    177
ORGANIC TRANSITION
A BUSINESS PLANNER FOR FARMERS,
RANCHERS AND FOOD ENTREPRENEURS
Organic food is a booming busi-
ness. The profit potential—along
with other rewards—has farmers,
ranchers and food business own-
ers across the country considering
the switch to organic production.
But successfully managing your
business through the multi-year
transition process requires careful
planning. What are your long-term
business goals? What organic market
opportunities are you in a position to
exploit? How will you acquire the re-
sources you need to make the transi-
tion? How will you anticipate and deal
with challenges as they arise? These are just a few of the critical
questions you should be thinking about as you plan, and Organic
Transition: A Business Planner for Farmers, Ranchers and Food Entrepreneurs can help. While not a com-
prehensive guide to becoming certified, the Organic Transition Planner will help you explore organic tran-
                          sition strategies and decide whether going organic makes sense for your farm or
                          business. The Organic Transition Planner contains explanations of key concepts,
                          real-life examples from transitioning farmers and detailed worksheets covering farm
                          operations, marketing, human resources and finances. After working through the
                          Organic Transition Planner you will be ready to develop an actionable business
                          plan suitable for yourself, your management team or a lender.

                         The Organic Transition Planner can be used alone or in conjunction with the more
                         comprehensive business planning publication Building a Sustainable Business: A Guide
                         to Developing a Business Plan for Farms and Rural Businesses, available through SARE at
                         www.sare.org/business.
