                                               Sustainable Agriculture
               A program of the National Center for Appropriate Technology • 1-800-346-9140 • www.attra.ncat.org




               Tipsheet: Organic Poultry
               Production for Meat and Eggs
Introduction
This tipsheet discusses certified organic
poultry production for eggs and meat in
compliance with United States Depart-
ment of Agriculture (USDA) organic reg-
ulations. The costs of meeting organic
production regulations are related to
the cost of organic feed (which varies
widely depending on access and prox-
imity to production of organic grains)
and housing and management (which
vary with weather and system design).
Some markets and consumers value
organically raised livestock and live-
stock products, both in terms of food
value and benefits to animal welfare
and environmental stewardship. In
these markets, organic products com-
mand price premiums, which may off-
set higher production costs sufficiently
                                          Outdoor access is required by organic regulations for all livestock. Access to pasture,
for organic poultry production to be a although not specifically required for organic poultry, allows birds to actively forage for
viable business.                          plants, bugs, and seeds, and generally results in better health. Photo: Pamela Wolfe, NCAT



 NOP Organic Regulations Related to Poultry Production
 Organic regulations specify, in 7CFR §205.2 Terms defined and in §205.236 Origin of Livestock, that poul-
 try or edible poultry products must be from birds that have been under continuous organic management
 beginning no later than the second day of life. Provisions for livestock feed, including allowed ingredients,
 are addressed in §205.237. The livestock health care practice standard, §205.238, emphasizes preventative
 health and humane treatment. Organic livestock living conditions are described in §205.239.
 Synthetic substances allowed for use in organic livestock production and handling are specifically listed
 in §205.603. Conversely, non-synthetic materials that are prohibited for use are listed in §205.604. Organic
 handling regulations are found in §205.270, and a list of nonagricultural (nonorganic) substances allowed
 as ingredients in or on processed products labeled as “organic” appear in §205.605. Facility pest manage-
 ment is addressed in §205.271. Prevention of commingling and contamination are described in §205.272.
 Regulations on labeling are found in §205.200-311, including §205.306 Labeling of livestock feed.
 Regulations that apply to all organic operations include §205.103 Recordkeeping, §205.201 Organic system
 plan, and §205.202 Land requirements. Parts of §205.203, Soil fertility and crop nutrient management, are
 relevant to management of organic poultry production operations.
Selection of Animal Type and Breeds; Source
of Livestock
According to USDA organic regulations, an organic livestock producer
must select species and types of livestock that are suitable to the site,
well-adapted to the climate, and resistant to diseases and parasites that
are common in the area. Poultry breeds vary with respect to the range
of temperature in which they thrive and maintain good productivity.
Some do better in colder climates; others tolerate heat better. Some
are better foragers; others grow faster. Producers should seek a balance
of desirable characteristics. Hatchery breed descriptions and producer
experience can guide breed selection. For organic production, one-day
old chicks and poults may be purchased from any hatchery. (Poultry farm
advisors recommend purchasing only from breeding flocks approved
by the USDA National Poultry Improvement Program, which certifies
flocks to be free of certain diseases.) Organic management must begin
no later than the second day of life.

Nutrition: Feed, Supplements, and Additives
Organic poultry must be fed rations sufficient to meet nutritional require-     A clean environment for young birds, along with
ments, including vitamins, minerals, protein and/or amino acids, fatty          selection of well-adapted poultry breeds, are foun-
acids, energy sources, and fiber. Agricultural ingredients must be cer-         dations of preventative health care for organic poul-
tified organic. Oyster shell may be used as a calcium supplement to             try. Photo: Ann Baier, NCAT
strengthen eggshells. All feed rations, additives, and supplements must
be listed with complete brand name, formulation, and manufacturer in
the producer’s Organic System Plan (OSP).
Synthetic methionine is an amino acid that may be used in certified
organic feed rations in limited quantities that are specified by the reg-
ulations (two pounds per ton of chickenfeed; three pounds per ton of
turkey or other poultry feed). This level of use will be allowed until the
sunset date on this regulation. (Please check with your certifier and the
National Organic Program website to verify this date.)
Organic poultry producers must not use animal drugs, including hor-
mones, to promote growth. (The U.S. Food and Drug Administration
prohibits hormone use in all poultry production, whether organic or
non-organic .) Additionally, organic producers must avoid products such
as non-organic “medicated” chick starter, which includes antibiotics.
Arsenic is included in some non-organic broiler feed as a feed stimulant
and for protozoan parasite control. Arsenic should not be included in
organic rations; its use is prohibited for organic crop production, so it
must not be “applied” to organic land through poultry manure. Organic
producers must not use feed supplements or additives in amounts above
what is needed for adequate nutrition and health maintenance. Organic
regulations specify that it is prohibited to feed mammalian or poultry
slaughter by-products to mammals or poultry, or to use any feed, feed
additives, and feed supplements in violation of the Federal Food, Drug, Organic poultry must be provided with rations that
                                                                          are 100% organic and allowed ingredients for good
and Cosmetic Act.                                                         nutrition and productivity. A grain silo is one way to
Although pasture is not required for organic poultry, outdoor access protect feed from the elements and pests. Photo: Ann
is required. Production systems that allow poultry to forage fulfill the Baier, NCAT
requirement for outdoor access and can provide for healthy living conditions. Pasture-based systems can be certified
organic when they use organic feed, preventative health care, and avoid prohibited materials. House-based systems
are also permitted for organic production, provided they allow for access to the outdoors and direct sunlight, and oth-
erwise fulfill all other regulatory requirements described below in Living Conditions.

Page 2                                                                   Tipsheet: Organic Poultry Production for Meat and Eggs
Preventative Health Care
Organic regulations require preventative health care, beginning with appropriate selection of species and breeds, an
overall healthy environment with good sanitation and biosecurity measures to prevent the spread of diseases, and
measures to minimize stress. Vaccination against prevalent diseases of poultry is allowed in organic poultry production,
as long as the vaccines are not genetically modified. Vaccines commonly used in the United States include those for
Marek’s disease, Newcastle disease, and infectious bronchitis. Preventative practices and healthy living conditions, such
as maintaining clean feeding and watering systems, are critical to reducing diseases such as Coccidiosis, which is caused
by a protozoan parasite. Probiotics, or beneficial microbes, may be fed or added to drinking water to establish beneficial
                                                  microflora. These work in the poultry’s gut, through competitive exclu-
                                                  sion, to reduce pathogenic organisms such as Salmonella and E. coli.
                                                           Use of parasiticides is prohibited in organic slaughter stock of any kind,
                                                           including poultry. Parasiticides are limited to uses specified in the Live-
                                                           stock healthcare practice standards, the National List, and only by writ-
                                                           ten order of a licensed veterinarian if required. Organic regulations
                                                           §205.238(b) specify the conditions under which parasiticides may be
                                                           used. §205.238(c)(6) also states “The producer of an organic livestock
                                                           operation must not: Administer animal drugs in violation of the Federal
                                                           Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act”. The producer must, therefore, be aware
                                                           of, and avoid recommendations for off-label use of any drug.
                                                           Physical alterations of organic livestock are allowed only when neces-
                                                           sary to promote the animals’ welfare, and when they are performed in
                                                           a matter that minimizes pain and stress. Most organic producers find
                                                           alterations such as beak trimming to be unnecessary when they have
                                                           designed their systems and management practices to provide adequate
                                                           space, include roosters for natural social order, and use other strategies
                                                           to reduce stress among birds.

                                                           Living Conditions
Laying hens on pasture with clean water, Solseeker         A healthy environment that minimizes stress is foundational to produc-
Farm at Hain Ranch Organics. Photo: Ann Baier, NCAT       tion of healthy birds. Organic poultry, like all organic livestock, must have
                                                                                    access to the outdoors, shelter, exercise areas,
                                                                                    fresh air, clean drinking water, shade, and direct
                                                                                    sunlight--suitable for the animal’s stage of life,
                                                                                    climate, and environment. Animals need to
                                                                                    express their natural behaviors to maintain good
                                                                                    health. For poultry, this includes exercise, roost-
                                                                                    ing, scratching, and dustbathing, which, among
                                                                                    other benefits, helps control ectoparasites.
                                                                                       Chicks, poults, and other young birds are typi-
                                                                                       cally confined during brooding to keep them
                                                                                       warm and safe from predators. Outdoor access
                                                                                       is required for all poultry once they have ade-
                                                                                       quate feathering. Confinement of poultry after
                                                                                       this stage of development—about four weeks
                                                                                       for chickens—must be documented and jus-
                                                                                       tified according to the reasons for temporary
                                                                                       confinement allowed in §205.239: inclement
                                                                                       weather; stage of life; health, safety, or well-
                                                                                       being; risk to soil or water quality; healthcare—
Living conditions required by organic regulations include access to the outdoors,
                                                                                       illness or injury; sorting, shipping or sale; breed-
shade, shelter, exercise areas, fresh air, clean water for drinking, and direct sun-   ing; and youth projects.
light, as shown at Everett Family Farm. Photo: Ann Baier, NCAT

www.attra.ncat.org                                                                                                                 Page 3
Housing must be designed to protect birds from the elements, with reasonable temperatures for health and stress
reduction. Although organic programs in other countries, and animal welfare programs in the United States, specify
minimum per-bird requirements for roost space, housing area, and outdoor access, as well as limits on the size and
density of flocks, NOP organic regulations do not quantify how much living or roosting space is adequate. Instead, they
focus on qualitative descriptions of living conditions and the purpose of the requirements: that livestock producers cre-
ate living conditions that minimize stress. Any production practice that restricts space or outdoor access, or otherwise
compromises healthy living conditions, will not comply with organic regulations.
In organic production, use of lumber treated with prohibited materials is not allowed where it will contact soil, crops,
or livestock.
Supplemental lighting, commonly used in layer operations to diminish seasonal dips in rate of lay during winter months,
is not specifically addressed in the organic regulations. Describe your proposed practices with respect to lighting in
your Organic System Plan (OSP), to be reviewed and approved by your certifier.
Good air quality is extremely important to birds’ health because dust and high levels of ammonia in the air can cause
respiratory problems. Adequate ventilation, appropriate bedding (high-carbon material to absorb the nitrogen in the
manure), and regular cleaning of poultry housing are all important.
Feed-storage facilities, feeder design, and maintenance procedures must keep poultry feed clean. Practical consider-
ations (some of which are common sense and not covered explicitly in organic regulations) are listed below:
      yy Provide balanced rations and adequate feed to birds. Layers are often fed free choice, such that they may eat
         their fill. However, fast-growing meat birds, such as Cornish cross, are prone to heart attacks and leg prob-
         lems when they overeat; their daily feed quantity needs to be limited to reasonable rations for the breed.
      yy Protect feed from factors that diminish its nutritional quality and health, such as moisture (which may allow
         growth of undesirable microorganisms) and excess heat (which degrades vitamins).
      yy Manage rodents to prevent both feed loss through consumption and introduction of pathogens through
         rodent droppings.
      yy Position feeders to prevent birds from standing, scratching, or defecating in the feed to prevent disease and
         parasite reinfection.
Watering equipment needs to provide a reliable supply of clean, cool water. Birds drink twice as much, by weight, as
they eat. Because they eat in proportion to their drinking, poultry health, growth, and productivity depend on a reli-
able supply of good water. Poultry prefer cool water over warm water. Check and maintain watering systems regularly
to ensure reliable function and prevent leaks that waste water and create fly habitat.
Predator management, while not directly
addressed by organic regulations, is necessary
for the safety and well-being of both poultry
and predators. Keeping predators at bay is criti-
cal to the survival, health, and stress reduction
of poultry. In addition, the manner in which
predator management is accomplished must
maintain or improve the natural resources of
the operation, including soil and water, wet-
lands, woodlands, and wildlife. Predator man-
agement practices must be designed and car-
ried out in ways that prevent wildlife contact
with livestock. Producers must “train” each type
of potential predator not to perceive their live-
stock as prey. Protecting livestock against pred-
ators must be done with conscientious planning
in order to protect the lives of both potential
predator and potential prey to promote ecologi-
cal balance, as is required by the definition of Pastured poultry farmer Aurelio Lopez of Fiesta Farm with guard dog. Photo: Ann
“organic production” in §205.2 of the organic Baier, NCAT
regulations.

Page 4                                                                   Tipsheet: Organic Poultry Production for Meat and Eggs
Predator management strategies should consider some combination of the following: physical barriers such as housing
and fencing; deterrents such as “predator eyes” lights, motion sensor lights or sprinklers; management barriers such as
placement of housing to make livestock less accessible to ground and air predators; and regular presence of humans
and well-trained guard animals. Certain breeds of dogs have especially good instincts and can respond well to train-
ing for this occupation.
Organic poultry need appropriate, clean, dry “bedding,” usually used to line nest boxes to keep eggs clean. If the bed-
ding material used is an agricultural crop that may be consumed, that crop must be organically grown. Check with your
certifier as to whether poultry nest-box-lining materials, such as straw or rice hulls, must be certified organic if poul-
try do not consume such materials. When forest products such as wood shavings are used, they need not be certified
organic, but must consist only of plant products that are untreated with any prohibited material.
Manure management is a critically important part of an organic livestock operation. Per §205.239(e), “The producer of
an organic livestock operation must manage manure in a manner that does not contribute to contamination of crops,
soil, or water by plant nutrients, heavy metals, or pathogenic organisms and optimizes recycling of nutrients and must
manage pastures and other outdoor access areas in a manner that does not put soil or water quality at risk.” Although
hydrated lime is allowed per §205.603 as an external pest control, its use is not permitted to cauterize physical altera-
tions or to deodorize animal wastes.

Handling (Processing)
Handling facilities for processing meat or eggs may be on- or off-farm. Regardless of their location, organic operations
must comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, such as those related to meat inspection and market-
ing, egg handling and egg handler registration,
sanitation, water use, and waste management.
In order to sell eggs as organic, they must be
handled in certified organic handling facilities
and using allowed materials. Materials com-
monly used in egg handling include cleaners,
sanitizers, and egg-coating materials. These are
listed in §205.605(a) and (b) with any restrictions
on their use as sanitizers (chlorine materials,
potassium hydroxide, sodium hydroxide, hydro-
gen peroxide, sodium carbonate, and peracetic
or peroxyacetic acid); defoaming agents (ingre-
dients must be organic or on the National List,
i.e., silicon dioxide, lecithin, organic vegetable
oil), and egg coatings (organic oils). As noted
above, any material planned for use must be
listed in your OSP and approved by your cer-
tifier for its intended use. In addition to being Freshly gathered eggs. Eggshell colors are characteristic of different breeds of lay-
allowed under NOP organic regulations, egg ing hens. Photo: Ann Baier, NCAT
handling methods and materials must meet
federal regulations: USDA Grading Standards (Agricultural Marketing Service or AMS); Egg Products Inspection Act or
EPIA, Egg Safety Rule, and Food Code (Food and Drug Administration); the National Poultry Improvement Act (Animal
and Plant Health Inspection Service or APHIS); Flock Health & Production, Research, Statistical Information (from the
Food Safety and Inspection Service or FSIS, Agricultural Research Service or ARS, and National Agricultural Statistics
Service or NASS). They must also meet state and local requirements as applicable, such as regulations of State Depart-
ments of Agriculture, Departments of Health Services, Industry Marketing Boards, and Farmers Market Boards, as well
as Retail Food Codes.
Similarly, in order for a producer to sell poultry meat as organic, it must be handled (processed) in a certified organic
facility, using allowed practices and substances. Any materials used on equipment, food-contact surfaces, and organic
products themselves must be: a) on the National List as allowed; b) listed in your OSP; and c) approved by your certi-
fier for their intended use. Materials commonly used for poultry meat production include soaps/cleaners and sanitiz-
ers used in scalders and on evisceration tables, scales, or any other food-contact surfaces that organic products touch.


www.attra.ncat.org                                                                                                             Page 5
Recordkeeping
Documentation needed to show implementation
of the producer’s Organic System Plan and compli-
ance with the National Organic Program organic
regulations includes the following:
      yy Source of birds (purchase receipts or
         brooding/hatching records)
      yy Feed sources (receipts and labels for
         purchased rations and feed supple-
         ments, production or purchase of
         organic forage or other agricultural
         feedstuffs)
      yy Preventative health care practices
      yy Production, handling, and sales records
         (meat-bird slaughter, packaging and
         sales; or egg collection, washing, can-
         dling, grading, and sales)                                                 Turkeys on pasture. Photo: Ann Baier, NCAT
      yy Labels must be part of the producer’s
         OSP, approved by the certifier, and compliant with government regulations for labeling of meat (e.g. inspec-
         tion or exemption, and safe food handling instructions) and eggs (“Sell by…[30 days from pack date]”, Julian
         date, keep refrigerated, etc.). See the ATTRA publication entitled Small-Scale Egg Handling for further details.

Resources
National Organic Program Resources
USDA Organic Regulations 7 CFR 205
www.ams.usda.gov/nop
USDA National List of Allowed and Prohibited Substances
www.ams.usda.gov/NOPNationalList
USDA National Organic Program Handbook
www.ams.usda.gov/NOPProgramHandbook
      yy PM 11-12 Confinement of Poultry Flocks Due to Avian Influenza, or Other Infectious Diseases
      yy NOP 5029 The Use of Kelp in Organic Livestock Feed
Market News and Transportation Data: Organic Poultry and Eggs
www.ams.usda.gov/marketnews

NCAT/ATTRA Resources
Print Publications
https://attra.ncat.org/attra-pub/poultry/
      yy Organic Standards for Livestock Production: Excerpts of USDA’s National Organic Program Regulations
      yy Documentation Forms for Organic Crop and Livestock Producers
      yy Guide for Organic Livestock Producers
      yy Pastured Poultry Nutrition and Forages
      yy Growing Your Range Poultry Business: An Entrepreneur’s Toolbox
      yy Arsenic in Poultry Litter: Organic Regulations
      yy Small-Scale Egg Handling
      yy Small-Scale Poultry Processing


Page 6                                                               Tipsheet: Organic Poultry Production for Meat and Eggs
Videos
https://attra.ncat.org/video/#Poultry
       yy Pastured Poultry Production and Profitability
          www.youtube.com/watch?v=WGFCsN-UaZs
Presentations
https://attra.ncat.org/attra-pub/poultry/presentations.html
       yy Small-Scale Table Egg Quality and Processing
       yy Specialty and Small-Scale Poultry Processing
Spanish-Language resources
https://attra.ncat.org/espanol/ganado.html#aves




Cornish Cross broilers shown in two styles of moveable pens on Fiesta Farm. Photo: Ann Baier, NCAT




www.attra.ncat.org                                                                                   Page 7
                                 This product was developed with support from
             U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Agricultural Marketing Service, National Organic Program


                                                                                 Tipsheet: Organic Poultry Production for Meat and
                                                                                 Eggs
          Produced by the National Center for Appropriate Technology
                                                                                 By Ann Baier, NCAT Agriculture Specialist
               www.ncat.org • 1-800-275-6228 (1-800-ASK-NCAT)
                                                                                 Published July 2015
         (Parent organization to the ATTRA Project, www.attra.ncat.org)


Page 8                                                                    Tipsheet: Organic Poultry Production for Meat and Eggs
