                                                                                                                       January 2020



                     Natural Resources Conservation Service
     Guide to Pasture Condition Scoring
                                                               Desirable Plants

                                              n                                                Per
                                           sio                                                    cen
                                      E ro                                                           tL
                                 re                                                                    eg
                                                                                                             um
                           stu
                        Pa                                                                                        es




                                                                                                                                     Cover
    Vigo
                                                                                                                                 ant
        r
 Plant                                                                                                                       e Pl
                                                                                                                          Liv




eration

 Regen                                                                                                                      Plan
                                                                                                                                t Di versi
                                                                                                                                           ty
          &
     tion
          ac
            mp
          Co

                 s
                 Area
                     on
                         kC
                           o nc                                                                              So
                                                                                                        er
                               en                                                                     ov
                                 t ra
                                     ti                                                           il C
                                              Li vesto
                                                      c
                                                                   ion and Severity
                                                           Utilizat

                                         USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer and lender.
Contents
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 1
Indicator Descriptions .......................................................................................................................... 2
   Percent Desirable Plants .................................................................................................................. 2
       Desirable Plants ........................................................................................................................... 2
       Intermediate Species .................................................................................................................... 2
       Undesirable Species ..................................................................................................................... 2
   Percent Legume ............................................................................................................................... 3
   Live Plant Cover (includes dormant) ............................................................................................... 5
   Plant Diversity ................................................................................................................................. 6
   Plant Residue and Litter as Soil Cover ............................................................................................ 7
   Grazing Utilization and Severity ..................................................................................................... 8
   Livestock Concentration Areas ........................................................................................................ 9
   Soil Compaction and Soil Regenerative Features .......................................................................... 11
   Plant Vigor ..................................................................................................................................... 12
   Erosion ........................................................................................................................................... 13
       Sheet and Rill ............................................................................................................................. 13
       Streambank, Shoreline ............................................................................................................... 13
       Wind........................................................................................................................................... 14
       Gullies ........................................................................................................................................ 14
References .......................................................................................................................................... 14
                                         Introduction
Pasture condition scoring (PCS) is a systematic way to assess how well a pasture is being managed
and resources protected. A pasture rated with a high score is well-managed with productivity (plant
and animal) being sustained or enhanced. By rating the key indicators common to all pastures,
pasture condition can be evaluated and the primary reasons for a low condition score can be
identified. A low rating typically means the pasture has one or more challenges, such as poor plant
growth, weedy species invasion, poor animal performance (low forage quantity and quality), visible
soil loss, increased runoff, and impaired water quality in or adjacent to the pasture.

The PCS should be performed several times a year during critical management periods throughout
the grazing season. The revised “Pasture Condition Score Sheet” (PCSS) should be used to rate
individual pastures. Regardless of the time of year selected to do the PCS, the best time to score a
pasture is just before it is grazed.

The PCS should be performed—

    •   As a benchmark condition of the pasture.
    •   Early in the growing season before grazing events occur.
    •   At peak forage supply periods.
    •   At low forage supply periods.
    •   At plant stress periods such as drought or very wet conditions.
    •   When conservation practices (management) have been fully applied.

For best results, the livestock manager and conservation planners should evaluate the pastures the
same time each year to note changes in the condition of the pasture.

PCS results can be useful in deciding when to move livestock or planning other management
actions. It assists in identifying which improvements are most likely to improve pasture condition
or livestock performance.

The PCS is not a replacement for doing a forage inventory or forage production estimates. The
pasture planner should consider other available data
such as pasture state information in an ecological site
description, forage suitability groups, or pasture and
hay suitability groups.

PCS involves the visual evaluation of 10 indicators,
listed and described below, which rate the pasture
vegetation and soils. Rating subjectivity can be
reduced by incorporating quantitative measures. For
example, using the step-point method for evaluation
can provide measured results for five of the indicators
(percent desirable plants, percent legume, live plant
cover, plant diversity, and plant residue). Also, by
pacing to measure the livestock concentration areas and
using a shovel to quickly evaluate the soil compaction      The step-point method can provide data
and soil regenerative indicator, the user of the PCSS       for five indicators.
1
and guide can have confidence in each indicator rating and the total score.

On the PCSS, each indicator or factor has five possible ratings, ranging from lowest (poorest)
condition (1) to highest (best) condition (5). This objectively identifies the extent of any pasture
challenges and helps determine the likely causes. Evaluate each indicator separately. The
indicators can then be combined into an overall score for the pasture unit or utilized as individual
scores and compared with the other nine indicators. Indicators receiving the lowest scores can be
targeted for corrective action. The plant vigor indicator is rated one of the last because previous
indicators in the assessment give insight into the plant health and productivity of the pasture.

                                 Indicator Descriptions
Percent Desirable Plants
These are the key species that provide most of the
quality forage ingested by the grazing animal being
fed. The percent is calculated by dry matter weight.

Desirable Plants
Desirable species are well-adapted to the site, are
readily consumed, show persistence, and provide
high tonnage and quality, with sufficient fertility, for
a significant part of the growing season. The most
desirable species may be grazed first and close to the
ground in poorly managed systems and therefore,
may decline in prevalence. Meanwhile, other less-
palatable species that can avoid grazing impacts may increase. These less-desirable species can
eventually displace the desirable ones since they are grazed less, if at all. This replacement is
important to this indicator and should not be overlooked when the desirability score is low. Some
examples of desirable species are orchardgrass, white clover, Kentucky bluegrass, and big bluestem.
Refer to your State or regional desirable plant list, and ideally, by grazing livestock type (cattle,
sheep, goats) for scoring this indicator. Desirable, intermediate, and undesirable species will
depend upon geographic region and livestock type

Intermediate Species
These are adapted to the prevailing site conditions; just as desirable species are. Intermediate
species are those which, while eaten, provide low production or lose quality fast, are only eaten by
certain species, and often have a short-lived grazing-use period. Intermediates increase as desirable
species are selectively grazed out but will be the next set of species to decrease if grazing
management doesn’t intervene. When adequate forage allotments are presented to livestock, the
utilization rate of these species will be less than that of the desirable species. Examples of
intermediates are dandelions, wild plantains, barnyard grass, and hop clover.

Undesirable Species
Those that typically are not eaten (rejected) by most livestock, cause undesirable side effects when
eaten, or have little or no forage value. They include some woody invaders, noxious weeds, toxic
plants, and plants that crowd out more desirable species. A few forages are undesirable during a
specific growth stage when they produce toxins. On severely overstocked sites, such as exercise

                                                                                                       2
lots, undesirable species will become the only surviving plants. Examples of undesirable species
are nimblewill, wild garlic, horsenettle, and buttercup. Record notes in the comment section of the
scoresheet for invasive species creating plant pest pressure concerns. Some woody plants such as
brush species may be present in the ratings of 1, 2, or 3 on this indicator in amounts economically
impacting the herbaceous desirable species and should be noted in the rating.

In this indicator assessment, determine the type and amount of plants within the pasture that the
livestock will readily graze that are desirable and intermediate. Estimate visually the proportion
(percent) of desirable species present in the entire sward by dry matter weight and score
accordingly. The technique of estimating dry weight through visual assessment requires training
and knowledge of plant identification. The use of the step-point method is highly recommended for
this indicator.

Percent Legume
This indicator measures the average amount (percent) of legume present in a forage stand during the
growing season expressed as dry matter weight. The percent legume present at a given time during
the growing season can vary considerably, depending upon climate (especially heat), stability, and
seasonal growth cycle of the legumes being assessed, the timing and severity or laxity of grazing
events, and the timing and level of agronomic inputs.

Legumes are important sources of nitrogen for pastures and improve the forage quality of the
pasture mix when they comprise at least 20 percent of total air-dry weight of forage. Deep-rooted
legumes also provide grazing during hot, dry periods in midsummer.

Pastures can sometimes be limited in nitrogen, especially ones lacking enough legumes and low in
organic matter. Nitrogen excreted by animals often is not distributed well due to lack of pasture
management or the location of water, mineral, or shade except in some types of grazing systems
such as high-density short-duration grazing. Pastures with few or no legumes will need added
nitrogen for increased forage production. Legumes growing along with grasses in pastures have
been shown to improve animal intake and performance.

If the proportion of legumes is too high, especially legumes with bloat potential, forage
consumption can cause bloat and thus be detrimental to ruminant livestock health. Legume cells
rupture easily after ingestion, causing a high fermentation rate to occur in the rumen. This causes
the formation of gas bubbles in a stable foam, which can lead to the rumen distending and causing
lung malfunction. When bloating legumes, such as clovers and alfalfa (see your State’s plant list
for additional species), are greater than 40 percent of total forage dry weight, bloat incidence in
ruminants is likely without preventative steps.




                                                                                                      3
To perform this indicator, visually estimate the percentage of legume present in the total forage
biomass. When conducting the visual assessment on most introduced cool-season legumes (except
red clover which has a higher dry weight (90%) and alfalfa (100%)), the estimate will need to be
reduced by approximately 50 percent of the visual estimate when converting to a dry matter weight
basis. Most legumes have their leaves in the upper part of the plant with only stems below. Thus,
the upper part of the plant appears denser visually when compared to grasses which are denser at the
base of the plants. For rare cases where legume percentages are greater than 40 percent of the
stand, but still are less than 40 percent bloat-type legumes, rate as a 5.




 Legumes at 6% by dry weight                         Legumes at 15% by dry weight
 (approximately 10% visual wet).                     (approximately 30% visual wet).




 Legumes at 27% by dry weight
 (approximately 50% visual wet).




                                                                                                  4
Live Plant Cover (includes dormant)
The percentage of the soil surface covered by live plants is important for pasture production, and
soil and water protection. This indicator rates how well your plant solar panel is working. The
higher the leaf area, the higher the photosynthetic activity. A dense stand (high-stem count) of live
leaf area ensures, when properly grazed, high animal intake and high sunlight interception for best
forage growth. Bare, open spots allow for weed encroachment, increased water runoff during
intense rains, soil erosion, and lost production. Attached, standing dead plant material can reduce
forage quality, photosynthesis, and new tillering depending on the amount and height.

Live cover assessment can be determined at any time
on continuously grazed pastures but is best done
closer to optimal grazing heights. On rotational
pastures, ideally estimate canopy cover of the
paddock the day prior to livestock entry. This will
represent the best possible condition. If cover rates
fair or lower at this growth stage, management
changes are recommended. It can also be used to
assess postgrazing events to determine if adequate
residual is left or not.
Several things can influence live plant cover,
especially time of year, rest period prior to review,       How good is my solar panel?
forage present, weather conditions, and management.
Forages can be easily placed into three different stages.

   •   Stage one plants are short and immature, having high quality but low production. Stage one
       plants are good for being a solar panel, but they lack the surface area of stage two, which
       generally ends right at the early boot stage for grasses.
   •   Stage two has the greatest live leaf surface area and normally the best forage quality.
   •   The third stage has maturing vegetation of lower quality and dormant vegetation. Although
       this stage has the greatest volume of forage available, mature and dormant plants are
       performing less photosynthesis and forage quality is less.
The management factor in live plant cover is very important. Frequency of grazing, length of
grazing period, stop-grazing height, stocking rates and density, length of rest period and nutrient
management are factors to be managed to achieve the highest production of quality forage for
animal growth.

There are times when letting the forage mature longer can certainly be a positive move, especially
to grow deeper roots and potentially build soil organic matter. Dormant forage and stockpiled
forage may not be the best collector of sunlight but shouldn’t be scored as the 5-point category but
could still score moderately well on the PCS scoresheet if everything else is met.

Forage stands with dead or dying intact material should be rated lower accordingly, this includes
attached standing dead plant material. This material is not collecting sunlight, and it is not desirable
for the livestock, although there is some fiber benefit early in the season. Too much standing dead
material may cause the forage to be rejected by the grazing animal or lead to other forages being
selectively grazed. Note when forage is dormant stockpile for future reference.

                                                                                                        5
Visually estimate percent live cover of all species. Assign a value based on live green leaf canopy.
If the estimate is inconclusive, or difficult to complete because of the complexity of species or stage
of growth, then use the step-point method to estimate or use a camera-based, accurate green canopy
cover measurement tool.

Plant Diversity
This indicator is done by dry matter weight. Forage production varies throughout the grazing
season because of changing weather, growing degree days, management, and insect or disease
pressures. Increasing diversity can help moderate negative changes. Having multiple dominant
desirable forage species in a pasture offers some “insurance” and it’s more likely that there is
something that can be productive under a wide range of conditions. Warm season grasses for
example, can provide quality forage during hot, dry summer periods for areas where adapted, when
most cool-season forage tend to go dormant. Low species diversity makes pastures more vulnerable
to stress and to changing conditions.

The plant diversity score describes the number and abundance of well-represented forage plants and
plant functional groups. For the PCS scoresheet rating, desirable forage species must comprise
more than 50 percent of the total biomass to score above a 1. Any time there are more undesirable
than desirable plant species, the score will be 1. Refer to your State or regional desirable plant list
and ideally by grazing livestock type (species).

The PCSS considers a dominant species to be one
that makes up at least 15 percent of the pasture
biomass by dry weight. Dominant species
contribute substantially to the total forage biomass,
and having several similar dominant desirable
species helps to spread the production and lower the
risk.
A functional group includes plant species that have
similar management requirements, biological
contributions, and attributes. For most of the
United States, the four basic functional groups for
improved pastures are cool-season grasses, warm-         Warm-season grasses are a functional group
season grasses, legumes, other grazable                  that when present in the system can ease
nonleguminous forbs (e.g., brassicas, forage             summer slump periods.
chicory, dandelion), or a functional group
designated by the State. A functional group is counted even if it has no dominant species, if the
group collectively makes up at least 15 percent of the pasture biomass.

Plants from different functional groups are most compatible when they can be successfully managed
together. Mixed species pastures with at least two functional groups and three or more well-
represented forage species are generally the most productive. Higher total diversity within a
functional group does not ensure higher productivity and may cause animals to avoid some species
and graze others heavily, as species differences in palatability and maturity are more likely. The
greatest benefit for the grazing system is often achieved by the addition of another functional group.

Adding legumes to the stand increases protein and energy improving forage quality, boosts

                                                                                                      6
production, fixes nitrogen for the grasses in the stand, are agronomically sound, environmentally
friendly, and economically advantageous. The addition of forbs can provide plants with deeper
roots that can bring up nutrients from deeper in the soil profile, provide some additional drought
tolerance to the pasture, and often provide highly preferred species that livestock desire.

Some climates may have other functional groups to assess to accomplish the desired outcomes of
this indicator.

The PCS scoresheet rating for diversity balances the number of dominant desirable species within a
functional group and the number of functional groups to provide a score that indicates general
forage productivity and manageability.

Plant Residue and Litter as Soil Cover
Soil cover is important to slow evaporation, maintain and stabilize ideal soil temperatures, be a
carbon and food source for soil life, deter erosion, and to help with water infiltration. Residue is
dead plant material in varying states of decay.

                                              Decomposing surface residue is detached plant
                                              material that typically creates a light duff layer directly
                                              on the soil surface. It is highly subject to microbial
                                              activity and is in constant flux. Litter is generally the
                                              uppermost layer of detached residue on the soil surface
                                              including freshly fallen or slightly decomposed
                                              vegetative material. This can include flattened plant
                                              material from a recent grazing event with high stock
                                              densities that may still be attached. Litter is slightly
                                              more stable for a longer period depending on the
                                              presence and amount of biological activity.

In a well-managed system, there should always be some plant residue and litter present. Extremely
active biological systems, such as an intensely grazed dairy or a beef finishing operation, where
vegetation is consistently grazed in the vegetative stage, often lack enough residue and litter most of
the season. This can be resolved if needed by increasing the rest period and thus allows more
trampling of mature forages onto the soil surface.

Excessively high amounts of residue, especially litter, can interfere and slow down new tiller
growth, and tie up nitrogen. These systems often lack enough biological activity. This can be
resolved if needed by shortening the rest period, adding more diversity, especially legumes, and
increasing stock density.

Grazing events, grazing systems, soil biology and life, weather, and management are constantly
changing and often quite fluid. The percentage of ideal cover is not exact but should be in most
cases a minimum of 60 percent with good soil biological activity. The higher the requirements of
microbial life, the higher amount of residue and litter is needed to support it.




                                                                                                        7
First assess the amount of bare soil. Cover is
easily assessed during the step-point method by
gently moving the aboveground plant cover to
one side with your hand or foot if needed to see
if soil cover is provided between plants and
under the canopy. The soil should be covered by
either live plants and tillers or residue. Visually
estimate the percent cover between live plants in
the stand; the step-point method is a good
quantitative way to do this.

Grazing Utilization and Severity
                                                      Estimate the amount of bare soil. When bare soil is
The proper amount and frequency of grazing are        easily seen it is rated a 1. This should not be
critical in maintaining productive pastures.          common.
Close and frequent grazing causes loss of vigor,
reduces density of desired species and yield, can promote erosion, and have impact on bite size and
intake. Differences in species, plant maturity, stocking rate, location and distance to water, shade,
and mineral availability may cause uneven grazing to occur.

Grazing utilization and severity are directly related to uniformity of grazing by livestock, except
when continually overgrazing. Though an overgrazed pasture may look uniform, the impact of this
severity places such pastures in the lowest rating. Uniform grazing results in almost all desirable
and intermediate species being grazed to a targeted residual or “stop-grazing” height or slightly
higher. Uniform grazing, without overgrazing, usually only exists when proper grazing
management techniques are employed and especially where smaller allocations are made.

Nonuniformity is spotty or patterned grazing that appears uneven throughout a pasture, with some
plants or parts of paddocks grazed heavily and others grazed lightly or not at all. Individual forage
species are being selected by the livestock based on their palatability, nutritional value, amount of
other forages available, and location in the pasture.

Selectivity is also affected by differences in stage of maturity among species, amount of forage
offered to livestock, their length of stay in the paddock, and the livestock stocking density. In most
instances, livestock will readily select younger plants over more mature ones. Livestock will also
usually refuse to graze where manure and urine have recently been deposited. This leads to a
continuing cycle of uneven grazing patterns and reduced efficiency.

Zone grazing occurs when one end of the pasture is heavily grazed, and the other end is lightly
grazed or ungrazed. It often occurs on pastures with long walking distances from one end to the
other, especially when shady areas, windbreaks, hay, creep, or mineral feeding and watering sites
are a long distance from some parts of the field. Pastures with abrupt topography changes can also
cause zone grazing.

For this indicator solely visually assess. When zone grazing is occurring, along with some uneven
grazing throughout, rate it a 3. Rate the pasture a 4 if the pasture is uniformly grazed to target
residual heights but there is some zone grazing occurring.

While understocking will lead to more selectivity and the potential for uneven grazing, continual
                                                                                                        8
overstocking can result in pastures being uniformly grazed (mowed lawn appearance) but to heights
that are too low to maintain all the desirable species. These uniformly overgrazed pastures should
be rated low on the score sheet.

Livestock Concentration Areas
Concentration areas are places in pastures where livestock return frequently and linger near feeding
areas, gates, water, mineral or salt, or shade. These areas may have reduced vegetative cover,
increased bare ground, and have concentrated animal waste. Livestock trails to and from these
preferred areas can create pathways that may increase erosion and become conduits for sediment,
nutrients, and pathogens to nearby water bodies.

This indicator addresses the potential impacts on water quality by assessing the size of the disturbed
areas and the connectivity to adjacent water bodies through trailing and location. Livestock
concentration areas near water sources or with direct conveyance to surface water can create
resource concerns. Additionally, these areas on pervious soils over shallow ground water can also
create water quality problems from introduced contaminants when close to adjacent waterbodies.

For estimates and comparisons, one square acre is 208’ by 208’ and 10 percent of that or 0.1 of an
acre is 66’ by 66’. When assessing pastures that are less than 1 acre, use 10 percent of grazing unit
area as an alternative to 0.1 acres, to determine score.

Pace unknown distances and assess the amount of concentration area for this indicator.




 Example of a 2-point rating.
 Concentration areas are within100 feet
 of water body and less than .1 acre in
 size.




  Example of a 1-point rating.                            Example of a 2-point rating.
  Concentration areas are within 100 feet                 Concentration areas are within 100 feet
  of water body and more than .1 acre in                  of water body and less than .1 acre in
  size.                                                   size.



                                                                                                        9
                                           Example of a 3-point rating.
                                           Concentration areas are greater than 100
Example of a 2-point rating where the      feet of water body and more than .1 acre
field is less than 1 acre. It receives a   in size.
rating of a 2.




 Example of a 4-point rating.
 Concentration areas are greater than
 100 feet of water body and less than .1
 acre in size.




                                                                                      10
Soil Compaction and Soil Regenerative Features
Soil compaction is the diminished pore space between soil aggregates that hold air and water.
Compaction reduces a pasture’s ability to infiltrate water by minimizing pore space and increasing
bulk density of the soils, negatively affecting hydrologic function, nutrient cycling, and the energy
flow throughout the pasture ecosystem. Compaction affects the ability of plant roots to access
water and nutrients. Increased runoff resulting from soil compaction creates the potential to
transport contaminants such as sediment, nutrients, and pathogens to surface water, degrading water
quality.

Roots can be diminished by not only compacted
layers, but also from overgrazing and haying.
Shallow or sparse roots that do not move deeper in
the soil profile, especially when there are no limiting
layers, are good indicators these possible
management activities are occurring.

Soil regenerative features focus on the condition of
plant roots and the abundance of soil life, both of    Compaction is one of the most detrimental
which can improve important soil attributes like       resource concerns.
structure and organic matter. Soils with roots
growing deep and downward have the potential to feed a large and diverse population of soil life.
These soil organisms can improve water-holding capacity, nutrient cycling, plant productivity, plant
health, and nutrient density.

To evaluate, use a shovel to dig a hole in the pasture, large enough to see the indicator features.

If a comparison is needed or desired, locate one hole in a protected area, such as a fence line where
grazing can occur, but soil is not adversely affected by hoof action, and the other within the pasture
away from the protected area and on the same soil type to compare differences in soil features.

Soil features to observe and or to compare in the soil of each hole are —

       •   Ease of getting the shovel into the soil.
       •   Soil structure—look for platiness and aggregates in the top twelve inches.
       •   Rooting depth.
       •   Root morphology and direction of growth—roots should be growing downward through
           the soil profile.
       •   Color—contrasting color changes in the soil with darker soil in the more biotically active
           upper layer.
       •   Worms, tunnels, or other biotic presence and activity.




                                                                                                      11
When rating this indicator, begin with the primary
subindicators (compaction layer, then root
characteristics) and use these two subindicators as
the main scoring factors, with the most adverse
factor of the two subindicators determining the
score. Soil color and soil life subindicators are
secondary indicators and can be considered where
applicable but used primarily for discussion with
the manager and planning for improving soil health.
When rating the compacted or platy layer, consider
if the layer is within a zone where primary forage
roots would typically extend to (not potentially).
                                                         Healthy pasture soils should have good
Plant Vigor                                              aggregates, vertical roots, and soil life.

In simplest terms, plant vigor refers to the health of a plant. Another interpretation is the plant’s
robustness in comparison to others of the same species, relative to the size and age of the plant
within the environment and weather where it is growing. A loss of plant vigor can cause a loss in
desirable species and plant cover. Primary things to consider when rating plant vigor are color and
rate of regrowth (recovery) following a grazing event, but also taking into consideration the grazing
height of plants, size (density) of plants, and productivity. This indicator is purposely placed as one
of the last indicators to score doing this PCS. The scorer can then use the earlier indicator scores
information to better score plant vigor.

Color is a major indicator of plant vigor. Yellowing plants indicate drought, insect damage, or
prolonged heavy usage (continuous grazing). Pale green grass plants can be indicative of low
fertility or cool, wet, and poor soils and growing conditions. Fields where nitrogen-starved grasses
exist will be obvious and have dark green spots under dung or urine patches with the rest of the
pasture area or unit being pale in comparison. Frost-damaged plants will turn yellow or to a blue-
gray cast depending on the severity of the cold damage.

Leaf color can also change due to age. Older, lower leaves of plants turn yellow as they become
more shaded and nutrients are translocated from them to the younger leaves higher in the canopy.
This type of progressive vigor decline on a single
plant is critical to the producer timing the rotation of
livestock from one pasture to the next. In general,
color is a visual indicator of either mineral
deficiencies or, occasionally, of over-fertilization.
Over-fertilization is not separated out in this indicator
but should be annotated in the notes when observed
and rated a 1 if an issue. Excess applications of
nitrogen can cause some major nitrate toxicity issues.
A lush, lodged, very dark green-to-bluish-green grass
can be indicative of over-fertilization especially by
nitrogen. It can also occur where livestock have
concentrated on a pasture such as at a permanent
water trough or feed bunk. These spot areas are often     Recovery and forage color are good
ungrazed by livestock due to taste, smell, or             indicators of plant health.

                                                                                                      12
postingestive feedback caused by low level nitrate poisoning.

Growth rate is a key trait of plant vigor, which is greatly affected by the management of the plant
community. Plant recovery should be evaluated based on average growth rates for the plant
community involved at the time of the season being rated. This is easier to evaluate on rotational
pastures, because the last time an individual plant was grazed is likely to be known.

Too often, the recovery period for the plants is too short. Ideally, when growth is slow, longer
recovery is needed, and when growth is fast, shorter recovery is needed. Recovery is influenced by
the time of year, the type of plants, and even manager goals, such as if it is planned to be used for
stockpiled forage or not. It is highly influenced by how severely the pasture was used the last time
it was grazed. The more severe the grazing (below recommended stop-grazing heights), the longer
the recovery required. Most severe grazing occurs when a pasture is overstocked. Pasture plants
when continuously grazed have little or no recovery. In contrast are pastures that are rarely grazed
below stop-grazing heights and management is initiated at prime plant recovery and intake amounts.
Make notes on any disease or insect stresses (pressure) on the plants. Using color as a plant vigor
indicator may be difficult during a plant’s dormant season. Under such conditions, use the ratings
of all indicators along with overall plant health and remaining leaf area to assist in a vigor score.

Erosion
Soil erosion involves the detachment, transport, and redistribution of soil particles by forces of
water, wind, or gravity. The types of erosion evaluated for pasture condition score are below.

Sheet and Rill
Soil loss caused by water drop impact, drip splash from water dropping off plant leaves and stems
onto bare soil, and a thin sheet of runoff water flowing across the soil surface. Sheet and rill erosion
increases as cover decreases. Evidence of sheet erosion appears as small debris dams of plant
residue that build up at obstructions or span between obstructions. Some soil aggregates or worm
castings may also be washed into the debris’ dams. Rills are small, incised channels in the soil that
run parallel to each other downslope. When rills appear, serious soil loss is occurring. This erosion
type includes most irrigation-induced erosion.

Streambank, Shoreline
When in pastures, channels or shorelines can have heightened erosion problems and loss of
vegetative cover that typically grows on them. These accelerated damages can result from grazing
animal traffic in or on them. Open channels may be intermittent or perennial flowing streams or dry
washes. The factors that affect the extent of disturbance livestock cause to streambanks, shorelines,
and their associated vegetation include—

   •   Livestock traffic patterns.
   •   Frequency, duration, and intensity of use.
   •   Attractiveness of these channels or banks as sunning, dusting, travel lanes, watering,
       grazing, or rubbing areas.
   •   Channel shape and steepness of banks.
   •   Water flow characteristics (frequency, depth, sediment load, velocity, and turbulence).
   •   Only consider erosion caused or influenced by livestock use.
                                                                                                      13
Wind
Wind is the transport and deposition of soil from one
location to another, occurring when heavier, windblown
soil particles abrade, exposing soil and causing particles to
become airborne. Deposition of the heavier soil particles
occurs downwind of obstructions, such as fence lines,
buildings, and vegetation. Often vegetative debris is
windrowed against obstructions and in extreme cases soil
will abrade and smother vegetation.

Gullies
Gullies are an advanced stage of water erosion, developing
in situations where rill erosion has not been addressed.
Concentrated, fast-moving water can cause gully                 There are at least two types of erosion on
expansion through both mass soil caving along sides and         this field. Circle both on the PCSS. The
head-cutting upslope, creating deep channels in the             lowest rating score which accounts for the
ground. Both ephemeral and advanced classic gullies             worst erosion present should be given.
should be addressed under this subindicator.

Circle or mark all erosion types found within the planning unit. Rate the indicator with the score for
overall erosion as the lowest scoring point value of the erosion types.

                                          References
USDA NRCS. 2019. National Resources Inventory Grazing Land On-Site Data Collection,
Handbook of Instructions, Chapter 13, Dry Weight Rank Method, Page 13-8. Iowa State University
of Science and Technology. https://grazingland.cssm.iastate.edu/reference-materials.

USDA NRCS. 2003. Title 190, National Range and Pasture Handbook. Washington, D.C.
https://directives.sc.eov.usda.gov/.




                                                                                                      14
  U.S. Department of Agriculture
  Natural Resources Conservation Service




                                                                                             Pasture Condition Score Sheet

           Operator:                                                                                                                                        Date:
       Evaluator:                                                                                                                                      Pasture ID:
                                                 Soil(s), ESD(s) and or FSG(s):                                                                    Livestock type:
                                         Current Season's Precipitation (check one) Above Normal           Normal                   Below Normal
                                          Seasonal Temperature Trend (check one) Above Normal              Normal                   Below Normal

Evaluate the site and rate each indicator based upon your observations. Scores for each indicator may range from 1 to 5. Sum the indicator scores to
determine overall pasture condition score.
                                                                                                                                                                                              Score
   Indicator                                                 1 Point                           2 Points             3 Points                   4 Points                      5 Points         Points


    Percent                                         Desirable species                 Desirable species       Desirable species         Desirable species              Desirable species
   Desirable                                         <20% of stand.                   20 – 40% of stand.      41 – 60% of stand.       61 – 80% of stand.            exceed 80% of stand.
  Plants* (Dry
   Weight; for
Livestock Type)
                                                          <5%                         5-10% legumes           11-20% legumes.           21-30% legumes.              31-40% legumes. No
   Percent                                                 OR                              OR                                                                        grass loss; grass may
Legume by Dry                                         >50% bloating                >40% bloating legume.                                                                 be increasing.
   Weight
                                                        legumes.

                                                 Less than 40% is live   40-65% is live leaf    66-80% live leaf     81-95% live leaf   More than 95% live
                                                     leaf canopy.      canopy. Remaining is canopy. Remaining is canopy. Remaining is    (non-dormant) leaf
Live (includes                                    Remaining is either   either dead standing either dead standing either dead standing canopy. Remaining is
dormant) Plant
    Cover
                                                    dead standing         material, or bare    material, or bare    material, or bare   either dead standing
                                                   material, or bare           ground.              ground.              ground.          material, or bare
                                                        ground.                                                                                ground.

                                                Diversity: Very low                Diversity: Low          Diversity: Moderate      Diversity: High                  Diversity: Very high

                                                     <50% desirable                 2 dominant desirable 3 dominant desirable 4 dominant desirable 4 dominant desirable
                                                        species                    species in 1 functional species in 1 functional species in 2 functional species in 3 functional
                                                                                           group                   group                  groups                  groups



      Plant Diversity by Dry Weight
                                                           OR                    OR                     OR                      OR                   OR
                                                 1 dominant desirable    2 functional groups 2-3 dominant desirable 3 dominant desirable 4 dominant desirable
                                                species in 1 functional each represented by species in 2 functional species in 3 functional species in 2 functional
                                                         group          minor species totaling        groups                  groups           groups AND 1



     (*See footnote at bottom of page)
                                                                                ≥15%                                                         additional functional
                                                           OR                                           OR                      OR
                                                No dominant desirable                           3 functional groups   3 dominant desirable group represented by
                                                species and all minor                          each represented by species in 2 functional minor species totaling
                                                    species in each                            minor species totaling    groups AND 1               ≥15%
                                                   functional group                                    ≥15%            additional functional
                                                     totaling <15%                                                    group represented by
                                                                                                                      minor species totaling
                                                                                                                              ≥15%
                                                 Bare soil is very easily Openings of bare soil Small openings of bare No bare soil is easily                         No bare soil is seen;
                                                         seen;             can be seen fairly    soil can be seen, but        seen;
                                                                                easily;                 minimal;
 Plant Residue
 and Litter as                                   There is <20% cover Soil cover is 21-40%.                  Soil cover is 41-60%.    Soil cover is 61-80%.             Soil cover is >80%
Soil Cover (Pull                                on the soil surface or it                                                                                             with good biological
 back canopy )                                  is excessive, and slow                                                                                                     activity and
                                                    to break down.                                                                                                   decomposition of older
                                                                                                                                                                             residue.

                                                 Pasture is overgrazed    Pasture consists     Pastures show uneven Pasture grazed evenly Pasture grazed evenly
                                                      throughout.      primarily of overgrazed grazing throughout        throughout with    throughout with no
                                                                        and/or refused areas    with heavier grazing   minimal overgrazing     overgrazing.
    Grazing
Utilization and
                                                                        (former dung areas, near water or feeding        with some under
    Severity                                                           older plants, undesired areas, or distinct zone grazed small areas
                                                                               plants).               grazing.         and heavier use near
                                                                                                                          water sources.

*Use NRCS plant list for livestock species. Functional groups are as appropriate for your state (cool-season grasses, legumes, warm-season
grasses, non-leguminous forbs). Any time there are more undesirables than desirables, it will be 1 point. Desirable species must total more than
50% of the total biomass. Dominant species are ≥15%. Functional groups must be ≥15% of stand to be counted.




                                                                                                                                                                                              1/28/2020
 U.S. Department of Agriculture
 Natural Resources Conservation Service


    Indicator                                                         1 Point                    2 Points                     3 Points                     4 Points                 5 Points           Points


                          Livestock              Livestock                 Livestock               Livestock                                                                       Livestock
                    concentration areas     concentration areas      concentration areas    concentration areas                                                              concentration areas,
   Livestock       are within 100 feet of, are within 100 feet of, are farther than 100     are farther than 100                                                              including trails, not
 Concentration         or are a direct         or are a direct     feet from and are not a    feet and are not a                                                                    present.
Areas (If field <1 conveyance to surface conveyance to surface direct conveyance to         direct conveyance to
  acre, see **
                   water, and cover more water, and cover less        surface water, and     surface water, and
    footnote)
                       than 0.1 acre,          than 0.1 acre,        cover more than 0.1     cover less than 0.1
                      including trails.       including trails.     acre, including trails. acre, including trails.

                                                             Compaction: Dense Compaction: Dense Compaction: Thin                                  Compaction: Minor        Compaction: No
                                                             or thick platy layer very or moderate platy layer dense or platy layer                dense or platy layer;    dense or platy layers;




       Soil Compaction and Soil Regenerative
                                                             distinct;                 noticeable;             still present;                      good aggregates          crumbly soil
                                                                                                                                                   common (crumbly          throughout;
                                                                                                                                                   soil);

                                                             Roots: Dominantly         Roots: Numerous              Roots: Some          Roots: Few                         Roots: Abundant
                                                             horizontal; most          horizontal; moderate         horizontal with      horizontal, more                   growth primarily
                                                             shallow/sparse;           amount                       increasing downward; downward through the               downward through the




      Features (***See footnote at bottom of page)
                                                                                       shallow/sparse;                                   soil profile;                      soil profile;
                                                             Color: Surface                                         Color: Surface                                          Color: Surface
                                                             horizon same as                                        horizon moderately                                      horizon dramatically
                                                             subsoil;                                               darker than subsoil;                                    darker than subsoil;
                                                             Soil Life: Few or no      Soil Life: Signs             Soil Life: Signs               Soil Life: Signs     Soil Life: Signs
                                                             signs.                    scattered in surface         scattered throughout.          numerous throughout. abundant throughout.
                                                                                       layer.
                                                             No plant recovery after    Some recovery.               Adequate recovery of    Good recovery of      Rapid recovery of
                                                             grazing/harvest. Pale,     Yellowish green                desirable forage.  desirable forage. Light desirable forage. All
                                                               yellow or brown, or   forage, or moderately            Yellowish and dark   green and dark green healthy green forage.
  Plant Vigor
                                                               severe stunting of     or slight stunting of           green areas due to      forage present.
                                                                desirable forage.       desirable forage.             manure and urine
                                                                                                                           patches.

                                                             Sheet and Rill: Plant     Sheet and Rill: Plant Sheet and Rill: Plant                 Sheet and Rill: Plant Sheet and Rill: Plant
                                                             density is insufficient   density slows runoff.  density good and                     density high, runoff     density high, no runoff,
                                                             to stop runoff, with      Erosion present and    runoff moderate. If                  low, good infiltration. good infiltration. No
                                                             poor infiltration.        easily seen on steeper present, erosion                     May have evidence of evidence of present or
                                                             Erosion easily visible    terrain;               concentrated on                      past erosion if present; past erosion;




       (Circle all that apply; the overall indicator score
                                                             throughout pasture;                              heavily used areas;


                                                             Wind: Severe scoured Wind: Scoured areas Wind: Occasional                             Wind: Minimal soil      Wind: No exposed
                                                             areas and deposition common, deposition  scoured areas, litter                        exposed, some           soil;
                                                             throughout;          effecting plants;   windrolled;                                  detatched vegetation
                                                                                                                                                   windrolled, minor plant
 Erosion
                                                                                                                                                   damage;




              will be the lowest rating indicated)
                                                             Streambank and/or         Streambank and/or            Streambank and/or              Streambank and/or       Streambank and/or
                                                             Shoreline: Banks          Shoreline: More than         Shoreline: Less than           Shoreline: Eroding at Shoreline: Vegetation
                                                             bare, major sloughing,    half the bank                half the bank                  crossings, entrances; intact and stable,
                                                             no bank vegetation;       vegetation trampled;         vegetation trampled;           all the bank vegetation hardened crossings
                                                                                       sloughing.                   eroding at                     is intact and banks are and alternative water
                                                                                                                    crossing/entrances.            stable.                 sources used;

                                                             Gully: Very large         Gully: Advancing             Gully: Not all active          Gully: Stable with       Gully: None, drainage
                                                             mass movement,            upslope, increasing          but extensions                 vegetative cover.        ways vegetative.
                                                             caving sides.             fingering extensions.        present.
** If field size is less than 1 ac. Use 10% of field size in place of 0.1 acre. ***Use a shovel. Root and Compaction subindicators are primary and
should be considered first. Soil color and soil life are secondary subindicators which can be considered where applicable.
 Overall Pasture                                                      Individual
 Condition Score                                                   Indicator Score
                                                                                                                     Management Change Suggested                                  Overall Pasture
     45 to 50                                                            5             No changes in management needed at this time.                                            Condition Score =
     35 to 45                                                            4             Minor changes would enhance, do most beneficial first.
     25 to 35                                                            3             Improvements would benefit productivity and/or environment.
     15 to 25                                                            2             Needs immediate management changes, high return likely.
     10 to 15                                                            1             Major effort required in time, management and expense.
Comments/Notes:




                                                                                                                                                                                                       1/28/2020
                                                          Acknowledgments
Kevin Ogles, NRCS East National Technology Support Center (ENTSC) Grazing Specialist, North Carolina (Revision Team Lead)
      Victor Shelton, NRCS State Agronomist/Grazing Specialist, Indiana (Contributing Author and Scoresheet Editor)
                       Kris Vance, NRCS Public Affairs Specialist, Indiana (Contributing Design Editor)


                                     Contributing Authors and Reviewers:
                                Greg Brann, Retired NRCS State Grazing Specialist, Tennessee
                               Brendan Brazee, NRCS State Rangeland Conservationist, Idaho
                          Marty Chaney, NRCS State Pasture Management Specialist, Washington
                                  Jill Claasen, Retired NRCS State Specialist, South Carolina
                                  J.B. Daniel, NRCS State Conservation Agronomist, Virginia
                         Sarah Goslee, Agriculture Research Service (ARS) Ecologist, Pennsylvania
                           Justin Morris, NRCS Northeast Region Soil Health Specialist, Wisconsin
                                Susan Parry, NRCS Natural Resource Specialist, Pennsylvania
     Johanna Pate, NRCS Central National Technology Support Center (CNTSC) Rangeland Management Specialist, Texas
                                   Brian Pillsbury, NRCS State Grazing Specialist, Wisconsin
                              Karin Sonnen, NRCS State Range Management Specialist, Alaska
                                          Roger Staff, NRCS Grazing Specialist, Illinois
        David Toledo, Agriculture Research Service (ARS) Research Rangeland Management Specialist, North Dakota
           Steve Woodruff, NRCS East National Technology Support Center (ENTSC) Agronomist, North Carolina


                Authors extend their thanks to Extension and NRCS reviewers for their input on technical content.

    This publication and the Pasture Condition Score Sheet that accompanies it were adapted from the Guide to Pasture
                   Condition Scoring, May 2001. Dennis Cosgrove; Dan Undersander; and James Cropper.




In accordance with Federal civil rights law and U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) civil rights regulations and policies, the USDA, its Agencies, offices,
and employees, and institutions participating in or administering USDA programs are prohibited from discriminating based on race, color, national
origin, religion, sex, gender identity (including gender expression), sexual orientation, disability, age, marital status, family/parental status, income
derived from a public assistance program, political beliefs, or reprisal or retaliation for prior civil rights activity, in any program or activity conducted or
funded by USDA (not all bases apply to all programs). Remedies and complaint filing deadlines vary by program or incident.

Persons with disabilities who require alternative means of communication for program information (e.g., Braille, large print, audiotape, American
Sign Language, etc.) should contact the responsible Agency or USDA’s TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TTY) or contact USDA through the
Federal Relay Service at (800) 877-8339. Additionally, program information may be made available in languages other than English. To file a program
discrimination complaint, complete the USDA Program Discrimination Complaint Form, AD-3027, found online at How to File a Program Discrimination
Complaint and at any USDA office or write a letter addressed to USDA and provide in the letter all of the information requested in the form. To request a
copy of the complaint form, call (866) 632-9992. Submit your completed form or letter to USDA by: (1) mail: U.S. Department of Agriculture, Office of the
Assistant Secretary for Civil Rights, 1400 Independence Avenue, SW, Washington, D.C. 20250-9410; (2) fax: (202) 690-7442; or (3) email: program.intake@
usda.gov.

USDA is an equal opportunity provider, employer, and lender.
