                   A program of the National Center for Appropriate Technology • 800-346-9140 • ATTRA.NCAT.ORG


Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale
Intensive Crop Production
By Andy Pressman, NCAT            This publication focuses on equipment and tools for intensive crop production on a small-
Sustainable Agriculture           scale commercial farm. It details equipment and hand tools for soil preparation, planting, weed
Specialist                        management, and harvesting. The use of appropriate equipment and tools, both in terms of size
Published Sept. 2011              and practicality, can increase production efficiency and profits while minimizing disturbance to
Updated April 2023 by
                                  soil and to plant health. Lists of further resources and tool and equipment suppliers are included.
Andy Pressman and
Omar Rodriguez, NCAT
Agriculture Specialists
© NCAT
IP417




 Contents
Introduction:
Selecting
Appropriate Tools...... 1
Soil Preparation......... 8
Seeding and
Planting.................... 10
Weed Control........... 12
Harvest. ................... 17
Summary.................. 18
References............... 19
Further                           Farm machinery. Photo: Andy Pressman, NCAT
Resources................ 19
Appendix..................26      Introduction: Selecting Appropriate Tools

                                  M
                                               ost farmers can tell you how important   to rely on older equipment that requires frequent
                                               it is to have good tools and equipment   maintenance and repairs to keep running.
                                               to increase efficiency and production.   However, the current interest in small-scale
                                  They can also tell you about the impact equipment     intensive crop production in the United States
                                  can have on farm expenses, assets, and other          has generated a resurgence of the small-scale farm
                                  financials. Scale of production plays a fundamental   machine industry and provided opportunities
                                  role in all current and future farm operations;       for farmer-to-farmer knowledge sharing on tool
                                  it is a critical consideration in decision-making     and equipment design and local fabrication of
                                  related to effective use of labor and in making       hand tools.
                                  sure the tools and equipment used can do the
This publication is produced      work that is needed. It is common to see tractors
by the National Center for
Appropriate Technology            and equipment more than 50 years old being                “Any intelligent fool can make things
through the ATTRA                 used today on smaller-scale farms. Many farmers           bigger, more complex … It takes a
Sustainable Agriculture
                                  who operate at this scale also rely on imported           touch of genius—and a lot of courage—
program, under a cooperative
agreement with                    tools and machinery designed for more intensive           to move in the opposite direction.”
USDA Rural                        cropping systems. The farm-equipment market in            –E.F. Schumacher
Development.
ATTRA.NCAT.ORG.                   the United States often leaves smaller-scale farms

ATTRA.NCAT.ORG                                                                                                                     Page 1
                      Equipment and tools are necessary for plant          is specialized and not used often. Farm-tool
                      propagation, soil preparation, planting, pest and    lending libraries and equipment rental programs
                      weed control, irrigation, harvesting, postharvest    are offered in many areas, often through
                      handling, storage, and distribution. Sustainable     organizations such as county conservation
                      agriculture can be a labor-intensive business;       districts. Utilizing these programs can be cost-
                      by selecting the appropriate tool for the task at    effective, as rates are often determined by the
                      hand, farmers can increase profits by increasing     job, acreage, or time spent using the equipment.
                      crop yields, improving crop quality, and             Options to custom hire out the job or barter
                      reducing expenses. There are several factors to      with a neighboring farmer may also be worth
                      consider when choosing appropriate agricultural      exploring. In some situations, the farmer may be
                      equipment and tools:                                 able to change management practices in order
                                                                           to achieve a suitable solution.
                        • Does the tool or equipment support your
                          whole-farm plan?
 Related ATTRA
 Resources              • Is the tool or equipment appropriate to your
                          farm’s location and growing condition?
 ATTRA.NCAT.ORG
                        • How does the tool or implement impact soil
• Draft Animal            health, production, and marketing?
  Power for Farming     • Is it safe to use and appropriate to your
                          skill and comfort level and to that of other
• Conserving Fuel
  on the Farm
                          farmworkers?
                        • Is it appropriate in scale now and for future
• Market Gardening:
                          growth?
  A Start-Up Guide
                        • Is it easy to maintain and repair? How
• Sustainable Weed
                          accessible are parts?
  Management
  for Small and       How a farm operates and maintains its equipment
  Medium-Scale        can have a significant impact on that farm’s
  Farms               bottom line. In addition to the initial purchase
• Solarization and    price and costs to operate and maintain the
  Biosolarization:    equipment, there are many associated costs that
  Harnessing the      need to be considered. These can relate to taxes,
  Sun and Organic     fees for tool and equipment storage, insurance
  Matter to Control   costs, and more. A partial budget is a tool that
  Weeds               can help determine the return on investment
                      when purchasing equipment. The University
• Topic Area:
                      of Kentucky Cooperative Extension Service
  Equipment
                      publication titled Understanding Equipment
                      Costs on the Small Commercial Vegetable Farm
                      (2020) offers additional methods to help small
                      vegetable farms plan for the costs of operating,
                      maintaining, and replacing equipment.
                      When a piece of equipment is needed on the
                      farm, it is important to consider all options
                      that may achieve the desired outcome. Maybe
                      buying outright or leasing is the right choice,
                      but there are often several other options that can
                      be considered, as well. Many farmers purchase
                      equipment jointly, especially when the equipment




Page 2                                                       Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale Intensive Crop Production
   Appropriate Technologies
   There are a number of characteristics
   that define agricultural tools as an
   appropriate technology:

     •  They should be safe to use and allow
          for efficient work.

     • They should fit local conditions.

     •  They should be inexpensive to make,
           use, and maintain.

     • They should be made from local
        materials.

     • They should not deplete natural
        resources.

     • They should promote fulfilling jobs
        and workplaces.




  Open Source/
  Open System
  Tools and Equipment
  Farmers have always been innovators
  and tinkerers, be it out of necessity,
  for profit, or simply for fun. Many
  farmers are also open to sharing
  information, especially when it comes
  to building, modifying, and utilizing
  specialty tools and equipment that
  will increase on-farm efficiencies and
  a farm’s bottom line.
  Farm Hack is a community of
  collaborators interested in developing
  and sharing open-source tools for
  resilient agriculture. Farm Hack exists
  as a platform for community-based
  sharing and collaborative research.
  To join the Farm Hack community
  and to access all the open-source tool
  designs, visit farmhack.org.
  The Oggún tractor, developed by
                                          The Culticycle, an open-source pedal powered tractor for cultivation and seeding, built
  CleBer, LLC, is designed on an open from readily available lawn tractor, ATV, and bicycle parts. Photo: Farm Hack
  system (non-proprietary) platform.
  This allows for each tractor to be designed at a scale that can lower costs and empower farmers to troubleshoot,
  configure, and adapt equipment as they deem necessary. And, by creating an open system design, CleBer’s Universal
  Power Platform (UPP) can be used for a range of small-scale equipment beyond tractors. For more information on
  the Oggún tractor and CleBer’s open system design platform, visit ronnietractors.com.
  More information on open-source tool designs is included in the Further Resources section of this publication.




ATTRA.NCAT.ORG                                                                                                               Page 3
                                                                               more precise bed preparation, and more efficient
                        Hand Tools                                             nutrient cycling for long-term resilience.
                        There are three components to consider when
                        selecting hand tools for commercial crop               Capitalization costs for purchasing mechanized
                        production: how the tool fits the hand and body,       equipment can have a significant impact on a
                        how the tool fits the need, and the quality or         farm’s budget and monthly cash flow. With
                        durability of the tool. Ergonomics refers to how       planning, new farmers can design their systems
                        a tool is best designed for comfort, efficiency,       to function now and for future growth. This will
                        safety, and productivity. The more ergonomically       help in preparing to scale up and use mechanized
                        designed a tool is, the easier it will be on the       equipment. Careful recordkeeping allows for an
                        human body. The length of a handle, the type           understanding of how mechanized equipment
                        of handle grip, the weight of the tool, and the        can reduce labor costs. It can also portray the
                        angle of the tool head to the handle all affect the    return on investment while offering a pathway
                        ergonomics of a tool.                                  for managing financial risks, especially when
                                                                               debt (from a bank loan) is being considered for
                        The more durable a tool is, the longer it will last    purchasing farm equipment.
                        without sustaining significant damage or wear.
                        Durability can be measured in the strength of          Several tools are now on the market that run




T
                        the handle and tool head. The harder the steel         on battery power. This includes tools for soil
         here are                                                              preparation, cultivation, pest control, and
                        used for the tool head, the better it will hold an
         three          edge—which in turn improves efficiency and             harvesting. Although battery-powered tools,
         components     reduces wear. Thus, it is important to keep a          such as those powered by hand drills, have been
                        sharpening tool close by, and one that best serves     available for many years, there are newer options
to consider when
                        that particular type of steel. Filing in the forward   being used on farms, such as chain saws and string
selecting                                                                      trimmers. The batteries for these tools tend to be
                        direction with something like a mill file with a
handy tools for                                                                costly, though when they are selected carefully,
                        bastard cut works to keep softer steels sharp, while
commercial              sharpening stones perform well on harder steel         interchangeable batteries allow for different
                                                                               tools to be powered by the same type of battery.
crop production:        blades, including stainless and spring steel. How
                                                                               Battery-powered tools don’t produce exhaust, are
how the tool fits       the tool head and handle are joined together also
                                                                               quieter, and are easier to maintain than tools that
                        affects the durability of the tool and determines
the hand and body,                                                             run on fuel.
                        whether parts can be replaced.
how the tool fits
the need, and the       The Further Resources section of this publication
                        contains a list of suppliers that specialize in
quality or durability
                        various tool types, including tools ergonomically
of the tool.            optimized for women and left-handed people, tools
                        made from recycled materials, and many more.

                        Mechanized Equipment
                        In recent years, there has been a great amount
                        of innovation in mechanized equipment for
                        small farms. This includes machines specifically
                        designed for seeding, bed preparation, harvesting,
                        and much more. When selected appropriately,
                        these tools can be great labor-saving investments
                        that contribute to overall efficiency, productivity,
                        and profit. Mechanization is often linked to an
                        expansion in production, from a human-powered
                        and labor-intensive scale to an increase in acreage
                        and number of markets, but it can also be used
                        to increase efficiency within current production
                        systems. For example, tools can be used to farm
                        more intensively on a given parcel by allowing for     Drill-powered Iconoclast tool available from Neversink
                        closer plant spacings, more efficient weed control,    Farm. Photo: Andy Pressman, NCAT


Page 4                                                           Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale Intensive Crop Production
                                                          quantities of horsepower and can frequently get the
Walk-Behind Tractors                                      job done with less than 30 horsepower. Additional
A walk-behind tractor, or two-wheel tractor, can          considerations in tractor use include the skill level
be an effective—even essential—tool for small-            of the farmer or farm worker to safely operate the
scale farming. At 3.5 to 16 horsepower, these two-        tractor and to maintain it.
wheeled power sources can handle the mowing,
                                                          In 1939, Ford Motor Company came out with
tillage, and cultivation needs for a farm up to a few
                                                          the three-point hitch on its Model N tractors.
acres. Their versatility allows them to be used in
                                                          Prior to this time, the brand of most implements
high tunnels, while also allowing them to be used
                                                          had to match the brand of the tractor, because
in combination with a four-wheeled tractor to
                                                          each manufacturer had its own way of hitching
manage crop production on more acreage. Walk-
                                                          its implements to its own tractors. The three-point
behind tractors tend to be affordable for smaller
                                                          hitch allows for implements to be easily attached
scales of production, easy and safe to operate, and
                                                          to a tractor and lets the tractor carry the weight
less costly to maintain. They can be equipped
                                                          of the implement. Although single and double
with a wide range of implements, including PTO-
                                                          hitches served in a similar capacity, the three-
driven tillers, rotary plows, power harrows, and
                                                          point hitch also allows for the implement to be
mowers. Other implements that can be pulled or
                                                          lifted by the tractor’s hydraulic system. As a result,
powered by a walk-behind tractor include discs,
                                                          the depth of the implement can be controlled;
roller-crimpers, seeders, and toolbars with various
                                                          therefore, the load on the tractor is also controlled.
cultivation set-ups. Many of these implements
                                                          The three-point hitch became standardized in the
are designed for 30-inch bed widths and can be
                                                          1960s, making different manufacturers’ tractors
used in combination with other hand tools for
                                                          and implements compatible.
managing intensive crop plantings.

Tractors, PTOs, and Toolbars
    One horsepower is equal to the force
    required to raise 33,000 pounds one
    foot in one minute.

Tractors provide the power to push and pull farm
machinery and move materials, when equipped with
a front-end loader, forks, or hay bale spear. There are
many considerations to be evaluated when selecting
a tractor, including the type of operation, scale,
terrain, physical layout of the production area, soil
conditions, and implements that will be mounted           A three-point hitch with toolbar. Photo: Andy Pressman,
to it. Small-scale farms do not often need large          NCAT




BCS tractor and implements. Photo: Strafford County (NH) Conservation District

ATTRA.NCAT.ORG                                                                                                      Page 5
                            A toolbar can also be attached to a tractor to     vibrate slightly, S-shanks vibrate aggressively,
                            serve as a tool carrier. Toolbars are most often   and straight shanks are firm.
                            utilized for cultivation purposes, and they can
                                                                               Starting in 1947, manufacturers began adding a
                            be set up with multiple tools that can work in
                                                                               built-in transmission device known as a power
                            conjunction with one another. A shank is used
                                                                               take-off (PTO) to tractors. The PTO allows the
                            to attach a tool, such as a sweep or shovel, to
                                                                               tractor to be driven while powering an implement.
                            the toolbar. Depending on how much action, or
                                                                               PTOs are a main feature on tractors today,
                            mobility, is needed by the tool, different types
                                                                               including several walk-behind tractor brands. For
                            of shanks can be used. For example, C-shanks
                                                                               most tractor implements, the PTO runs at 540
                                                                               rpm, which equates to the PTO shaft rotating
                                                                               nine times per second. PTO entanglements are
                                                                               all too common on farms and investing in a PTO
                                                                               shield can prevent accidents caused by the PTO.

                                                                                Although draft-animal power does find a
                                                                                place on small farms, this publication does
                                                                                not include a discussion on equipment
                                                                                for draft power. However, many of the
                                                                                implements described in this publication
                                                                                were originally designed for draft animals
                                                                                and can be used with either draft or tractor
                                                                                power. Refer to ATTRA’s Draft Animal Power
                                                                                for Farming for information on the use of
                                                                                draft animals.
PTO shield. Photo: NYCAMH




    To Invest or Not to Invest
    Efficient processes are often essential components of a successful farm. Whether talking about crop planning,
    bed preparation and turnover, management of pests, disease, and fertilization, or harvest and post-harvest, there
    are clear benefits to a streamlined and carefully designed plan. Selecting the appropriate suite of tools for a farm
    is an essential process that will have an impact on all the farm duties listed above. A well-selected combination
    of tools will allow a farmer to substitute human labor hours for a mechanical advantage. Combining real-time
    accounting information and a way to rank potential investments greatly reduces the possibility of making a poor
    choice. Whether a farmer chooses to create a simple back-of-the-envelope calculation that includes categories
    like cost, condition of purchase (new/used/rent), and urgency of need, or whether they use a more elaborate
    tool like the example included below, a well-thought-out investment is more likely to reflect the actual needs and
    expectations of the farmer.

    Table 1 (page 7) comes from the world of whole-farm planning, which is a holistic approach to establishing a short
    and long-term vision for the farm that examines values, capacity, and goals in creating a farm plan. Notice that the
    questions posed in the table go beyond cost and benefit to include a side-by-side comparison of two alternative
    options for addressing a farm need, as well as an examination of vision, goals, and future monitoring. Following the
    whole-farm plan methodology can help farmers adapt their goals and actions to align their needs and preferences
    for success in the long term. Eventually, the process of whole-farm planning will lead to the development of business,
    retirement, transition, estate, and investment plans.
    Click here for a downloadable Excel version of Table 1 (available for online and PDF formats).
    For information on sizing tractors, see What Size Farm Tractor Do I Need? in the Further Resources section.




Page 6                                                            Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale Intensive Crop Production
                                      Table 1. Decision-Making: On Farm Investments
 Decision Made By: Jack and Jill Hiller                             Date: 01 / 26 / 2019
                                                                    Scaling up the market garden to commercial enterprise, finding an
 Proposed Action & Objective
                                                                    efficient approach to managing it

 Is there a specific problem?                                       Tenacious perennial weeds; cheat grass; low organic matter

                                                                    1. Invest $$$$ in a BCS two-wheeled tractor and implements to
                                                                        allow for weed control and organic matter incorporations via
 Are there alternative options being compared?                          shallow tillage
                                                                    2. Invest $$ in imported compost and manage the system as
                                                                        no-dig; smother weeds and maintain by hand

 Mark Pass (P) or Fail (F) for each alternate where
                                                                     P       F      P       F    Notes / Further information needed
 applicable. List any additional issues or points raised.
 Cause and effect test: Does this action appear to address
                                                                             F      P            OM for intensive vegetable production
 the root cause of the problem? Have we discovered the root
                                                                                                 requires inputs. Tillage spreads weeds.
 cause of the problem yet?
 Weak link test - social: What are the possible reactions and
                                                                             ~      ~       ~    OM enhanced more by no-till than
 effects of this action? How can I /we enhance any positive
                                                                                                 by tillage.
 effects or address any negative impacts?
 Weak link test - biological: Does this action address the                                       Tillage controls weeds short term
 weakest point in the lifecycle of this organism, whether                    F      P            but damages soil structure; awakens
 enhancing or diminishing its impacts?                                                           weed seed
 Weak link test - financial: Does this action address the
                                                                             F      P            No-till feeds the soil while reducing
 weakest link in the chain of production (resource conversion,
                                                                                                 labor.
 product conversion, marketing)?
 Marginal reaction test: Comparing two or more actions:
                                                                             F      P            Compost = lower investment for
 Which option provides the greatest return (in terms of my /
                                                                                                 greater return
 our holistic goal, for the time, money, and effort spent)?
 Gross profit analysis test: Comparing two or more
                                                                     ~       ~      P            BCS would be efficient (low labor) but
 enterprises: Which contributes most to covering the
                                                                                                 continued use necessary
 overhead of the business?
 Energy / money source & use test: Is the money or energy
 to be used sourced in a manner that is consistent with my /
 our holistic goal? Will the energy or money lead toward my /
 our holistic goal?                                                                              Note to self - it seems possible to
                                                                                                 close nutrient cycles and create future
                         Energy                  Money                                           compost needs on site. With this
                                                                                                 in mind, the ongoing cost would be
                                                 From sales of               F      P            mostly labor.
 Source                  1. Oil 2. Labor
                                                 CSA shares
 Use

 Sustainability test: Will this action lead toward or away from              F      P            Leads to requiring oil, repairs, and
 the future resource base described in my /our holistic goal?                                    maintenance over time

 Justification test: I / we can honestly say theese tests have                                   BCS would work well, but no-dig has
 been used objectively, and not merely to justify a specific                                     more benefits across more aspects of
 desired outcome.                                                                                our context and at a lower cost
 Society and culture test: Gut check - Considering all of
                                                                             F      P            No-dig feels more in line with where I'd
 the testing outcomes and my /our holistic goal, what is the
                                                                                                 like to be in five years.
 feeling about the proposed action now?
 Monitoring: What social, financial, and ecological indicators can be tracked to discover (as quickly as possible) whether this action
 is progressing in the right direction? 1. Record total human hours for weeding, installing & total for the market garden;
 2. Monitor compost application rates over four years
Source: Adapted from Regenerative Agriculture, by Richard Perkins




ATTRA.NCAT.ORG                                                                                                                      Page 7
                                                                               pull a subsoiler to break up a hardpan may be
                      Soil Preparation                                         much greater than what is required throughout
                      Preparing the soil for seeding and planting              the rest of the year, often needing around 25 to
                      crops is a multi-step process. Depending on              30 horsepower per shank.
                      the soil condition and the kinds of crops to be
                      planted, farmers can decide which tool or piece          Hand Tools for Soil Preparation
                      of equipment to use, the depth to which the soil
                                                                               Hand tools can thoroughly prepare a small
                      needs to be prepared, and when the soil should
                                                                               amount of land for planting. Spades and digging
                      be worked. Soil preparation disrupts soil structure
                                                                               forks are designed to thrust vertically into the
                      and soil life; thus, maintaining and enhancing
                                                                               soil rather than at an angle. They are preferable
                      the life of the soil is the farmer’s responsibility.
                                                                               to a shovel because the blade of a shovel is often
                      Selection and use of the right tools and practices
                                                                               shorter than the blade of a spade; in addition,
                      to prepare the soil plays a crucial role in this
                                                                               the curve of a shovel blade makes it difficult to
                      regard. In some instances, farmers can get
                                                                               deeply penetrate the soil. Short-handled spades
                      exceptional crop quality and yields with minimal
                                                                               and forks with a D- or T-shaped handle allow for
                      soil disturbance through such practices as no-till
                                                                               more efficient use of energy when digging deeply
                      farming or preparing raised garden beds through
                                                                               and when moving soil.



S
                      the technique of double-digging, in which the soil
        oil           is loosened to a depth of as much as 24 inches.
        preparation
                      Breaking the soil for commercial crop production
        disrupts      usually requires the art of plowing or tilling the
soil structure and    soil. The goal of soil preparation is to minimize soil
soil life; thus,      damage while creating a smooth, deeply loosened
maintaining and       seed bed with as little residue and as few weed
                      seeds as possible in the top three to six inches.
enhancing the
                      Tools serve to loosen and aerate the soil, break up
life of the soil      residues and weeds, incorporate organic matter
is the farmer’s       and soil amendments, and shape the planting
responsibility.       bed. A well-prepared bed will be easy to seed or
                      transplant into, have good water drainage, and be
                      easy to cultivate. Soil amendments and organic
                      matter can be incorporated into the soil as it is
                      being prepared for seeding or planting.

                      Equipment for Soil Preparation
                      Selecting the right piece of equipment for tillage
                      depends on the type of soil that is desired.
                      Tillage can be broken down into primary and
                                                                               A digging fork (left) with a T-handle and a spade with a
                      secondary stages. Primary tillage aggressively           D-handle. Photo: Andy Pressman, NCAT
                      loosens the soil and breaks up residues at a deep
                      depth. Secondary tillage pulverizes and smooths          After the soil has been forked or spaded, a garden
                      the top several inches of soil. Equipment should         rake can be used to break up larger clods and
                      be selected based on the type of tillage desired         remove residues and stones that, left alone, could
                      and how the equipment works, given the specific          interfere with planting, cultivation, and overall
                      characteristics of the soil. The tools’ ability to       plant health. Rakes can also be used to level a bed
                      perform correctly also depends on the horsepower         and open furrows for seeding. They can be used
                      of the tractor. Soils that are heavy, compacted, or      with the head facing either up or down and by
                      have significant amounts of residues, for example,       using a push-pull motion. The handle of a rake
                      may require greater horsepower. In some cases,           can also be held parallel to the body so that the
                      like in systems that are heavily degraded or that        head can be used to lightly tamp down the soil
                      are compromised with a hardpan, a one-time               after seeding. The seedbed rake is designed with
                      heavy equipment rental or management option              longer tines that can be used to mark out specific
                      may be necessary. The horsepower required to             rows for planting.

Page 8                                                          Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale Intensive Crop Production
The broadfork, or U-bar, is used for tillage. Due      penetrate 16 to 18 inches or so. Subsoilers are also
to its minimal soil disturbance and no inversion       used to break up compacted soils and improve
of soil layers, some farmers include this tool in      drainage and aeration by penetrating deeper than
their regular operations for reduced or no-till        a chisel plow into the soil.
production. It consists of two handles, one on
                                                       Discs can be used for both primary and secondary
each side of the fork, and teeth that are spaced
                                                       tillage. Discs are ground-driven implements that
about four inches apart. The teeth are designed
                                                       cut and mix the soil. They come in several different
and spaced so that as the handles of the broadfork
                                                       shapes and sizes and can be arranged in different
are pulled toward the operator, the tines break the
                                                       rows and at different angles. Discs perform best
soil and lift it, without the broadfork itself being
                                                       on soils that don’t have a lot of residues and on
lifted. Once the soil is loosened, the broadfork is    soils that are not so wet that they will clog or so
moved back about six inches, and the procedure         dry that the discs don’t cut. Heavy discs can be
is repeated down the bed. Some farmers find the        used for primary tillage and adding additional
broadfork useful for harvesting crops such as          weight to the disc can help it cut further and
scallions and potatoes, as well.                       incorporate better. Lighter discs can be used for
Bed rollers can be used as a last step in preparing    secondary tillage after the soil has been plowed.
beds, to create a uniform planting surface.



                                                                                                                P
                                                       Rotary tillers can also be used for primary and
Depending on the desired condition of the              secondary tillage up to around eight inches deep.               rimary tilling
bed, weight can be added to provide a more             Rotary tillers are instrumental in small-scale                  is performed
compressed surface. Additionally, bed rollers are      vegetable production, because they can produce                  by different
compatible with dibblers for preparing transplant      fine seedbeds at varying widths. They are suitable
holes at regular intervals or placing row markers                                                               types of plows,
                                                       to use with walk-behind tractors that have as little
for follow-up with hand seeding or push seeders.       as five horsepower and four-wheel tractors up to         discs, rototillers,
                                                       100 horsepower. Rotary tillers have a rotating           and spading
Primary Tillage Equipment                              shaft with several attached tines that mix the           machines.
Primary tilling is performed by different types of     soil at various depths. While most tillers on the
plows, discs, rototillers, and spading machines.       market use a forward rotation to mix the soil,
The moldboard plow is one of the oldest                reverse-tine tillers use reverse action to pull the
implements used for soil preparation. It consists      tiller into the ground, burying larger soil clods
of one or more curved pieces of metal, called          underneath smaller clods, often leaving a finer
bottoms, attached to a frame. The bottoms are          seedbed with less compaction.
pulled through the soil to cut it and then invert      Rototilling is an effective way to prepare a seedbed;
it, either partially or wholly. One- to four-bottom    however, there are drawbacks when the tool is
plows are common for small-scale production,           overused. Continuous rototilling can create a hard
and each bottom requires approximately 10 to           layer of soil, or plow pan, underneath the tilled
15 horsepower from the tractor. Plows come in          soil and increase organic matter decomposition.
various shapes and sizes, which determine the          It can also lead to soils that can quickly erode.
depth of the cut and how the plow moves the            Reducing the rototiller’s revolutions per minute
soil. Disc coulters can be added to the front of       or increasing the tractor’s ground speed can be
the plow to pre-cut the soil so that the bottom        less harmful to the soil than normal rototilling
penetrates more effectively.                           (Wiswall, 2009). Power harrows, or rotary
Chisel plows, or field cultivators, have curved        harrows, are designed to gently move the soil
shanks (also known as chisels) with sweeps or          “horizontally” up to a few inches in depth. The
                                                       soil is not inverted nor over-pulverized, which
other tips attached to them. They are used for
                                                       allows for multiple uses during the season without
loosening the soil without inverting it, thus
                                                       jeopardizing soil structure or forming a hardpan.
leaving residues on the soil surface. They are
often used to break up hardpans and heavy soils        Spading machines are an alternative to using
and can be run across a bed before planting root       a rotary tiller. Common in Europe, spading
crops. Root penetration can also be improved           machines loosen the soil and incorporate residues
with a subsoiler. Subsoilers have straighter and       without turning the soil. Spaders are either rotary or
longer shanks than chisel plows, usually about 18      reciprocating, and the spades on both types move
inches; each shank needs about 25 horsepower to        more slowly than a rotary tiller through the soil.

ATTRA.NCAT.ORG                                                                                                                Page 9
                                                                                    Bed Shaping
                                                                                    There are several advantages to forming raised beds,
                                                                                    including warmer soils and better drainage. In
                                                                                    addition, raised beds make it easier to steer a tractor
                                                                                    and implement for planting and cultivating. Bed
                                                                                    shaping is usually done by pushing loose soil into
                                                                                    ridges with a hilling disc or other implement and
                                                                                    then forming and pressing the soil into a bed. There
                                                                                    are many different styles of bed shapers. Some can
                                                                                    lay drip tape and plastic mulch and apply fertilizers.
                                                                                    Many designs are made right on the farm.

                                                                                    Seeding and Planting
                                                                                    Farmers must take several factors into
                                                                                    consideration when choosing how best to
                                                                                    establish a crop for production. Local soil and
                                                                                    growing conditions, market considerations, and
A Celli spading machine at Pennypack Farm and Education Center in Horsham,          crop type affect whether a crop should be direct-
Pennsylvania. Photo: Andy Pressman, NCAT
                                                                                    seeded or transplanted. Decisions made around
                                                                                    crop establishment will affect performance; thus,
                            This action works the soil more effectively without     the selection of appropriate tools for a particular
                            causing compaction. Depending on the condition          farming operation can help greatly in saving time
                            of the soil, a fine seedbed can be accomplished in      and labor, while also increasing the health, viable
                                                                                    yield, speed to maturity, and quality of a crop.
                            a single pass without secondary tillage.

                            Secondary Tillage Equipment                             Equipment for Direct Seeding
                                                                                    Direct seeding requires contact between the
                            Depending on how rough or crusted the soil
                                                                                    seed and the soil, so that the crop can establish
                            is and how much plant residue remains, using            itself once it germinates. Spin seeders are used
                            secondary tillage equipment can further refine          for broadcasting cover-crop seeds at a set, desired
                            and level the soil before seeding or planting.          rate. They can be handheld or tractor-mounted.
                            Harrowing is used for shallow tillage and is            Light harrowing, raking, irrigating, or adequate
                            most often practiced after plowing. Harrows             rainfall will help ensure good seed-to-soil contact.
                            can be used to break down the furrow slices
                            caused by the plow, reduce clods, smooth out            Other types of seeders should be used for crops
                                                                                    that need to be planted in the soil at a uniform
                            the soil surface, and kill young weeds. The types
                                                                                    spacing and depth. These include precision seeders,
                            of harrows include light disc harrows, chain-link
                                                                                    pinpoint seeders, stick- or jab-type seeders, and
                            harrows, spring-tooth harrows, and spike-tooth          drills. Precision seeders can be manually pushed
                            harrows. If sod has been plowed under, the disc         or tractor mounted to dispense individual seeds
                            harrow will not bring lumps of sod up to the            in a furrow. Seeds can be singulated through
                            soil surface—unlike the spring-tooth or spike-          several different mechanisms, including cups,
                            tooth harrow. Although spike-tooth harrows do           belts, vacuums, plates, and rollers. For small-
                            not pulverize the soil as well as other types of        scale farms, Glaser, Earthway, and Jang are brand
                            harrows, they can sometimes be used to cover            names of precision push seeders that use plates or
                            broadcast seed.                                         rollers. The Stanhay uses belts, and the Nibex uses
                                                                                    cups. Both of these are available as walk-behind
                            Field cultivators consist of a toolbar with different   push seeders or toolbar-mounted seeders (Volk,
                            implements mounted on it. They are heavier than         2009). Some seeders function as standalone units
                            harrows and are used when the soil is too rough,        capable of seeding up to six rows of seed, while
                            is too compacted, or has too much residue for           other single-row seeders offer attachments that
                            a harrow. The toolbar usually has C-shanks or           can connect seeders together for seeding multiple
                            S-shanks with sweeps, tines, chains, or rollers         rows, attach seeders to a wheel hoe, or mount
                            attached to the bottom.                                 seeders with a fertilizer attachment.

Page 10                                                               Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale Intensive Crop Production
                                                       Equipment for Transplanting
                                                       Setting out transplants helps to extend the
                                                       growing season and harvest period. Many farmers
                                                       transplant crops by hand using a trowel, a dibbler,
                                                       or a jab-style planter, but mechanical transplanters
                                                       can speed up the planting process by offering more
                                                       accuracy and less labor. Mechanical transplanters
                                                       require one person to drive the tractor while a
                                                       crew of one or more people drops transplants into
                                                       the soil. Many farmers have designed simple sled-



                                                                                                                 M
                                                       type transplanters that allow the crew to sit or lie
                                                                                                                              any
                                                       down while they transplant by hand. Commercial
                                                       transplanters have a shoe, coulter, or some other                      farmers
                                                       device to open the planting furrow. They also                          transplant
                                                       have a closing wheel that packs the seedlings,            crops by hand using
                                                       which are held on trays, in place once they are           a trowel, a dibbler, or
                                                       planted. Water-wheel transplanters inject water
                                                       into the hole after the plant is set. Other types         a jab-style planter,
                                                       of transplanters include the gripper, the carousel,       but mechanical
                                                       the spade, and the no-till.                               transplanters can
                                                       Until recently there have been plenty of options for      speed up the planting
SPIN farmer Wally Satzewich of Wally’s Urban Market
Garden in Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, using an Earthway
                                                       mechanized transplanting equipment for farmers            process by offering
seeder. Photo: Courtesy of SPIN-Farming                at every scale, except those at the lower end of          more accuracy and
                                                       the spectrum—namely, the market gardeners.
                                                                                                                 less labor.
Pinpoint seeders are designed to be manually           Now, the paper-pot transplanter and other similar
pulled and perform well for greenhouse planting.       products fill that niche for the small-scale farmer
Medium- to large-sized seeds can be hand planted       who is looking to increase efficiency. The hand-
through a stick- or jab-type seeder that can also      pulled transplanter relies on a sled and chain of
plant through plastic mulch. Seed drills also          pots that are pulled across a pre-prepared seedbed
are available for manual or tractor-mounted            to plant and bury seedlings. A well-prepared
seeding. Discs can be set for the size of the seed,    seedbed is important for ease of planting, and,
but thinning may be necessary to achieve proper        in the right context, this type of transplanter can
spacing between plants. Planet Jr. is a classic name   greatly reduce transplanting times. One company
associated with vegetable drills. Drills can also be   claims that with its equipment, a single person can
used for planting grains and cover crops.              plant a 100-foot bed with 264 plants in minutes.


  Desirable Features of a Hand-Pushed
  Precision Seeder
  In his book The New Organic Grower, Eliot
  Coleman suggests several characteristics
  to look for in a hand-pushed precision
  seeder:
    • It is easy to push in a straight line.
    • It gives precise seed placement.
    • It allows accurate depth adjustments.
    • It is easy to fill and empty.
    • It is flexible and adaptable.
    • It has a visible seed level and seed drop.
    • It includes a dependable row marker.             A Rainflo water-wheel transplanter at Pennypack Farm and Education Center in
                                                       Horsham, Pennsylvania. Photo: Andy Pressman, NCAT

ATTRA.NCAT.ORG                                                                                                                    Page 11
                                                                               Weed Control
                                                                               Weeds compete with crops for light, water, and
                                                                               nutrients, and they can affect a farm’s economic
                                                                               bottom line. Weeds can reduce crop yields
                                                                               through competition with cash crops, promote
                                                                               pests and disease, and even be problematic in
                                                                               the harvesting process. As a result, there is a
                                                                               large cost associated with controlling weeds.
                                                                               Minimizing weed growth both in the short term
                                                                               and the long term should be considered when
                                                                               designing a cropping system. Careful planning
                                                                               to limit weeds’ competition with cash crops and
                                                                               to reduce the amount of time, fuel, and other
                                                                               resources spent on controlling weeds can be vital
                                                                               to a farm’s economic viability.
                                                                               There are several techniques for effectively
                                                                               controlling weeds, including chemical and
                                                                               cultural approaches, as well as the use of
                                                                               cultivation tools. Many of the control techniques
                         Paperpot transplanter. Photo: Andy Pressman, NCAT     can be integrated together to be more effective.
                                                                               All the techniques focus on either preventing
                                                                               weed seeds from germinating (pre-emergence) or
  Conservation Tillage Equipment                                               suppressing established weeds (post-emergence).
  Conservation tillage refers to several strategies and techniques for
  establishing crops in a previous crop’s residues, which are purposely
  left on the soil surface. The principal benefits of conservation                 A weed-management strategy
  tillage are improved water conservation and the reduction of soil                includes several factors:
  erosion. Additional benefits include reduced fuel consumption,                     • Timing weed-control operations
  reduced compaction, planting and harvesting flexibility, reduced
                                                                                     • Selecting the most appropriate tools
  labor requirements, and improved soil tilth. Ridge till and no-till are
                                                                                        for cultivating
  the most common types of conservation tillage systems.
                                                                                     • Forming planting beds and crop-row
  Ridge tillage uses specialized planters and cultivators to maintain
                                                                                       spacing to match the cultivation tool
  permanent ridges, on which crops are grown. After harvest, the
                                                                                       and its configuration
  crop residue is left until planting time. The planter places the seed
  in the top of the ridge after pushing residue out of the way and                   • Incorporating other cropping practices
  slicing off the surface of the ridge top. Ridges are re-formed during                such as cover crops, crop rotation,
  the last cultivation of the crop with a ridge-tillage cultivator that                irrigation, fertilization, and pest
  removes weeds while building up the ridge.                                           management
  As the name implies, tillage is not used in establishing a seedbed
  in no-till systems. Instead, crops are simply planted into the
  previous year’s crop residue or into cover crop residue. Farmers
  producing on smaller scales are utilizing several different hand
                                                                               Cultural Practices
  tools and mulching techniques for no-till vegetable production,              Cultural practices include cover cropping, the
  while no-till drills and transplanters can benefit farmers growing           use of stale seedbeds, mulching, tarping, and
  on a mechanized scale. No-till drills are equipped with coulters             mowing. The practice of using a stale seedbed
  that slice the soil, allowing a double-disc opener to place the seed         targets weed seeds within the top one to two
  at a proper depth. The slot is then closed with a spring press               inches of soil and is usually performed mid to
  wheel. No-till waterwheel transplanters are commonly used for
                                                                               late season. This technique allows the weed seeds
  vegetable transplants. The transplanter uses coulters that allow
  no-till planting into bare soil or terminated cover crops. A spiked          to germinate, but the young weeds are then killed
  wheel creates a hole and fills it with water, then workers riding on         through practices such as flaming or scraping just
  the transplanter place plants.                                               below the soil surface. This prevents new seeds
                                                                               from coming up to the surface.

Page 12                                                           Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale Intensive Crop Production
Mowing weeds can stress the weed plants so that
they are unable to flower and set viable seed.
Mowing around crops also can limit weeds’
ability to compete.
Mulching can create a physical barrier to limit
weed growth. Organic mulches, such as straw,
can also reduce the soil temperature, which may
slow down the growth of weeds. Plastic and
biodegradable “plastic” mulches are used with
heat-loving plants and promote an earlier harvest
by raising the soil temperature. Plastic mulches
come in a variety of colors that affect the soil
temperature differently. Although black plastic
mulch doesn’t provide much heat to the soil,
it effectively suppresses weeds. A plastic-mulch
layer is an implement that can quickly lay plastic       Terrateck manual plastic-mulch layer.
in a straight, flat, and tight manner over a bed.        Photo: Andy Pressman, NCAT




                                                                                                               S
Depending on the unit, plastic-mulch layers can                                                                      olarization
level the soil surface, shape beds, lay plastic over     crops, such as rye, contain allelopathic chemicals          refers to the
hoops or raised beds, and even lay drip tape under       that prevent weed seeds from germinating.
                                                                                                                     use of clear
the mulch, all in one pass. Plastic-mulch lifters        Selecting which cover crop(s) to use depends on
can be used to assist in pulling up the plastic          the goal for the cover crop, as well as how it will   plastic mulch on
mulch at the end of each season.                         be managed or terminated. For cover crops that        moist soils during
                                                         don’t winter kill, mowing will likely be necessary    the hottest parts
The use of plastic tarps can raise soil temperatures
                                                         before incorporating the crop into the soil. Unlike   of the year to
to levels that kill or debilitate many soil pathogens,
                                                         sickle bar or rotary-type mowers that leave a lot
insects, nematodes, weed seeds, and seedlings.                                                                 harness the sun’s
                                                         of the cut biomass intact, flail mowers cut the
Solarization refers to the use of clear plastic mulch                                                          energy to reduce
                                                         cover-cop material into fine biomass that is evenly
on moist soils during the hottest parts of the year
                                                         distributed. Meanwhile, the roller-crimper is a       the number of
to harness the sun’s energy to reduce the number
                                                         cutting-edge implement that is being used to kill     insects, diseases,
of insects, diseases, nematodes, and weeds in the
                                                         cover crops in no-till plantings. It consists of a    nematodes, and
soil. Solarization can also improve soil tilth and
                                                         metal drum with protruding blunt metal blades
release nitrogen in the form of ammonium and                                                                   weeds in the soil.
                                                         arranged in a pattern, designed to roll over a
nitrates, as well as calcium, magnesium, and
                                                         cover crop and crimp the plants so that they die,
potassium (Guerena, 2022). Adding organic
                                                         creating a mulch layer. Crops can then be planted
amendments to the solarization process creates
                                                         or transplanted directly through the mulch.
anerobic conditions that break down the carbon
sources, creating a toxic environment for pests
and diseases. This is known as biosolarization.          Hand-Tool Cultivation
Tarping, or occultation, is the process of using         The primary tool used in hand cultivation is the
impermeable tarps for weed control. This is a            hoe. For many farmers, hoeing may seem like
more common practice in places that receive less         back-breaking and labor-intensive work. This
sunlight. Weed seed germination is stimulated,           may well be the case, especially when using the
but weeds then die after emergence due to lack           standard hoe with a 90-degree angled blade and
of light. Tarps can also be used to warm up the          a 54- to 57-inch handle for weeding. These hoes
soil in the early spring, speed up decomposition         are designed for such tasks as digging, chopping,
of crop residues, conserve soil moisture, and            and hilling soil, and they are inadequate for
minimize nutrient leaching.                              cultivating smaller weeds that have germinated
                                                         in intensively planted beds. Understanding when
Cover crops can be planted to suppress weeds.
                                                         to hoe and how to use different hoes will allow
Cover crops such as rye, oats, buckwheat, and
                                                         for easy cultivation of weeds.
sorghum-sudangrass can be planted during
certain times of the year to smother weeds through       The eye-hoe, or chopping hoe, is one of the oldest
competition or by creating a mulch layer. Some           and most traditional tools in the world. The

ATTRA.NCAT.ORG                                                                                                              Page 13
                               eye-hoe is designed with a heavy head for chopping
                               larger weeds and roots and for moving soil. They
                               are swung similarly to an axe, with the weight of
                               the head doing the work.
                               Upright hoes allow for smaller weeds to be sliced
                               just below the soil surface. Their blades can fit
                               in narrow spaces and are relatively lightweight.
                               Their handles tend to be longer, between 66 and
                               74 inches, which allows for a farther reach and
                               for hand positioning that lets the user’s back stay
                               straight. Examples of upright hoes are the narrow
                               collinear hoe and the swan-neck or half-moon hoe.            Terrateck wheel hoe with attachments. Photo:
                                                                                            Andy Pressman, NCAT
                               The narrow collinear hoe has a thin metal blade,
                               usually 3¾ inches or 7 inches long, placed at                same time. Wheels come in different diameters,
                               a 70-degree angle to the handle. The blade                   usually from nine to 24 inches, with the smaller-
                               runs parallel to the soil surface and is used in a           wheeled models being easier to direct and less
                               pulling motion, with the user standing sideways.             tiring and cumbersome to use (Coleman, 1995).


W
           heel                The swan-neck hoe also is used in a pulling or
                                                                                            As with the toolbar for tractor-mounted cultivators,
           hoes are            sweeping motion, and the blade is a bit heavier
                                                                                            wheel hoes can also serve as tool carriers, as newer-
           one of              and wider than the blade of the collinear hoe. The
the most efficient                                                                          type wheel hoes can be fitted with accessories that
                               push hoe is designed with the front of the blade
tools for weed                                                                              mimic larger-scale implements. For example, the
                               sharpened and lying flat on the ground so that it
cultivation on small                                                                        French-manufactured wheel hoe from Terrateck
                               can “scuffle” across the soil surface in a pushing
land bases.                                                                                 can be positioned for in-row and between-row
                               motion. The diamond hoe is sharpened on both
                                                                                            cultivation with setups using collinear hoe
                               the front and back of the blade, allowing it to cut
                                                                                            blades, various discs and blades, tine cultivators,
                               in both a pushing and a pulling motion. The blade
                                                                                            and finger weeders. Tine weeders have also been
                               of a stirrup hoe is not fixed like the diamond hoe’s,
                               which allows it to dig deeper into the soil as it            adapted for manual cultivation by attaching flex
                               cuts in both directions. In addition, the stirrups,          tines to long tool handles.
                               or sides of the blade, make it possible for users to
                               see how close they are cutting to the cash crop.             Mechanical Cultivation
                                                                                            For many farms, an increase in production
                               Wheel hoes are one of the most efficient tools
                                                                                            efficiency begins with a cultivating tractor.
                               for weed cultivation on small land bases. The
                                                                                            Farmall, Allis Chalmers, Ford, Case, Oliver,
                               ability to attach different cultivation implements,
                                                                                            Kubota, and John Deere are some common
                               such as stirrup hoes, chisels, and sweeps, onto
                                                                                            brand names of cultivating tractors, and many
                               a wheeled frame allows the user to stay upright
                                                                                            models are designed for accuracy that allows the
                               while pushing and pulling the tool. Wheel hoes
                                                                                            driver to steer close to the crops while cultivating.
                               have either one or two wheels. Although the
                                                                                            Guidance accuracy was incorporated into the
                               double-wheeled version is less common, it allows
                                                                                            design of many models by using belly-mounted
                               for cultivation on both sides of a crop row at the
                                                                                            toolbars and by offsetting the motor to give the
                                                                                            driver a clear line of sight. Having the toolbar
                                                                                            belly mounted also compensates for the lateral
                                                                                            direction of the toolbar while steering. In other
                                                                                            words, the toolbar moves slightly in the same
                                                                                            direction the tractor is being steered. With rear-
                                                                                            mounted implements, on the other hand, the
                                                                                            toolbar moves slightly in the opposite direction
                                                                                            of the tractor as it turns.
                                                                                            Many cultivating tractors were manufactured
                                                                                            during the late 1940s and early 1950s and are
From left to right, a collinear hoe, a swan-neck hoe, a stirrup hoe, a “regular” hoe, and   still common on small-scale vegetable farms.
an eye-hoe. Photo: Andy Pressman, NCAT                                                      The Allis Chalmers Model G, for example, was

Page 14                                                                       Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale Intensive Crop Production
built between 1948 and 1955, and, unlike other              Cultivation Equipment for
cultivating tractors, its motor was placed behind
the driver to provide even further guidance when
                                                            Pre- and Post-Emergence
cultivating. Newer makes with this type of design           Weed Control
include Oggún, Tuff-Bilt, and Tilmore tractors.             Controlling weeds before they germinate involves
While some cultivating tractors were designed to be         cultivating just below the soil surface. Pre-
low to the ground for precision cultivation between         emergence cultivation can be done prior to or in
young or low-growing crops, other tractors, such            between plantings or shortly after a crop has been
as the Landini, were built with a high clearance            planted. Clean fallow is a term used to describe
to cultivate between larger crops throughout the            repeated cultivation before or between plantings
growing season.                                             and is used to kill annual weeds, reduce weed-
There is a broad range of tractor-drawn and PTO-            seed banks in the soil, and remove perennial weed
driven implements for weed cultivation. In addition         growth (Grubinger, 1999). Once a crop has been
to reducing weed populations and herbicide use,             planted, and even germinated, a technique known
many of the implements function to loosen,                  as blind cultivation is used in and between rows.
aerate, and till the soil, as well as to incorporate        Blind cultivation targets small weeds that have
soil amendments into it. Implements for cultivation         been up for a week or less and does not prevent



                                                                                                                     D
are designed for both post- and pre-emerging weeds          large-seeded crops that have been sown deeply
and include sweeps, discs, torsion hoes, brush                                                                                  isc
                                                            from germinating.
hoes, spider wheels, finger weeders, S-tines, basket                                                                            harrows
weeders, rolling cultivators, and other specialized         Disc harrows are one of the most versatile                          are
cultivating devices. Some of the more common                cultivation tools for clean fallowing. The blades
                                                                                                                     one of the most
implements are described below. For a detailed              of the disc loosen and mix the soil through a
explanation of weed-management tools, see Steel             lifting action, which then leaves the soil level.        versatile cultivation
in the Field in the Further Resources section.              Tandem disc blades are usually 16 to 18 inches           tools for clean
                                                            in diameter and are set about seven inches apart,        fallowing. The
                                                            while offset disc harrows have discs 20 to 24            blades of the disc
  Huguenot Street Farm in New Paltz,
                                                            inches in diameter and are set nine inches apart
  New York, received funding from                                                                                    loosen and mix
  the USDA-SARE program to develop
                                                            (Schwenke, 1991). Offset disc harrows are often
                                                            used in orchards because they can be set up to           the soil through
  detailed instructions on converting an
  Allis Chalmers Model G into an electric                   stir the soil close to trees. Some perennial weeds,      a lifting action,
  vehicle. There are numerous instructions                  particularly those that spread through rhizomes,         which then leaves
  and videos available online, including                    are better dealt with by equipment that can dig          the soil level.
  the original plans at projects.sare.org/                  the rhizomes up to the soil surface, where they
  wp-content/uploads/910807converting-                      can dry out and die. Spring-tooth harrows or field
  an-allis-chalmers-g-cultivating-tractor-                  cultivators equipped with sweeps or shovels work
  into-an-electric-vehicle.pdf.
                                                            well for uprooting perennial weeds.
                                                            Tine weeders and rotary hoes are two implements
                                                            commonly used for blind cultivation. Tine
                                                            weeders, also known as flex-tine weeders, consist
                                                            of many small metal tines that are pulled through
                                                            the soil at a fast speed, causing the tines to vibrate
                                                            and remove the weeds from the soil. Timing is key
                                                            because the tines scratch the cash crop as well as
                                                            the weeds growing between the rows. The depth
                                                            of the tines can be controlled by gauge wheels or
                                                            by using a three-point hitch. Rotary hoes often
                                                            are used for blind cultivation in corn and beans
                                                            and for breaking up the surface of crusted soils
  An Allis Chalmers G converted to electric at Fair Share
                                                            (Grubinger, 1999). Rotary hoes are ground-driven
  Farm, Kearney, Missouri. Photo: Rex Dufour, NCAT          and consist of several spider wheels with “spoons”
                                                            or tips that rotate and remove weeds.

ATTRA.NCAT.ORG                                                                                                                    Page 15
                                                                             Basket weeders consist of two rows of metal
                     Cultivation Equipment                                   baskets that roll across the soil surface at different
                     for Post-Emergence                                      speeds. The first row is ground driven, which also
                     Weed Control                                            drives a chain to power the rotation of the second
                     Tools for post-emergent weed cultivation are            row. This increases the rotation speed of the
                     designed to be used for specific crop stages. As a      baskets in the second row, so that they cultivate
                     crop grows and gains strength, more aggressive          weeds that survive the cultivation of the first-
                     tools that throw soil can be used, such as              row baskets. The baskets scuff the soil surface
                     sweeps, basket weeders, Spyders™, hilling discs,        without moving the soil. Basket weeders are belly
                     finger weeders, row-crop cultivators, and rolling       mounted, can be driven at moderate speeds, and
                     cultivators. Implements such as wiggle hoes and         are ideal for cultivating various greens, such as
                     brush weeders are designed for cultivating smaller      lettuce. Buddingh basket weeders are designed
                     crops between rows.                                     for cultivating two- to eight-row beds.
                     The sweep is one of the most basic tools used for       The Spyder is a ground-driven wheel with offset
                     cultivation. Sweeps are V-shaped blades on a shank      teeth angled to either throw soil toward or away
                     that is attached to a toolbar. Depending on the         from the row. Torsion weeders and spring-hoes
                     style of sweep, the blade faces forward and slices,     can be mounted to the Spyder to take care of



T
        ools for     drags, or buries the weeds while throwing soil into     weeds missed by the teeth of the Spyder.
        post-        the rows. The toolbar can be rear mounted, front
                                                                             Hilling discs are used to pull soil away from
                     mounted, or belly mounted to the tractor. Sweeps
        emergent     are usually set to a depth of one inch below the
                                                                             small crops or to hill (throw soil toward) larger
weed cultivation                                                             crops, such as potatoes and sweet corn.
                     soil surface, and the depth of the sweeps can be
are designed to be   adjusted to accommodate differences in elevation        Finger weeders are metal, cone-shaped wheels
used for specific    within a bed. Running a sweep too deeply can            mounted to the belly of a tractor. Protruding
                     disturb plant roots and throw more soil. However,       from the wheels are rubber-coated metal fingers
crop stages. As
                     sweeps set at a deeper depth can also be used           that cultivate around the stems of plants. The
a crop grows and     for hilling-up crops such as Irish potatoes, sweet      wheels are ground driven and cultivate closely
gains strength,      corn, and broccoli (Schonbeck, 2010). Shovels are       in rows.
more aggressive      narrower than sweeps and throw less soil.
                                                                             Rolling cultivators contain gangs of wheels with
tools that throw                                                             tines angled to either throw or hill soil into the
soil can be used.                                                            rows. The gangs swivel as they slice through the
                                                                             soil, digging up weeds. A fertilizer attachment can
                                                                             be used at the same time as a rolling cultivator for
                                                                             side-dressing crops (Grubinger, 1999).
                                                                             A row-crop cultivator is a metal frame with
                                                                             several shanks and cultivators attached. The
                                                                             shanks can be set for specific crop rows and
                                                                             throw the soil as the frame is pulled by a tractor.
                                                                             Shields can be mounted to protect the more
                                                                             delicate plants.
                                                                             Wiggle hoes are steered from the back of the
                                                                             implement as it is pulled by a tractor. They
                                                                             consist of half sweeps that face either to the left
                                                                             or the right and are attached to a shank. Wiggle
                                                                             hoes can be steered by the driver close to the
                                                                             crops, but this requires wide crop spacing.
                                                                             The European brush weeder sweeps weeds out of
                                                                             the soil. The brushes fit between narrow rows of
                                                                             crops, which are protected by a shield. As with
                     A basket weeder belly mounted to an Allis Chalmers G
                     at Pennypack Farm and Education Center in Horsham,      the wiggle hoe, a brush weeder is steered from
                     Pennsylvania. Photo: Andy Pressman, NCAT                the back of the implement by a driver.

Page 16                                                         Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale Intensive Crop Production
Flame weeders use propane burners that create
a flame of intense heat to control small weeds.
Flame weeding is often used to kill weeds in the
stale-seedbed technique, particularly for intensive
plantings of greens and herbs, because it does not
disrupt or throw the soil. There are different scales
of flame weeders, from handheld or backpack
flamers to tractor-mounted implements.
Soil steaming is an emerging technology that is
being utilized to manage disease, weeds, and pests
in fields and in high tunnels. The goal of soil
steaming is to pasteurize the soil, not to sterilize it,
by reaching temperatures between 140 and 180°C             Soil steaming at Picadilly
                                                             Farm, Winchester, New
for an extended period. This is accomplished by            Hampshire. Photos: Andy
using a boiler unit that fills a tarp laid over an                  Pressman, NCAT
area with steam or by directly injecting the steam
into the soil. While soil steaming offers a solution
for managing many pests, diseases, and weeds,
more research is needed before conclusions can be
drawn about the depth and breadth of the effects
of soil steaming on soil biology.

Harvest
Of course, like any operation, context is key, and
every farm will benefit from careful planning and
the design of workflows that make for a more
efficient and less redundant process. Farmers
should always ask themselves: How does this
piece of equipment work with my management                 There are so many harvest tools and implements
style and scale of production?                             out there, many of which are well known at the
                                                           larger scales of production. A few that work for
Let’s take an example of a simple yet often-
                                                           small- and mid-scale farms are harvest baskets,
overlooked and useful piece of equipment: storage
                                                           aprons, and bags, as well as knives, garden carts,
boxes. How many different brands and shapes
                                                           and snips. To borrow the suggestions made by
have you accumulated over the years? How much
                                                           Daniel Mays (2020) in his book The No-Till
time do you spend looking for lids to match the
                                                           Organic Vegetable Farm, when it comes to knives,
correct box? As they say, the devil is in the details,
and small time sucks like these can accumulate             there are many to choose from, but some farmers
drastically when summed across an operation.               have found that a single multipurpose knife
Storage boxes that have incorporated lids that can         with a serrated edge should be carried by each
also be nested inside one another or stacked when          farmworker and is best for general harvest needs.
filled may be a good solution worth considering.           For crops that require a more delicate touch and
                                                           that may have brittle or delicate stems (eggplant,
For those taking part in direct sales, who need            peppers, flowers, tomatoes, etc.) a snip with
to keep their produce cool, the typical and most           long, straight blades should do the trick. People
common route has been to purchase a refrigerated           harvesting crops that can be harvested while
vehicle. While this is a good option and one               standing (tomatoes, snap peas, other trellised
of the more reliable ways to transport delicate            crops, tree fruit, etc.) can benefit from the use of
produce across longer distances, there is a more           fruit-picking bags, which help with picking speed
cost-effective choice. Well-made and lightweight           and ergonomics. When it’s time to transport
insulated boxes made from recyclable materials             from the field to the wash/pack station, a garden
may be a suitable substitute for many wanting to           cart serves as a good bulk transporter for heavy
transport products from an on-farm refrigerator            produce or produce that has been accumulated
to the buyer or market.                                    at the end of the row.

ATTRA.NCAT.ORG                                                                                                    Page 17
                        There are also a couple of recent notable            scaled-up options, farmers don’t have to crawl
                        innovations that some will find particularly         around on hands and knees cutting each plant by
                        useful. Single-row potato diggers and tuber-         hand; an entire bed can be harvested in a fraction
                        digging ploughs can be attached to a small tractor   of the time.
                        or a two-wheeled tractor. These open the potential
                        for economically viable potato production at         Summary
                        smaller scales, particularly when thinking about
                                                                             Choosing the right tool or piece of equipment
                        more desirable and tastier cultivars.
                                                                             can greatly affect production efficiency and the
                        Additionally, greens harvesters have been a great    economic bottom line for the small-scale farmer.
                        innovation for the small farm producing salad        Investing in well-designed hand tools of good
                        mixes or “cut and come again” greens. Many small     quality enhances the farmer’s ability to maximize
                        farmers were priced out of salad mix production      production on an intensive scale. Using tractors
                        when innovations were made for larger growers        and implements designed for small-scale intensive
                        that saved on labor costs; the small farm just       crop production can increase crop quality and
                        couldn’t compete. Now, with several options          yields while reducing labor inputs. Such factors
                        for the small and mid-scale farmer, including        as soil type and crop selection play an important
                        the “Quick-cut-greens harvester” and similar         role in the utilization of farm equipment.


   Foggy Meadow Farm – Benson, Vermont
   Paul Horton and Sally Beckwith of Foggy Meadow Farm produce naturally grown vegetables and herbs on 4½
   acres in Benson, Vermont. Foggy Meadow is a year-round operation that direct markets its crops through farmers
   markets and restaurants. From its
   start in 2004, Foggy Meadow has
   invested in small-scale equipment
   and tools, which has resulted in
   the farm being able to continue
   producing at this scale and remain
   economically viable.
   Horton and Beckwith believe every
   farm should develop a reputation
   for growing certain crops. Foggy
   Meadow is known for its high-quality
   greens and carrots. Although most
   crops on the farm are transplanted,
   the farmers at Foggy Meadow direct-
   seed 1,000 row feet of salad mix and
   10,000 row feet of carrots each week
                                           Foggy Meadow Farm, Benson, Vermont. Photo: Courtesy of Sally Beckwith
   from March through September to
   ensure a continuous supply. Greens are grown in two 15-foot by 96-foot high tunnels during the spring and winter
   months, and tomatoes take root in these tunnels during the summer. The high tunnels are moved once or twice
   a year to new soil to help protect plants from soil salinity issues, pests, and disease.
   Field crops are grown in ¾-acre sections. This amounts to having six to seven sections, which allows Horton and
   Beckwith to plan for extensive crop rotations. As spring crops come out of the ground, some land becomes a
   stale seedbed, while other parcels are cover cropped or sheet mulched for use the following spring.
   The farm uses a 70-horsepower John Deere tractor for field tillage and bed preparation. Beds are prepared for
   planting using a combination of a five-shank chisel plow and a 70-inch rototiller. This creates beds for up to three
   crop rows, which are marked out in the bed using pins on a basket weeder. The Buddingh basket weeder is attached
   to a Farmall Cub—one of four tractors used for cultivation. There are two Farmall Super Cs, one with sweeps and
   hilling discs, and the other with shovels that are matched with the rows in each bed. In addition, a Farmall A tractor
   is set up with a 6-foot disc and harrow for planting cover crops. Having tractors set up with only one implement
   reduces the time and stress involved with switching implements on a single tractor. As Foggy Meadow Farm looks
   to produce more crops for winter markets, Horton is interested in purchasing another cultivating tractor with a
   toolbar set up for single-row crops.


Page 18                                                        Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale Intensive Crop Production
References
Coleman, Eliot. 1995. The New Organic Grower. Chelsea                 How to Use Implements on Your Small-Scale Farm. 2005.
Green Publishing, White River Junction, VT.                           By Rick Kubik. Motorbooks International, Minneapolis,
Grubinger, Vernon. 1999. Sustainable Vegetable Production             MN. 120p.
from Start-Up to Market. Natural Resource, Agriculture,                Describes how to use implements in detail, including their
and Engineering Service, Ithaca, NY.                                    function, how they are attached and removed from tractors,
                                                                        when to use them, and basic maintenance and repair.
Guerena, Martin. 2022. Soil Solarization and
Biosolarization. National Center for Appropriate                      Managing Weeds on Your Farm: A Guide to Ecological
Technology ATTRA Publication. attra.ncat.org/publication/             Strategies. 2022. By C.L. Mohler, J.R. Teasdale, and A.
soil-solarization-and-biosolarization/                                DiTommaso. SARE Handbook Series 16. SARE, College
Mays, Daniel. 2020. The No-Till Organic Vegetable Farm.               Park, MD. 416p.
Storey Publishing, North Adams, MA.                                     Provides in-depth information about dozens of agricultural
                                                                         weeds and the best ways to manage them.
Perkins, Richard. 2019. Regenerative Agriculture.
regenerativeagriculturebook.com                                       Sample Costs to Produce and Harvest Strawberries.
                                                                      2016. By M. P. Bolda, L. Tourte, J. Murdock, and D.A.
Schonbeck, Mark. 2010. Design the Cropping System
                                                                      Summer. University of California Agriculture and Natural
and Select Tools for Effective Weed Control. eXtension.
                                                                      Resources, Cooperative Extension and Agricultural
extension.org/pages/18531/design-the-cropping-system-and-
                                                                      Issues Center, UC Davis Department of Agricultural and
select-tools-for-effective-weed-control
                                                                      Resource Economics. coststudyfiles.ucdavis.edu/uploads/
Schwenke, Karl. 1991. Successful Small-Scale Farming: An              cs_public/e7/6d/e76dceb8-f0f5-4b60-bcb8-76b88d57e272/
Organic Approach. Storey Publishing, North Adams, MA.                 strawberrycentralcoast-2016-final2-5-1-2017.pdf
Volk, Josh. 2009. Tools that Make Direct Seeding                        Offers sample budget for labor, materials, equipment, and
Easier. Growing for Market. growingformarket.com/                        custom services to produce and harvest strawberries in the
articles/20090428_6                                                      Central Coast Region.
Wiswall, Richard. 2009. The Organic Farmer’s Business Handbook.       Steel in the Field – A Farmer’s Guide to Weed Management
Chelsea Green Publishing, White River Junction, VT.                   Tools. 1997. Edited by Greg Bowman. A publication of the
                                                                      Sustainable Agriculture Network (SAN), Beltsville, MD. 128p.
Further Resources                                                       Highlights 22 farms and how mechanical weed control works
                                                                         in their sustainable cropping systems.
Books and Publications
Build Your Own Farm Tools. 2021. By Josh Volk. Storey                 The Market Gardener. 2014. By Jean-Martin Fortier. New
Publishing, North Adams, MA. 207p.                                    Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, BC, Canada. 221p.
 Offers small-scale farmers an in-depth guide to building              A compendium of proven horticultural techniques and
  customized equipment that will save time and money and                 innovative growing methods.
  introduce much-needed efficiencies to their operations.
                                                                      Understanding Equipment Costs on the Small Commercial
Grower to Grower: Creating a Livelihood on a Fresh Market             Vegetable Farm. 2020. By M. Ernst., A. Butler, and
Vegetable Farm. 2005. By John Hendrickson. Center for                 T. Woods. University of Kentucky Center for Crop
Integrated Agricultural Systems. University of Wisconsin,             Diversification CCD-FS-18. University of Kentucky,
Madison, WI. cias.wisc.edu/wp-content/uploads/                        Lexington, KY. 13p. uky.edu/ccd/sites/www.uky.edu.ccd/
sites/194/2008/07/grwr2grwr1.pdf
                                                                      files/equipmentcosts.pdf
   Report that offers Wisconsin case studies to provide a basis
                                                                         A free publication that describes equipment commonly used
    for comparisons between farms on how to make farming a
                                                                          in small-scale vegetable production and details the methods
    quality livelihood.
                                                                          for calculating farm machinery costs per hour of use.
Growing for Market
P.O. Box 75                                                           What Size Tractor Do I Need? 2007. By Paul E. Sumner
Skowhegan, ME 04976                                                   and E. Jay Williams. University of Georgia Cooperative
800-307-8949                                                          Extension Pub. No. ENG07-003. University of Georgia,
www.growingformarket.com                                              Athens, GA. 8p. tractorbynet.com/forums/attachments/
  Subscription journal with news, advice, and resources for market   farm-tractor-pdf.240968
  farmers. Articles are written by market farmers and regularly         Provides information and data to help determine the
  include information on equipment and tools for market farms.           right-size tractor for a farm.

ATTRA.NCAT.ORG                                                                                                               Page 19
                                                                       A.M. Leonard, Inc.
Videos                                                                 241 Fox Drive
Vegetable Farmers and Their Sustainable Tillage Practices              Piqua, OH 45356
[DVD]. By V. Grubinger. 2007. University of Vermont                    800-543-8955
Extension. eorganic.org/node/3450                                      info@amleo.com
  Eleven farmers and researchers in three northeastern states         amleo.com
   describe their sustainable tillage practices and tools, from          Offers quality horticulture tools and equipment for nursery,
   mulches to ridge till to spaders.                                      landscape, and agriculture customers.
                                                                       BCS America
Vegetable Farmers and Their Weed-Control Machines
                                                                       14151 Fir Street
[DVD]. By V. Grubinger and M.J. Else. 1996. University of              Oregon City, OR 97045
Vermont Extension. eorganic.org/node/3448                              800-543-1040
  Nine farmers from three northeastern states describe their          info@bcsamerica.com
   tools for weed management, from cultivation to flaming.             bcsamerica.com
                                                                       BCS America offers two-wheel tractors and a wide selection of
                                                                       implements for BCS two-wheel tractors.
Websites
Farm Tractor Manuals                                                   Brookdale Fruit Farm
                                                                       38 Broad Street
farmtractormanuals.com
                                                                       Hollis, NH 03049
  Company offers a full line of parts, service/repair, and
                                                                       603-465-2240
   owners/operators farm tractor manuals for almost every make         tractortrv@aol.com
   or model of farm tractor.                                           brookdalefruitfarm.com
New York Center for Agricultural Medicine and Health                     Supplier of irrigation equipment and an assortment of
                                                                          equipment, including no-till vegetable seeders and transplanters.
nycamh.org
  The mission of NYCMH is “Enhancing agricultural and                 Buckeye Tractor Co
   rural health by preventing and treating occupational injury         P.O. Box 97, 11313 Slabtown Rd
   and illness.” NYCAMH provides services and education                Columbus Grove, Ohio 45830
   related to farm safety and farmer mental health.                    800-526-6791
                                                                       buckeyetractor@bright.net
TractorData.com                                                        buctraco.com
 For 20 years, TractorData.com has been providing tractor               Manufacturer of specialty agricultural equipment.
  specifications to farmers, homeowners, and the machinery industry.
                                                                       Carts and Tools
University of Vermont’s Ground Work Tractor Resource Hub               7171 NE Highway 20
blog.uvm.edu/groundwk/                                                 Corvallis, OR 97330
                                                                       541-286-3161
  The Ground Work Tractor Resource Hub brings together
                                                                       cartsandtools.com
  information and resources regarding basic tractor use and
                                                                         Manufacture and sales of small battery-powered tillers and
  operation, basic tractor maintenance, tractor safety, tractor           wheel hoes.
  purchase decision-making, and farm mechanization strategies.
                                                                       Carts Vermont
Yesterday’s Tractor Company                                            210 Pierce Road
ytmag.com                                                              St Johnsbury, VT 05819
  Website with active forums, photos, and extensive                   800-732-7417
   information about pre-1985 farm equipment.                          customerservice@cartsvermont.com
                                                                       cartsvermont.com
                                                                         A variety of yard carts built with the durability for outdoor,
Suppliers                                                                 continued use.
This is not a complete list and is to be used for educational          Clampco Fertilizer Applicators
purposes only. The ATTRA Sustainable Agriculture                       3400 Rancho Vista Ct
Program is operated by the National Center for Appropriate             Gilroy, CA 95020
Technology under a cooperative agreement with the                      408-706-0016
Rural Business-Cooperative Service, U.S. Department of                 info@clampcoapplicators.com
Agriculture. These organizations do not recommend or                   clampcoapplicators.com
endorse products, companies, or individuals.                             Applicators designed for use with dry organic fertilizers.

Page 20                                                                Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale Intensive Crop Production
Curly’s Ag                                                           flameengineering.com
1349 Old Rosevale Road                                                  Developer of flame weeders, including the Red Dragon®
Rosevale, QLD 4340                                                       Agricultural Flamers.
Australia: 0449 268 131
                                                                     Four Season Tools
info@curly’sag.com
                                                                     9615 Grandview Road
curlysag.com
                                                                     Kansas City, MO 64137
  Tools and equipment designed and manufactured for efficient
                                                                     816-444-7330
   and productive sustainable bio-intensive farming.
                                                                       Dealer of small farm tools for seeding, harvest, weed
Dailey’s Farm & Walk-Behind Tractors                                    management, and more.
141 Marvin Whitehead Rd.
                                                                     Gempler’s
Hohenwald, TN 38462
                                                                     P.O. Box 5175
931-295-9009
                                                                     Janesville, WI 53547-5175
  Retails BCS, Yagmur, and Grillo walk-behind tractors, as
                                                                     800-382-8473
   well as hand tools and seeders. The company also has locations
                                                                     customerservice@gemplers.com
   in Georgia and Indiana.
                                                                     gemplers.com
Easy Digging                                                           Farm supply company.
1400 Forum Blvd. #585
                                                                     Green Heron Tools
Columbia, MO 65203
                                                                     P.O. Box 71
573-823-3539
                                                                     New Tripoli, PA 18066
contact@easydigging.com
                                                                     610-844-5232
easydigging.com
                                                                     info@greenherontools.com
  Sells a variety of heavy-duty tools for gardening, landscaping,
                                                                     greenherontools.com
   construction, and small-scale agriculture.
                                                                       Maker of high-quality hand tools and equipment specifically
Earth Tools                                                             designed for women farmers.
1525 Kays Branch Road
                                                                     Grindstone Farm
Owenton, KY 40359
                                                                     780 County Route 28, Tinker Tavern Road
502-84-3988
                                                                     Pulaski, NY 13142
officemanager.earthtools@gmail.com
                                                                     customerservice@grindstonefarm.com
earthtoolsbcs.com
                                                                     grindstonefarm.com
  Offers BCS and Grillo walking tractors, compatible implements,
                                                                       Organic farm and manufacturer of root-crop washer.
   and a full line of hand-forged and professional garden tools.
                                                                     Growers & Co.
Farmers Friend
                                                                     3535 Boul. Ste-Anne B.300
99 Broome Lane
                                                                     Quebec, Qc, Canada, G1E 3L6
Centerville, TN 37033
                                                                     418-524-4443
931-583-0397
                                                                     info@growers.co
support@farmersfriendllc.com
                                                                     growers.co
farmersfriend.com
                                                                       Handcrafted products that address the need for reliable,
  Dedicated to equipping, educating, and inspiring growers to
                                                                        functional, and durable market gardening tools and clothing.
   change the world through regenerative agriculture.
                                                                        Founded by Jean-Martin Fortier.
Ferrari Tractor C.I.E.
                                                                     Growing Resources
P.O. Box 1045
                                                                     1711 Mud Lick Rd.
Gridley, CA 95948
                                                                     Glenville, WV 26351
530-846-6401
                                                                     304-462-7606
sales@ferrari-tractors.com
                                                                     info@flameweeders.com
ferrari-tractors.com
                                                                     flameweeders.com
  Dealer of new and used equipment for the small farm, with
                                                                        Flame weeders designed for market gardeners.
   expertise in carrying European-made two- and four-wheel
   compact tractors and implements.                                  Gulland Forge Broadforks
                                                                     Siler City, NC
Flame Engineering, Inc.
                                                                     502-682-8529
P.O. Box 577
                                                                     gullandbroadfork@me.com
LaCrosse, KS 67548
                                                                     gullandforge.com
800-255-2469
                                                                       Designer and fabricator of high-quality forged broadforks.
dragonmaster@flameengineering.com

ATTRA.NCAT.ORG                                                                                                                  Page 21
Harmony Farm Supply and Nursery                                         croproller.com
P.O. Box 460                                                            farmingwithhorses.com
Graton, CA 95444                                                          Manufacturer of roller crimpers for cover crops and durable,
707-823-9125                                                               workable, and economical horse-drawn farm equipment.
info@harmonyfarm.com
harmonyfarm.com                                                         Johnny’s Selected Seeds
  Offers a full range of tools and supplies for the small-scale farm.   955 Benton Avenue
                                                                        Winslow, ME 04901
Hida Tool & Hardware Company, Inc.                                      877-564-6697
1333 San Pablo Avenue                                                   communications@johnnyseeds.com
Berkeley, CA 94702                                                      johnnyseeds.com
800-443-5512                                                              Offers a complete line of tools for the gardener or commercial
hidatool@hidatool.com                                                      grower, including flame weeders, wheel hoes, seeders, and
hidatool.com                                                               hand tools.
  Specializes in Japanese handcrafted weeders, hoes, sickles,
   and cutting implements.                                              Kennco Manufacturing, Inc
                                                                        1105 3rd Street NE
Hillside Cultivator                                                     Ruskin, FL 33570
911 Disston View Drive                                                  800-645-2591
Lititz, Pennsylvania 17543                                              sales@kenncomfg.com
717-626-6194                                                            kenncomfg.com
sales@hillsidecultivator.com                                              Since 1973, Kennco Manufacturing has been designing raised
hillsidecultivator.com                                                     bed shapers and plastic layers and developing farm equipment
  Manufacturer and dealer of cultivation equipment for fruits             for small farm growers.
   and vegetables.
                                                                        Koskitie 185
HISCO Professional Tools
                                                                        FIN-45520 Kukkola
4320 North Cooper Ave.
                                                                        Tornio, Finland
Oklahoma City, OK 73118
                                                                        +358 16-472 000
405-524-2700
                                                                        Petri.leinonen@elomestari.fi
customerservice@hisco-okc.com
                                                                        elomestari.fi/english/english.htm
hiscotools.com
                                                                          Finnish company specializing in products for small-scale
  Professional-grade tools with reinforced fiberglass handles.
                                                                           sustainable farming. The company is the maker of the Weed
Hoss Tools                                                                 Master (a manual carrier for seeding, planting, flaming,
P.O. Box 429                                                               spraying, and hoeing) and the Crawler (a motorized, lay-
Norman Park, GA 31771                                                      down working cart for all horticultural work).
888-672-5536
Custserv@hosstools.com                                                  Kult Kress
hosstools.com                                                           717-984-8979
  Hoss Tools carries a complete line of high-quality garden            info@kult-kress.com
   tools, gardening supplies, vegetable seeds, and cover crop seeds.    kult-kress.com
                                                                          Manufacturer of efficient cultivation equipment including
Howland Tools                                                              the Kress Finger Weeder and Kress Robovator.
25 Elm Street
Shelburne Falls, MA 01370                                               Lee Valley Tools
413-776-1948                                                            P.O. Box 1780
info@howlandtools.com                                                   Ogdensburg, NY 13669
howlandtools.com                                                        800-267-8735
  Source for premium-quality hand tools made in the USA and            customerservice@leevalley.com
   imported from Europe. Howland stocks hand-crafted farm               leevalley.com
   and garden tools from SHW, Falci, DeWit, Ashfield Tools,               Offers an extensive inventory of gardening tools.
   Hoss Wheel Hoes, Council Tools Axes, and more.                       Market Farm Implement
I&J                                                                     257 Fawn Hollow Road
10 S New Holland Rd, Suite 2                                            Friedens, PA 15541
Gordonville, PA 17529                                                   814-443-1931
717-442-9451                                                            marketfarm.com
info@croproller.com                                                       Specializes in vegetable-crop machinery from tillage to harvest.

Page 22                                                                 Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale Intensive Crop Production
Meadow Creature                                                       Offers a full line of hand tools, growing supplies, irrigation
P.O. Box 2112                                                          and season-extension supplies, organic soil amendments, seed,
Vashon, WA 98070                                                       and pest and weed controls.
360-329-2250
                                                                    Purple Mountain Organics
sales@meadowcreature.com
                                                                    7120 Carroll Avenue
meadowcreature.com
                                                                    Tacoma Park, MD 20912
  Manufactures the Meadow Creature® Broadforks, the Avalon
                                                                    877-538-9901
   Cider Press, grub hoes, and other metal fabricated products.
                                                                    purplemountainorganics.com
Mechanical Transplanter Company                                       Offers a full line of high-quality tools and equipment for the
1150 Central Avenue                                                    small farm, including hand tools, walking tractors, compact
Holland, MI 49423                                                      tractors, and implements.
800-757-5268
mtc@mechanicaltransplanter.com                                      Rain-flo Irrigation
mechanicaltransplanter.com                                          929 Reading Rd.
  Offers a full range of manual and tractor-mounted                East Earl, Pennsylvania 17519
   equipment for tillage, planting, and cultivation.                717-445-3000
                                                                    rainfloirrigation.com
Morgan County Seeds                                                   Purveyor of vegetable planting equipment, vegetable growing
18761 Kelsay Road                                                      products, T-Tape drip tape for drip irrigation, plastic mulch,
Barnett, MO 65011                                                      portable water pumps, diesel powered water pumps, and
573-378-2655                                                           overhead crop irrigation.
errolahlers@reagan.com
morgancountyseeds.com                                               Rebel Tools
  A seed and supply store for home gardens, organic growing,       223B W. Walnut St.
   greenhouse operations, and commercial vegetable growing.         Lancaster, PA 17603
                                                                    717-288-7058
Neversink Farm                                                      susquehanna.apothecary@gmail.com
635 Claryville Road                                                 susquehannasustainability.com/garden-tools
Claryville, NY 12725                                                  Highly ergonomic forged tools; owned by Susquehanna
neversinkcustomerservice@gmail.com                                     Sustainable Enterprises.
neversinkfarm.com
  Offers a variety of tools for weeding and bed preparation.        Red Pig Tools
                                                                    12040 SE Revenue Road
Organic Growers Supply (FEDCO)                                      Boring, OR 97009
P.O. Box 520                                                        503-663-9404
Waterville, ME 04903                                                redpigtools@frontier.com
207-873-7333                                                        redpigtools.com
fedcoseeds.com                                                        Maker of forged-steel hand tools, including left-handed tools.
  Cooperative supplier of hand tools, orchard supplies,
   irrigation, and seed-starting supplies for the organic grower.   Ronnie Baugh Tractors
                                                                    P.O. Box 58007
OESCO, INC (Orchard Equipment & Supply Company)                     Raleigh, NC 27658
8 Ashfield Road                                                     256-655-8792
Conway, MA 01341                                                    horace@cleberllc.com
800-634-5557                                                        ronnietractors.com
info@oescoinc.com                                                     Distributer of the Oggùn tractor, an open-source, modern
oescoinc.com                                                           replica of the Allis G.
  In continuous operation since 1954, supplying growers,
  gardeners and green industry professionals with professional      Rogue Hoe
  grade machinery, tools, parts, and service.                       4360 Bado Road
                                                                    Cabool, MO 65689
Peaceful Valley Farm and Garden Supply                              417-962-5091
125 Clydesdale Court                                                sales@roguehoe.com
Grass Valley, CA                                                    roguehoe.com
888-784-1722                                                          Maker of hand-crafted hoes made from recycled agricultural
helpdesk@groworganic.com                                               disc blades that are sharpened on three sides.
groworganic.com


ATTRA.NCAT.ORG                                                                                                                Page 23
Seeds of Change                                                      Tilmore
P.O. Box 4908                                                        295 Kurzen Rd North,
Rancho Dominguez, CA 90220                                           Dalton, OH 44618
888-762-7333                                                         844-255-5864
seedsofchange.com                                                    info@tilmor.com
  Offers seeds, digging and cultivating tools, hand tools, rakes    tilmor.com
   and hoes, and seed-saving supplies.                                  Offers a variety of small farm implements for planting,
                                                                         cultivation, harvest, post-harvest, and more.
Small Farm Innovations
3701 State Highway 36, South                                         Tractor Tools Direct
Caldwell, TX 77836                                                   800 South 9th Street
979-200-1473                                                         Terre Haute, IN 47807
smallfarminnovations@hughes.net                                      260-225-3429
smallfarminnovations.com                                             info@tractortoolsdirect.com
  Supplier of compact tractors and farm implements for small        tractortoolsdirect.com
   acreages, including compact hay equipment.                          Offers a line of unique implements for compact tractors.
Small Farm Works                                                     Treffler-M@M
N1749 Yerges Road                                                    Molenstraat 4
Reeseville, WI 53579                                                 4364 AA Grijpskerke
608-620-5804                                                         Nederland
paperchainpots@gmail.com                                             +31(0) 630035123
smallfarmworks.com                                                   treffler@manatmachine.com
  Seller of the paper pot transplanter and associated accessories.   organicmachinery.net
Sioux Corporation                                                      A partnership between Treffler GmbH and Man@Machine
One Sioux Plaza                                                         for sales and promotion, specializing in Treffler machines
Beresford, SD 57004                                                     for farmers around the world. Team members are located
866-794-0848                                                            throughout the U.S. and can be found at organicmachinery.
email@sioux.com                                                         net/contact-us.
sioux.com                                                            Tuff-bilt Tractors Manufacturing, Inc.
  Manufacturer of steam units for soil steaming, sterilizing        2801 I Ave
   mushroom substrate, and agricultural plastic sterilization.       Walthill, NE 68067
Scythe Supply                                                        844-486-3268
496 Shore Road                                                       info@tuff-bilt.com
Perry, ME 04667                                                      tuff-bilt.com
207-853-4750                                                           Cultivating tractor designed for versatility and agility to
scythe@scythesupply.com                                                 meet the needs of landscape companies, small landowners,
scythesupply.com                                                        large farms with specific cultivation needs, farmers market
  Offers European style scythes, scythe blades, snaths,                producers, and organic farming.
   whetstones, hammers, anvils, and equipment.
                                                                     Two Bad Cats
Terrateck                                                            2631 N. Grove Street
600 Rue Adam Grunewald                                               Rutland , VT 05701802-775-8233
62136 Lestrem                                                        pete@twobadcatsllc.com
France                                                               twobadcatsllc.com
+33 (0)3 74 05 10 10                                                   Manufacturer of tools for the small farm, including dibblers
terrateck.com/en                                                        and weeding equipment.
  Design, manufacturing, and distribution of tools for market
                                                                     US Small Farm Equipment
   gardening.
                                                                     307-431-9555
Threadlite Broadforks                                                ussmallfarm@yahoo.com
920-332-6557                                                         ussmallfarm.com
treadlitebroadforks.com                                                Manufacturer and seller of potato planters, diggers, and
  Broadforks in a range of sizes and configurations.                    custom farm equipment.


Page 24                                                              Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale Intensive Crop Production
Valley Oak Tool Company                                               Woodward Crossings
P.O. Box 301                                                          178 Jackson Hill Road
Chico, CA 95926                                                       Aaronsburg, PA 16820
530-342-6188                                                          814-349-4484
david@valleyoaktool.com                                               mail@woodwardcrossings.com
valleyoaktools.com                                                    woodwardcrossingscountrybasics.com
  Specializes in high-quality wheel hoes and broadforks.                Inventors of the Wunderbar Module, strive to present
                                                                        economical and resourceful products for the gardener and
Wasco Hardfacing Co                                                     land owner. Sells anything from hay bale feeders to pallet
P.O. Box 2395                                                           forks to wood chippers and log grapples to spreaders, bale
Fresno, CA 93745                                                        choppers, rototillers, sprayers, garden seeders, skidding
888-485-5860                                                            winches, wood processors, and more.
Rancemess@ag1.net
wascohardfacing.com                                                   Yağmur Traktör Industry and Trade Inc
  Equipment for tillage, cultivators, rippers, and plows, with       İ.O.S.B Sefaköy Sanayi Sitesi 13.Blok No:9
   locations in CA and ID.                                            Başakşehir/İstanbul, TÜRKİYE
Wegners                                                               +90 (850) - 340 - 1314
814 S. College Street                                                 yagmurtraktor.com/en
Myerstown, PA17067                                                      Produces and exports 2-wheel drive and 4-wheel drive diesel
800-451-5240                                                             garden tractors under the brand name of Agrifarm. Also
jkline@wengers.com                                                       makes Blitz brand two-wheel tractors.
wengers.com
  Specializes in used tractor parts and skid loader parts, as well
   as farm equipment sales.




ATTRA.NCAT.ORG                                                                                                                Page 25
Appendix: Examples of estimated equipment needs for
vegetable farms of various sizes
                          Power                                                                      Post-
            Seed                         Direct
  Scale                 source and                    Equipment      Cultivation    Harvesting      harvest        Delivery
           starting                     seeding
                          tillage                                                                   handling

                                                                                                                  Everyday
          Small hoop    Rototiller      Direct                      Wheel hoe,                                    vehicle,
                                                      Backpack                     Field knives,   Bulk tank,
          house, grow   or walking     seeders                      hand hoes,                                    pickup
   0-2                                                sprayer,                     hand boxes,     canopy,
          lights,       tractor,       (Single and/                 digging                                       truck
  acres                                               irrigation,                  buckets,        packing
          planting      custom         or multiple                  forks,                                        (with
                                                      tools                        carts           containers
          trays         work           row)                         spades                                        topper)
                                                                                                                   or van

          1,000 sq.
                        16-40 hp
          ft. green-                                                               Potato
                        tractor, with                                                              Roller track
          house, cold                                 1-row trans-                 digger,
                        creeper                                                                    conveyor,
   3-6    frames,                     Plate           planter,     Cultivating     bed lifter,
                        gear, power                                                                hand carts,    Cargo van
  acres   field                       seeder          irrigation,  tractor         wagon,
                        steering,                                                                  walk-in
          tunnels,                                    more tools                   more boxes,
                        high-                                                                      cooler
          planting                                                                 buckets
                        clearance
          trays

          Additional                                               Tool bar
                        40-60 hp                                                                   Barrel
          cold                                        2-row trans- implements:                                    1-ton truck
   7-10                 tractor,       Precision                                   More field      washer,
          frames,                                     planter,     beet knives,                                   with refrig-
  acres                 chisel plow,   belt seeder                                 crates          spinner,
          planting                                    sprayer      basket                                         eration
                        spader                                                                     pallet jack
          trays                                                    weeder



                                                                    Sweeps
                                                                    (Besserides),
                        80 hp                                                                      Wash line,
                                                                    Buddingh
                        tractor                                                                    larger
                                                                    finger
                        with loader    Nibex or       Irrigation,                  Asa lift,       cooler,
   20 +   2,000 sq. ft.                                             weeders,                                      Refriger-
                        bucket         Monosem        bed shaper,                  harvest         packing
  acres   greenhouse                                                flame                                         ated truck
                        and forks,     seeder         mulch layer                  wagon           shed and
                                                                    weeder,
                        compost                                                                    loading
                                                                    potato hiller,
                        spreader                                                                   dock
                                                                    2nd cultivat-
                                                                    ing tractor




Page 26                                                        Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale Intensive Crop Production
Notes




ATTRA.NCAT.ORG   Page 27
                                         Equipment and Tools for Small-Scale Intensive
                                         Crop Production
                                         By Andy Pressman, Sustainable Agriculture Specialist
                                         Published September 2011, Updated April 2023
                                         by Andy Pressman and Omar Rodriguez,
                                         NCAT Agriculture Specialists © NCAT
                                         Tracy Mumma, Editor • Amy Smith, Production
                                         This publication is available
                                         on the Web at:
                                         ATTRA.NCAT.ORG
                                         IP417
                                         Slot 411
                                         Version 040323                    SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE




Contact Us! ATTRA.NCAT.ORG • Toll-free: 800-346-9140 • Email: askanag@ncat.org
