Wolf Safety
In Alaska




 Living safely in wolf country

                             Photo: Sue Steinacher




From the
Division of Wildlife Conservation
of the
Alaska Department of Fish & Game

       2008
Wolf Safety in Alaska
How to live safely in wolf country


    2008                 Project Manager
                         Mike Taras


                         Editor
                         Mark McNay
                         Mike Taras

                         Reviewers
                         Scott Brainerd
                         Sue Steinacher
                         Cathie Harms




       The Alaska Department of Fish and Game (ADF&G) administers all programs and activities free
       from discrimination based on race, color, national origin, age, sex, religion, marital status, pregnancy,
       parenthood, or disability. The department administers all programs and activities in compliance with
       Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Title II of the
       Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, and Title IX of the
       Education Amendments of 1972.
       If you believe you have been discriminated against in any program, activity, or facility please write:
               •ADF&G ADA Coordinator, P.O. Box 115526, Juneau, AK 99811-5526
               •U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 4401 N. Fairfax Drive, MS 2042, Arlington, VA 22203
               •Ofﬁce of Equal Opportunity, U.S. Department of the Interior, 1849 C Street NW MS
       5230, Washington DC 20240.
       The department’s ADA Coordinator can be reached via phone at the following numbers:
               •(VOICE) 907-465-6077
               •(Statewide Telecommunication Device for the Deaf) 1-800-478-3648
               •(Juneau TDD) 907-465-3646
               •(FAX) 907-465-6078
       For information on alternative formats and questions on this publication, please contact the following:
       Publications Specialist, ADF&G/Division of Wildlife Conservation, P.O. Box 115526, Juneau, AK
       99811-5526, or call 907-465-4176.
1.      Intro
There are thousands of wolves in Alaska and thousands of people who live, work and enjoy outdoor activities
in wolf country. Although wolves must make their living by preying on large animals, aggression by wolves
toward people is much less common than aggressive behavior by other large animals such as bears or even
moose. Yet there are instances when wolves can threaten or injure people and pets.

A basic introduction to wolf behavior is presented here to help you understand and avoid the potential dangers
of wolf-human encounters.


2.      Aggression During Human–Wolf Encounters
A published review of wolf-human encounters in North America (McNay 2002a,b) revealed that the reported
incidence of aggression by wolves is very low, but it has increased in recent years. For example, there was
only 1 case of unprovoked wolf aggression documented between 1900 and 1969, but 18 cases of unprovoked
aggression toward people between 1969 and 2000. Since 2000 there have been several more cases of
injuries inﬂicted by wild wolves on people in both Alaska and Canada, and in 2005 a young man in northern
Saskatchewan was killed by wolves. That increasing trend in wolf-caused injuries is occurring as wolves
increase and reoccupy areas where they were formerly removed. Human populations are also increasing, and
human activities such as camping, hiking, sightseeing and industrial developmental are increasing in areas
occupied by wolves.

Most of the recent cases of wolf aggression occurred where wolves were protected such as national, state, or
provincial parks, or near large industrial sites located in remote wilderness areas (mines, oil ﬁelds, logging
camps).


3.       Wolf Defensive Behavior
When people are injured during encounters with bears, it is often the result of defensive behavior by the bear.
A bear is either defending cubs, is aggressively defending a kill, or is surprised at close range and is defending
itself out of fear. That is not the case with wolves. Unlike a powerful bear that can successfully ﬁght its way out
of a sticky situation; wolves rely on their speed and quickness to insure their safety. Sometimes when people
inadvertently stumble onto an occupied wolf den the adult wolves will dash toward them, then veer off suddenly
with sharp barks and snorts. Commonly the wolves then retreat and howl repeatedly, but they may rush toward
the intruder again. The vocalization behavior is very consistent when wolves are defending a den. If you are
surrounded by wolves at close range that are howling or barking at your presence, you almost certainly are near
a den or rendezvous site where young wolves are resting. One group of hikers was so taken by the loud barking
and rushing behavior of a wolf pack that they climbed nearby trees until the wolves withdrew, but an equally
effective strategy would likely have been to retreat back along their original route. There are no documented
attacks resulting in human injury by wolves defending a den.

Similarly, it is not typical for wolves to aggressively defend kill sites to a point of attack. Although they may
initially growl or brieﬂy run at a human intruder, wolves commonly retreat into concealing cover when ﬂushed
from a kill and remain silent.

The only time when wolves have acted extremely aggressively in self defense is when they are cornered by
being caught in a trap, or by being pursued to the point of contact by a snow machine, aircraft or boat. An
injured wolf may also act aggressively if it feels that it is at a point of last resort in its self defense and it is
unable to escape because of its injury.
4.     Aggressive Behaviors Associated with Habituation and Food
       Conditioning
Where animals are protected or where humans by choice act passively toward the animals, the animals
gradually lose their natural avoidance response to people. This is called habituation. It is a common behavioral
trait among large herbivores (i.e. moose, caribou and sheep), bears, foxes, ground squirrels and many birds
in National, State, and Provincial parks. It can also occur with wolves. Habituated wolves are “comfortable”
around people and tolerate close approaches by people. The wolves may even initiate approaches toward
people, seemingly out of curiosity or a desire to interact. Ironically, wolves that exhibit those behaviors are
actually the most likely to act aggressively. Among documented cases of wolves that injured people, the wolves
often had a history of repeatedly acting disinterested or even “friendly” toward people at close distances in the
weeks or even months before they become aggressive.

Habituation involves a relaxation of inhibitions and when wolves feel comfortable around people they are more
likely to direct their natural social behaviors toward people. As pack animals wolves have a well developed
social repertoire of behaviors that include play behaviors as well as aggressive behaviors designed to dominate
or deﬂect the aggression of competitors within their pack. Habituated wolves may therefore initiate an
aggressive behavior toward a person just as they might against a pack mate. People who have been injured by
those types of wolf behavior are totally surprised by the unexpected aggression.

Wolves also quickly learn that human activity can provide a source of food in garbage cans, landﬁlls, or from
campground food scraps. When wolves begin to seek out human foods near human use areas they have become
food conditioned. Some food conditioned animals are not totally habituated. For example they may only come
into campgrounds or near garbage at night or during daylight if people are absent.

Food conditioning provides a fast track to habituation because it puts wolves near humans, and if the human
response to the presence of wolves is passive, habituation is fostered. Some food conditioned animals may
appear quite friendly, but may exaggerate their approach behavior if they do not get an expected response from
people. This behavioral response is common in all animals, even in people. For example, if you knock on your
friendly neighbor’s door thinking they are at home you expect your neighbor to answer the door. If they don’t
answer, you will knock again, but louder and longer this time. Similarly, if a wolf is fed by people it begins
to expect food handouts. If that wolf approaches a person but gets no food, it then exaggerates its behavior by
approaching closer and acting more willful (i.e. it knocks louder!). That willful behavior can suddenly turn to
aggression and that type of aggression is probably responsible for many of the bites that wolves have inﬂicted
on people in recent years.

Like wolves, other wildlife such as moose or bears also become habituated or food conditioned and then
become aggressive toward people. Those animals are usually killed for public safety reasons. Nobody wins with
food conditioned wildlife.


5.     Rabid Wolves
The rabies virus is present in Alaska’s wolf population along northern and western coastal areas where wolves
interact with dense populations of foxes. The fox populations serve as a reservoir for the rabies virus. Usually
only a small number of wolves are affected, but some population declines in wolves have been attributed to
rabies in northwestern Alaska. Attacks of people by rabid wolves have been documented in arctic areas of
Alaska and Canada but not in Interior, south central or southeastern Alaska.

Rabid wolves may attack viciously or they may exhibit slow and ponderous, but persistent attempts to bite. A
rabies infection causes a loss of inhibition in the affected animal and many infected animals also show other
signs of physical disability. Because of the presence of rabies in arctic areas many wolves that exhibit fearless
behavior near villages are often killed in fear of rabies, but most of those wolves are probably not rabid, instead
they have had little or no prior experience with people and are simply curious.

The rabies virus causes a variety of symptoms that include:
•       Loss of fear of humans
•       Glazed, poorly focused stare
•       Frequent shifting of aggressive behavior from one object to another.
•       Stubborn, undeterred approach
•       Staggering walk or trot
•       Biting the ground or other inanimate objects such as sticks, or rocks.
•       Large number of porcupine quills in the mouth or neck
•       Lack of reﬂex response if struck by a thrown object
•       Excessive salivation

You can become infected with rabies if you are bitten or licked by an infected animal, or if saliva or brain and
nerve tissue from an infected animal comes into contact with your eyes, broken skin (cuts or scratches), or
mucous membranes such as lips, mouth or nasal passages. Rabies is almost always fatal in humans and
animals, although symptoms may not show for several weeks. Any person exposed to an animal that may have
rabies should immediately contact their local health care provider.

If you suspect this has happened and you must kill an animal you think has rabies do not shoot it in the head
or cut into the carcass. A diagnosis of rabies in wolves is accomplished by taking samples from the head of the
animal so a suspected rabid wolf should not be killed by striking it or shooting it in the head.

Samples to collect

You should bring the animal fresh to the local clinic, hospital or biologist. If there is going to be a delay in
shipping, the animal may be frozen to preserve it.

For foxes, double-bag the entire animal in strong plastic garbage bags and put in a leak-proof container. Contact
the nearest Fish and Game ofﬁce or the Virology Unit in Fairbanks. Frozen specimens are okay. For larger
animals, do not cut into carcasses suspected of being rabid. Contact your nearest Fish and Game biologist.

Do not eat the meat from an animal that has rabies, and do not feed any of it to dogs.




    For more detailed information about rabies, submitting carcasses and carcass
    disposal see the Alaska Division of Public Health
    Alaska Rabies Prevention and Control Manual
    http://www.epi.alaska.gov/id/rabies/RabiesControlManual.pdf
    Prepared by the Alaska Section of Epidemiology

    Main telephone number         907-269-8000
    After-hours number            800-478-0084
6.       Wolf Aggression Toward Dogs
In their natural environment wolves defend territories against other wolves; it is common for wolves to kill
other wolves in territorial disputes. Wolves are also very aggressive toward domestic dogs. Although encounters
between a single wolf and a domestic dog sometimes result in play behavior, encounters between several
wolves and a dog usually result in the wolves aggressively attacking the dog. Wolves may act aggressively
towards dogs even when people are present, and even when dogs are on a leash or being held by their owner.
Among documented attacks on dogs, the wolves commonly directed their attack solely at the dog and not the
pet’s owner.
Although many people enjoy taking their dogs on camping trips in wilderness areas where the dogs are allowed
to run free, dog owners must recognize that this practice places their pet at some additional level of risk. Dogs
that are pursued by wolves or bears will probably try to retreat to their owner, thereby bringing the threat
closer to the people. A safer practice is to maintain control of pets within sight of the owner during wilderness
excursions.
In the recent past there have been several cases where wolves have come into cities, towns and villages around
the State and have killed and eaten dogs that were either off leash or chained outside. Most of those cases
occurred in winter and were related to low numbers or low vulnerability of wolves’ natural prey. However,
anytime a wolf pack takes residence near a human settlement, dogs or livestock may be preyed upon. Therefore
it is important for pet and livestock owners to take basic precautions when wolves are known to occupy nearby
areas. Those precautions could include:

1.       Indoor shelter options for animals during hours of darkness. For example dog houses, sheds, or barns.
2.       Chain link fences around dog yards and overwinter livestock areas.
3.       Electric fences around dog yards and livestock areas.
4.       Lights around dog yards and livestock areas.
5.       Clearing brush to provide a perimeter clear of concealing vegetation around dog yards or livestock areas.
6.       Noise makers.



7.       Wolf Safety
Don’t make your home or camp attractive to wolves (or bears).

     •   Keep a clean camp; don’t dispose of food by dumping into the campﬁre.
     •   Don’t leave unwashed cooking utensils around your camp.
     •   Keep food in animal proof containers.
     •   Don’t leave garbage unsecured.
     •   Don’t cook food near your tent or sleeping area.
     •   Don’t allow pets to freely roam away from your camp.
     •   Don’t bury garbage, pack it out.

In the rare event that you do have an encounter with an aggressive wolf:

     • Don’t run, but act aggressively stepping toward the wolf and yelling or clapping your hands if it tries to
        approach.
     • Do not turn your back toward an aggressive wolf, but continue to stare directly at it. If you are with a
       companion and more than one wolf is present place yourselves back to back and slowly move away from
        the wolves.
     • Retreat slowly while facing the wolf and act aggressively.
       • Stand your ground if a wolf attacks you and ﬁght with any means possible (use sticks, rocks, ski poles,
         ﬁshing rods or whatever you can ﬁnd).
       • Use air horns or other noise makers.
       • Use bear spray or ﬁrearms if necessary.
       • Climb a tree if necessary, wolves cannot climb trees.

Should Children play outside when wolves have been sighted nearby?

It is important to remember that we live in wolf and bear country. Commonly, wolves and bears may pass
through our woods, our neighborhoods, or our yards without our knowledge because most animals are secretive.
This is a normal occurrence and is not something to be alarmed about.

If however, there is a repeated number of sightings of wolves or they are showing unusual behavior such as
attacking dogs, approaching homes, or showing a lack of fear, then the following are some sensible precautions:

   •     Keep your children close when wolves or bears are known to be in the vicinity of your home. Children
         should remain close to adults when outside, particularly small children. The probability of a predatory
         attack by a wolf on a child is very small, but is greatest for very small children that are alone near
         concealing vegetation or terrain. When camping in wilderness areas travel with your family as
         a group keeping children comfortably close, do not leave children alone in camps even
         when motor camping in established campgrounds of government parks or recreation areas.

   •     Although thousands of Alaskan children wait in the dark at bus stops every morning without incident, it
         is appropriate for school bus stops to be supervised by an adult when bears or wolves have been sighted
         nearby.

   •     Noise makers (such as air horns) may be helpful and should be placed in handy locations if you live in
         an area that is frequented by wolves or bears.

Questions?
Call the Alaska Department of Fish and Game Regional Ofﬁces to report unusual wolf activity or for more
information.
    • Fairbanks: (907) 459-7206
    • Juneau/Douglas: (907) 465-4265
    • Anchorage: (907) 267-2257
    • Nome: (907) 443-2271

Resources:

   •     McNay, Mark E.2002a. Wolf-human interactions in Alaska and Canada: a review of the case history.
         Wildlife Society Bulletin, 30(3):831-843.

   •     McNay, Mark E. 2002b. A case history of wolf-human encounters in Alaska and Canada. Alaska
         Department of Fish and Game, Technical Bulletin 13.

   •     ADF&G, 2001. A Field Guide to Common Wildlife Diseases and Parasites in Alaska.
