                                            THE BAKERY
I. GOAL:
      The students should learn how the bakery at Sutter's Fort functioned and produced bread
      emphasizing cooking techniques, tools, and ingredients of the 1840s.

II.       OBJECTIVES:
      A. The students will be able to interpret the interrelationship of various fort activities related to
         the bakery, such as the wheat fields, granaries, grist mill and cooper shop.

      B. All students will participate in the variety of techniques involved in bread making and
         churning butter, such as following directions, measuring, kneading, cutting, and churning.

      C. The students will mix and bake the adobe bread used at Sutter's Fort in the 1840's.

      D. The students will churn the butter needed for the food preparations in the bakery and/or
         kitchen.

      E. The students will participate with an adult in fire building and maintaining the proper oven
         temperature needed for baking in an adobe oven.

      F. The students shall recognize how modem technology has saved man time and energy in
         meeting his everyday needs.

III. THE BAKERS:
      The Sutter's Fort bakery was primarily run by two men employed by John Sutter, J. Davis and
      David Dutton. Since ovens were scarce, the use of the bakery and ovens probably were used
      for personal use by the immigrants on occasion. The women might possibly have infiltrated
      here, when the men were otherwise occupied fighting in the Bear Flag Rebellion, as good
      cooks were in demand.

      Sutter's cooks and bakers often served double-duty. Cooking in the 1840's was a skilled craft,
      and baking was probably the most inexact science of them all. So a man or woman who could
      cope with vague measurements and instructions and still turn out a tasty product, was a
      person to be cultivated.

IV. THE PLACE:
   Early maps show the bakery in more or less the same location currently occupied. While
   easterners were using either outside beehive ovens ("hornitos" or "hornos" in Spanish
   parlance), brick ovens built into the wall of the kitchen, or in a bakehouse, things were different
   in California. In California, the style was that of the beehive oven, but was usually built outside
Bakery                                         Page 1 of 16                              Rev 10/08
   or occasionally in a comer of a room. Evidence indicates that Sutter's oven was outside and
   was indeed the adobe "hornito" used by locals. A terse comment in October, 1845, notes that
   "The oven fell down today." This indicates an adobe "hornito", as outside ovens are adversely
   affected by firing after the start of the rainy season, when the adobe becomes damp.
   Presumably, the oven was periodically reconstructed, when disasters of this sort befell it.

   Sutter baked not only to answer the needs of the fort, but also made "ship's bread", a hard
   cake of baked flour and water, to sell to the shipping trade. At this period, he was raising and
   milling his own flour and was making plans for a water-driven grist mill. His supply was
   abundant enough that he sold both wheat and "ship's bread" to the Russian fur traders.

V. THE CRAFT:
   The bread baked at the fort, was the common plain bread of the 1840's. It was not sourdough,
   nor did it use ingredients such as oil, which became a vogue in the 20th century. It was made
   with either sponge or leaven. Sponge has much in common with modern sourdough starter,
   except the yeast was not allowed to go sour. Until the first tasty sourdough sponge showed up
   around the time of the gold rush (at least post-1850), the mark of a bad baker was soured
   sponge, which tasted spoiled. (Sponge is to sourdough as wine is to vinegar: both products are
   caused by yeast, but with widely varying results). Leaven was cakes of flour and sponge which
   had been allowed to dry. These could be comfortably transported in a flour sack or barrel.

   What if you did not have any sponge or leaven? Then you had to "catch" the wild yeasts. To do
   this, you made a batter out of flour or potato gruel (a popular yeast medium), and set it in an
   open bowl in a warm place for a couple of days. This allowed the wild yeasts to settle into the
   batter. After a few days, the batter either bubbled and smelled yeasty, meaning you had caught
   a good strain, or bubbled and smelled spoiled and sour, which meant you had to throw it out
   and start all over again. Baking was always a challenge!

   Everyday bread often varied, depending on what ingredients were on hand. Plain bread for
   everyday use was usually made of unbolted (whole wheat) flour and sponge starter, with salt
   and possibly a little milk, a little sugar, or a pinch of mace thrown in for interest. An enterprising
   cook might also add such items as the leftover porridge from breakfast ("waste not, want not"
   was the pioneer motto) and get a delicious variant. Best bread, for Sunday or company, might
   be made of white flour and include such extravagances as eggs, cream, or honey.




Bakery                                        Page 2 of 16                                 Rev 10/08
VI. Fire Builders:
    As a fire-builder for the oven, you should be able to safely start and maintain a fire, as well as
    keep the temperatures consistent to provide for effective baking of the bread.

    MATERIALS TO BRING:                                MATERIALS AVAILABLE AT FORT
       1. Wood (tinder, kindling, small logs--            1. Wheelbarrow
          hard, dry wood only)                            2. Shovel
       2. Matches                                         3. Rake
                                                          4. Bucket for water
                                                          5. 2 Burlap sacks
                                                          6. Broom
PROCEDURE:

NOTE: ADULT SUPERVISION SHOULD BE PRESENT AT ALL TIMES.

STARTING THE FIRE:
   1. Allow 3 to 4 hours to prepare the oven to the proper heat.
   2. Choose a small log about 4" in diameter and 16-18" long and place it about 2' inside the
      door opening.
   3. Build tinder up against the log in a leaning way. Light.
   4. Add additional twigs or kindling as the flame rises.
   5. Add additional logs slowly as the flame rises.
   6. Keep the flames oven-door high (no higher!) for the first two hours and keep adding logs
      until the temperature is approximately 500 degrees.
   7. After the first two hours maintain even hot coals over the entire floor of the oven to ensure
      uniform oven temperature.

MAINTAINING THE HEAT:
   1. Once the fire is ready (and the bread has been put on the peels for the second rise), pull
      the fire with the rake from the oven.
   2. Shovel into the firepit beside the oven.
   3. Soak broom in water and sweep excess ash from the oven floor.
   4. Allow the oven to cool to about 400 degrees.*
   5. Soak a burlap sack in water and place in the back oven vent.
   6. Seal the front oven opening by first wrapping a wet piece of burlap around the metal door
      and then placing the door in place.


SAFETY SUGGESTIONS:
   1. The adult should be present at all times when the fire is going.
   2. The adult should light the fire and build up to log stage.
   3. Always have a bucket of water near the oven.
   4. Only the adult should rake the fire from the oven. Students should be about 15 ft. away.

Bakery                                        Page 3 of 16                               Rev 10/08
* To check the oven's temperature, throw a handful of cornmeal on the oven floor after removing
the fire. If it burns, so will your bread, and the oven is too hot. Let it cool a few minutes and try
again. The corn meal should turn brown, but not black after a minute or so.




                 BUILDING YOUR FIRE IN THE BEEHIVE OVEN




Bakery                                        Page 4 of 16                                Rev 10/08
                                              Bread
TASK: The bakery will provide the bread that will be used at the fort as well as the other bakery
items.

 NOTE: Two batches of bread will produce 8 loaves of bread. This should be enough for a class
      of 30 students and the volunteers. (The 15 lbs. of white & 10 lbs. of whole wheat flour is
      enough flour make 8 loaves of bread, 2 batches of cinnamon rolls, oatmeal cookies &
      gingersnaps. The yeast & milk would be enough for the bread & cinnamon rolls as well.)

MATERIALS TO BRING:                                MATERIALS AVAILABLE AT THE FORT:
   1. 15 lbs. unbleached flour                        1. Large wooden, metal, and crockery
   2. 10 lbs. whole wheat flour                          mixing bowls
   3. Vegetable oil (small bottle)                    2. Wooden spoons
   4. Salt (1 box)                                    3. Kneading boards
   5. Sugar (1 box of sugar)                          4. Cutting boards
   6. Yeast (12 pkg. Quick-Rising)                    5. Knives
   7. Milk (2 pints)                                  6. Peels (paddles) for moving bread
   8. Polenta (Coarse ground cornmeal, 2
       cups)
   9. Dish towels
   10. Dish soap
   11. Dish cloth
   12. Measuring spoons
   13. Measuring cups
   14. Hot pads

RECIPE:
Dissolve in a bowl:
    2 packages of yeast
    2 1/2 cup warm water
Add:
         1/3 cup cooking oil
         1/2 cup sugar
Mix the above.
Let rest 10 minutes.
Add:
         3 tsp. salt
         1/2 cup milk
         4 cups whole wheat flour
         1 cup white flour
Knead until smooth, adding up to 3 cups white flour.
Let rise until double.
Divide into 4 loaves and let rise ½ hour.
Bake at 375 degrees for 20 minutes.
Bakery                                       Page 5 of 16                              Rev 10/08
                                        Cinnamon Rolls
For approximately 30 students, you will need to have two batches of cinnamon rolls.(This means 4
of the basic bread recipes). That should give you enough cinnamon rolls for breakfast for the
students and volunteers.

INGREDIENTS:

2 batches of the bread recipe (same ingredients as for the bread)
1 can cinnamon
1 can nutmeg
1 Ib. box white sugar
1 box raisins
1 lb. butter or margarine or butter that you churned
1 bag nuts (optional)
1 jar honey

MATERIALS TO BRING:                                  MATERIALS AVAILABLE AT THE FORT:
All ingredients mentioned above                      Mixing tools (same as for the bread)
Dental floss for cutting the rolls                   4 flat baking sheets
Dish towels for covering the rolls

RECIPE:

    •    Make the bread recipe as you would for bread. When you divide the dough into four parts
         for the bread, take one part and pat or roll the dough into a flat rectangular piece
         approximately 1/4" thick.
    •    Spread a thin layer of butter all over the surface except for a 1 1/2" space along length of
         one side.
    •    Sprinkle the buttered area with sugar.
    •    Sprinkle the buttered and sugar area with cinnamon.
    •    Sprinkle lightly with nutmeg.
    •    Sprinkle with raisins and nuts.
    •    Sprinkle with sugar again.
    •    Roll the dough starting with the buttered side to the side without butter. Paste edge that is
         not buttered with buttermilk and place against the roll.
    •    Use the dental floss to cut the rolls approximately 2" wide. (Put the dental floss under the
         roll, cross the floss and pull.)
    •    Place flat on a greased cookie sheet and let raise.
    •    Bake until brown (approx. 10 – 15 min.)
    •    Remove from oven and pour honey over the top of the cinnamon rolls.
    •    Remove the rolls from the sheets before they are cool.


Bakery                                        Page 6 of 16                               Rev 10/08
                                            Cookies
RAISIN OATMEAL COOKIES (4-5 dozen)

1 cup shortening or margarine
 1 cup dark brown sugar
1 cup white sugar
2 eggs
1/2 cup dark molasses
 2 teaspoons vanilla
2 cups flour
1/2 teaspoon baking powder
 1 teaspoon baking soda
1 teaspoon salt
1 1/2 teaspoon cinnamon
2 cups oatmeal, regular or instant
 1 cup raisins
1 cup chopped walnuts

Cream shortening and sugars. Add eggs, molasses and vanilla. Sift together flour, baking powder,
baking soda, salt and cinnamon and add to creamed mix. Fold in oatmeal, raisins and walnuts. Let
stand a few minutes or overnight. Drop by teaspoonfuls on ungreased cookie sheets and press
down slightly.

Bake at 350 degrees for 10 to 12 minutes, until lightly browned. Allow to stand barely 1/2 minute
before removing from cookie sheets.

GINGERSNAPS

3/4 cup margarine                        2 teaspoons baking soda
1 cup sugar                              1 teaspoon ground cinnamon
4 tablespoons molasses                   1 teaspoon ground cloves
1 egg                                    1 teaspoon ground ginger
2 cups flour
bowl of sugar for topping

Cream margarine and sugar. Stir in molasses and egg. Sift together dry ingredients and beat into
shortening mixture until smooth. Cool dough. Shape into 1" round balls and roll in bowl of sugar.
Place on greased cookie sheet 2" apart.

Bake 375 degrees for 8-12 minutes depending on desired cookie (soft or crispy).




Bakery                                      Page 7 of 16                              Rev 10/08
                                         Tortilla Making
Tortilla making was a new job for many of the pioneer women, but it allowed them to feed their
families when other supplies were low. Many pioneer women learned tortilla making from the
Californio women.

TASK: As a tortilla maker, you will provide food for the hungry people at the fort. You will grind
      wheat or flour and prepare and cook tortillas.

 MATERIALS TO BRING:                                     MATERIALS AVAILABLE AT THE FORT:
    1. Wheat or corn for grinding                           1. Mano and metate
    2. Wooden bowls                                         2. 3 mortars with pestles
    3. Enriched corn meal or wheat flour                    3. Adobe bricks
    4. Flour (white, sifted)
    5. Salt
    6. Shortening
    7. Coals or briquettes
    8. Aluminum foil
    9. Cup and spoons for measuring
    10. Spatula and sauce pan
    11. Mixing spoon
    12. Gloves (heavy work type)
    13. Iron griddle

RECIPE:
   • 2 cups wheat or white flour, or com meal 2 tablespoons shortening
   • 1 cup boiling water
   • 1 teaspoon salt

Combine ingredients. Form into 12 walnut size balls. Put flour on your hands to prevent sticking,
then pat the balls into thin round tortillas. Cook on lightly greased griddle, turning when light brown.
Butter with fresh churned butter.

GRINDING:
   1. Place a small amount of com or wheat in each mortar.
   2. Pound with short chopping strokes.
   3. Put coarsely ground com or wheat on metates.
   4. Use the mano with a grinding back and forth motion on the metate.
   5. Frequently punch flour into small piles.
   6. When finely ground, place flour in wooden bowl.
SAFETY:
   1. An adult should be present at all times.
   2. Use the heavy gloves when attending fires and when removing hot griddle.
   3. Watch carefully the girls' long skirts around the fire.
   4. The children should not be lifting the mortars or metates.
Bakery                                        Page 8 of 16                                Rev 10/08
                                             BUTTER
 TASK: Churning butter will provide the needed butter for the bakery as well as for the cooking at
       the Fort.

NOTE: Two batches of butter will probably be needed for all the cooking for approximately 40 to
      50 people.

MATERIALS TO BRING:                                  MATERIALS AVAILABLE AT THE FORT:
   1. Heavy cream (8 pints-whipping)                    1. Ceramic churn with wooden dasher
   2. Salt                                              2. Butter paddle
   3. Cheesecloth (l sheet)                             3. Wooden bowl (Use to wash butter.)
   4. Dish towel to cover churn (It helps to            4. Pitcher to catch buttermilk drained from
      keep the mess under control.)                        butter.


PROCEDURE:

    1. The cream should be purchased the day ahead and allowed to reach room temperature. (If
        the cream is too cold, set in a pan of hot water.)
    2. Rinse out the churn with warm water.
    3. Pour four pints of cream into the ceramic churn. Put the lid on with the churn dasher
        handle coming out through the center of the lid.
    4. With a steady up and down twisting motion, not too fast or too slow, work the cream until it
        becomes a heavy lump of solid butter. (Don't let the dasher hit the bottom of the churn, as
        you don't want to break it.)
    5. Check inside the churn occasionally to see what is happening. It needs to be steady and
        constant for approximately 30 minutes to an hour depending on the temperature. (On cold
        days fill the chum with warm water before churning or place a warm cloth around it.)
    6. When you have a solid mass of butter, pour the contents of the chum into a piece of
        cheesecloth placed over a bowl or pitcher.
    7. Place the butter in a bowl and press out excess milk with the butter paddle.
    8. Wash the butter by pouring cold water over it to get the excess milk out. Keep washing
        until the water is clear and no longer a milky color. (Milk left in the butter causes it to spoil
        faster.)
    9. Salt the butter lightly and shape into a ball or desired shape.
    10. Use the buttermilk for other cooking or drinking.

SAFETY: An adult should be present at all times.

NOTE: Butter churning was one of the chores given to the younger children They spent several
      hours at the task if the family had several cows and a lot of cream.




Bakery                                        Page 9 of 16                                Rev 10/08
                                   Safety in the Bakery
   1. An adult must be present around all fires.

   2. A bucket of water must be near all fires.

   3. Only an adult should rake the fire from the oven.

   4. The sharp knives should only be used by the adults.

   5. An adult must supervise the butter churning.

   6. An adult must be in the bakery room with the children.

   7. Have only two people working at the kneading board at a time.

   8. No running or rough-housing in the Fort.

   9. Do not stand on the brick platform around the oven.

   10. Respect the fort's property at all times.

   11. Report any problems, injuries, or accidents to the Rangers/Fort staff.




Bakery                                       Page 10 of 16                      Rev 10/08
                               Clean-up For the Bakery
   1. The large iron kettle on the firepit beside the oven should be heating water during the day
       for clean-up.
   2. The large tub in the bakery may be used for a wash tub and placed outside on the bench.
   3. All equipment should be washed outside the bakery, such as the knives, spoons, cups,
       bowls, boards, etc.
   4. Use dish cloth, soap, and dish towels for washing and drying equipment and replace them
       in their proper places.
   5. Clean the kneading boards with the scraper. Then wash with hot bleach water, rinse, dry
       thoroughly with a clean towel and replace on stand.
   6. Wipe off the cabinets, wooden box, bread peels, etc., with warm bleach water and dry.
   7. Wash the butter churn and dasher with warm soapy water, rinse, dry and replace in the
       pie-safe leaving the dasher and lid off for airing.
   10. Oven:
            a. Be sure the oven is empty of all food, coals, etc.
            b. Remove burlap from the vent plug and oven door. Layout to dry.
            c. Lean the door against the opening to provide a slow cooling of the oven.
            d. Return the shovel, rake, and bread peels to the bakery.
            e. Return the wheelbarrow to the firewood area.
   11. Dump the water from the iron kettle slowly onto the fire under it to extinguish the fire. The
       kettle should be completely empty.
   13. Return all equipment to its proper place ready for inventory with the Fort staff person.




Bakery                                      Page 11 of 16                               Rev 10/08
                                 TENTATIVE SCHEDULE
1. Fill the cast iron kettle with water (with hose) and fill as many containers as needed. (Note: The
    cast iron kettle must be filled with water whenever there is a fire near it.)
2. Start Fires:
         a. Water in kettle
         b. Oven
3. Build up fire in oven and keep fire tended.
4. Get all ingredients, milk, utensils, etc., organized in bakery.
5. Students wash tables and pans.
6. Start students churning butter.
7. Start students making dough. Dough should be mixed and rising by 11:00 a.m.
8. Afternoon students make cinnamon rolls.
9. If cookies are to be made, mix the dough after the bread is mixed.
10. Students wash all utensils, bowls and pans outside and replace.
11. Cool bread on table, cover with towels.
12. Replace everything as it was.
13. Pick up all trash and garbage.




Bakery                                      Page 12 of 16                               Rev 10/08
BAKING
Note: Your baking time will be determined by the size of your loaves. It is important that all loaves
      be approximately the same size. I have found that risen loaves of 8"-10" in diameter cook
      best.
      Bake items requiring the most heat first: Loaves first, then cinnamon rolls, and cookies last.

1. Place the bread in the oven by shuffling it off the peels. If there are fewer than approximately
    12 loaves, use only the front half of the oven. The oven is hottest in the back.
2. Drape a soaking wet burlap in front of oven doorway and secure the door.
3. Let the bread bake for 5 minutes, then observe it by removing the door.
4. If the bread appears (dark spots on the loaves) to be getting too done, use the coal rake to pull
    the loaves as far forward as they will go and pull the rear plug. Replace the door and continue
    baking about another 5-15 minutes, depending on the size of your loaves. The bread is ready
    when it rebounds from a poke. If the oven is at the proper temperature the bread will take a
    total baking time of approximately 25-35 minutes depending on loaf size.
5. Remove the cooked bread using the iron rake. Scoop it from the oven and place it into the
    waiting aprons of some of the pioneer women.
6. Place the bread on a table for cooling.
7. Immediately put the cinnamon rolls into the oven and reseal the door.
8. Check the cinnamon rolls after 5 minutes and pull forward if burning. The rolls will usually take
    between 15-20 minutes to cook.
9. The cookies go in last. Reseal the oven and continue to bake.
10. Check the cookies after 5 minutes.
11. The cookies will take between 5 and 15 minutes.




Bakery                                       Page 13 of 16                                Rev 10/08
         GUILDELINES FOR THE OUTDOOR OVEN (Steve’s Brief Version)
Building and controlling the fire:

1. Use only small pieces of wood and begin with small split pieces.
2. The secret to properly heating the oven is to use a fire that is low and slow.
    • After the initial lighting, flames should never be higher than the top of the door.
    • Flames should never be coming out the door or the rear vent hole.
    • Use the coal rake to knock down the flame before adding wood. You are trying to make
         coals, not build a big fire.
3. Leave a 6" border on the sides and a 10" border at the back of the oven.
    • After the initial lighting, never add more than two pieces of wood.
    • Once the fire and coals are established, small rounds work well.
4. After heating the oven for between three and four hours, there should be a bed of coals and
flame that stretches from border to border and is 4"-6" high.

Preparing the oven for baking:

1.  After the bread dough has been placed on wooden peels, well lubricated with polenta for the
   second rising, and the cinnamon rolls are being put on cookie sheets, it is time to prepare the
   oven for baking. On a warm day, the oven should be raked as soon as the bread is on the
   peels. On a cool day, let the bread rise for 5-10 minutes before raking the oven. The cinnamon
   rolls should be started because the oven should never sit empty. The cinnamon rolls go in as
   soon as the bread comes out.
2. Use the coal rake and scoop shovel to remove the hot coals from the oven.
3. Use a wet broom to sweep the oven clean.
4. Place a very wet burlap sack in the rear vent hole.

Testing the oven for proper temperature:

1. The most common mistake is having the oven TOO HOT!
2. The oven usually takes 15-40 minutes to cool to the correct temperature (based on many
    factors, including ambient weather conditions).
3. Testing the oven temperature with polenta:
    • Throw a large handful of polenta into the middle back of the oven. We are not concerned
         with the scattered meal or the large pile. Observe the edges of the large pile. They should
         not brown before 30 seconds or burn before 60 seconds.
4. Testing with your hand (only for the brave or stupid).
    • You should be able to put your hand and arm inside the oven for a full 10 sec.




Bakery                                       Page 14 of 16                               Rev 10/08
                          !!Making Fire with Flint and Steel!!
                    (Prepared by Steve Beck. Sutter's Fort State Historic Park)

I. OBJECTIVE:
    The objective of this training is to demonstrate how the ability to make, maintain, and control
    fire gives people power over their physical environment. The training will also show that the
    ability to make fire using simple technology aided in the EuroAmerican colonization of the
    American West.

II. GOAL:
    The goal of this training is to teach participants to make fire using the technology known as
    "flint and steel." Each person will be given the proper materials and training and each
    participant will make fire.

III. MATERIALS:
    One hardened high carbon steel bar, flint or other suitable rock/mineral substitute, "char-cloth"
    (a flammable fabric cooked "charred" under low oxygen conditions). One metal can for making
    char-cloth, "tinder" or jute (the starting fuel).

IV. Brief History of Fire from Flint and Steel (and a little science):
    Archaeological evidence suggests that pre-humans (Homo erectus) learned to make and
    control fire about 1,000,000 years ago. The ability to control fire allowed them to leave the
    warm tropical regions and populate the higher latitudes. Scant physical evidence exists today
    to show the technique these early people used to make fire. But, the stone tools they
    manufactured were made from flint and similar siliceous micro crystalline rock/minerals. In
    banging rocks together to make tools they created sparks. The sparks were generated by
    pieces of metallic minerals that occurred naturally in the rock. Experimentation helped refine
    which rocks and which metals worked the best to make sparks. The combination that makes
    the best sparks is a rock with a sharp edge that is harder than the metal it is striking. Metal with
    high carbon content makes better sparks. The rock must also have enough tenacity (resistance
    to breaking) that it won't shatter upon impact with the metal.

   When Homo sapiens appeared on Earth they refined the fire making process.
   Individuals carried "fire kits" with them, much as we carry a lighter or matches. This greatly
   enhanced their ability to control their environment as they traveled. The use of flint and steel
   for making fire is strongly associated with the trappers, or "mountain men," who traveled alone
   into the mountains during the freezing winter months· in search of beaver and other fur bearing
   animals. The trapper's skill at using flint and steel often meant the difference between life and
   death. Later, emigrants heading west in search of land and opportunity used flint and steel to
   make fire along the trail. They also experimented with different fuels such as sagebrush and
Bakery                                         Page 15 of 16                              Rev 10/08
   buffalo dung which became known as "prairie coal." Using flint and steel was so commonplace
   with pioneers they seldom mentioned it in their diaries unless something out of the ordinary
   happened during the process. Just such an event happened to the "Forlorn Hope" members of
   the infamous Donner Party. The following is taken from Ordeal by Hunger by George Stewart.

             Saturday morning broke, the day after Christmas. They had now been beneath the
             blankets for more than thirty hours, and the situation was becoming no longer
             endurable. To light a fire in the brunt of the storm outside was still impossible, but in
             desperation Eddy attempted to get one started beneath the shelter of the blankets. He
             used some gunpowder for tinder, and by some accident blew up the whole powder
             horn. He was badly burned about the face and hands and two of the women also
             suffered.

             But the grim will to live still held. It outlasted the storm, and when the clouds finally
             broke on Saturday afternoon, Eddy, a little stronger than the others because of his
             bear meat, crawled from beneath the blankets and set to making a fire. But all the
             wood was soaked, and even their clothing offered scarcely a dry shed. They
             discovered, however, that Mrs. Pike's mantle had a lining of cotton and some of this
             seemed fairly dry. They exposed it to the sun's rays, struck sparks into it with flint and
             steel, and finally managed to blow it into a glow. After this they set fire to a large dead
             pine tree, and gathered weakly around rejoicing at last in the comfort of the flame.

V. TECHNIQUE FOR USING FLINT AND STEEL (Kits are sole in the Sutter’s
   Fort Trade Store):

   1.     Make "char-cloth."
         a. Put a hole in the top middle of the tin can.
         b. Loosely pack the can with a flammable cloth that has been shredded or cut into small
              squares.
         c. Place the can into the coals of a fire or in an oven. Heat the can until it stops smoking.
   2.    Separate the tinder (jute) into small hairs and loosely ball the hairs into a "birds nest."
   3.    Put some char-cloth on the piece of flint near the edge you are going to strike. Grip the flint
         firmly in one hand with your thumb holding the char-cloth in place.
   4.    Hold the steel striker in your other hand and using a long smooth sweeping motion, strike
         the steel against the edge of the flint. Don't jab at the flint or use short choppy strokes.
         Sparks will fly and one or more of those will land on the char-cloth. You will see a small
         ember appear on the char -cloth. Remove the char-cloth from the flint and loosely wrap the
         bird's nest around the char-cloth.
   5.    Lightly blow on the bird's nest to stoke the ember. Remove your hat or bonnet and hold the
         bird's nest away from your face. The bird's nest will start to smoke and will suddenly burst
         into flame (be prepared)!
   6.    Immediately place small pieces of flammable material on the burning bird's nest and you
         have successfully made fire!!! Congratulations!


Bakery                                        Page 16 of 16                                 Rev 10/08
