 Trapping Furbearers
An Introduction to Responsible
          Trapping




       Student Manual
                    Code of Trapping Ethics
1.   Know and obey trapping laws and assist in their enforcement by reporting violations.

2.   Improve your knowledge of furbearers, their ecology and management, and improved
     trapping and fur handling methods.

3.   Respect landowners’ rights and always obtain permission before trapping on private lands.

4.   Respect and conserve public lands and the natural resources found on them.

5.   Be aware of other people using the outdoors and avoid interference with their activities.

6.   Be aware of free‐ranging domestic animals and avoid trapping where there is a high risk of
     catching them.

7.   Know and use selective and humane trapping sets with appropriate trap types and sizes.

8.   Don’t set more traps than YOU can effectively handle.

9.   Cover all foothold traps set on land.

10. When trapping muskrat, always use body‐gripping traps, guarded foothold traps, or
    submersion sets.

11. Use body‐gripping traps or submersion sets with sliding locks for all beaver and otter sets.

12. Anchor traps securely enough to hold the largest potential catch.

13. Check all traps daily and as early in the day as possible.

14. Dispose of animal carcasses properly.

15. Support trapping, trapper training, and furbearer management and research.

16. Report diseased animals.

17. Make an effort to trap any areas where furbearer populations are overabundant or are
    creating a nuisance.

18. Know and use proper releasing and killing methods.




                                                      i
             Trapping Furbearers
          An Introduction to Responsible
                    Trapping
                                      Acknowledgements
A long list of distinguished individuals had a hand in the development of this manual over time. It is based
in part on, “Trapping Furbearers – Managing and Using a Renewable Natural Resource”, by Dr. Ronald
Howard and Dr. John Kelley, published by 4‐H/Cooperative Extension at Cornell University. Former and
current Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC) staff who participated in the manual’s many
editions include Louis Berchielli, Gary Parsons, Mark Brown, Wayne Jones, Paul Bishop, Benjamin Tullar,
Robert Henke, David Scudder, Gordon Batcheller, Scott Smith, Melissa Neely, and Ken Baginski. Critical
review of the text was provided by trappers Pete Smith, Tom Hayes, Angie Leubner, Pete Rickard, Gordon
Berndt, Tom Fisher, and Ray Schedivy (1st edition), Al West and Jerry Leggieri (2nd edition), and John
Rockwood, Angie Berchielli, and Jerry Leggieri (3rd edition).

Fourth edition, printed in 2016. DEC biologist Andy MacDuff performed editorial duties with input from
trappers Lou and Angie Berchielli.

Materials used from other sources for this manual include:

Association of Fish & Wildlife Agencies – logos on page 33 and material in Chapters 5, 7, and 8 and
Appendices 1, 2, and 5 (with changes)

Silvertip Productions – Images on pages 5, 6, 15, 16, 17, 80, 81 (bottom), 100, and 101

Ohio Division of Wildlife – Images on pages 24 (top), 26 (bottom), 30, 37, 39, 77, 78, 81 (top), and 86
through 93

Joe Goodman – Images on pages 26(top and middle), 29 (bottom), 75 (all but weasel box), 104, and 105.

Animal artwork was provided by Wayne Trimm and all other drawings by Michael Stickney.

           Funded in part by Federal Aid in Wildlife Restoration Act, project W‐125‐S, a hunter education
           project supported by federal excise taxes on hunting equipment.

© Copyright 1997, 2006, 2011, 2016. All rights reserved. Material may not be reproduced in any manner
without express written permission from the Department of Environmental Conservation.

                 NYSDEC – Sportsman Education, 625 Broadway, Albany, NY 12233‐4800




                                                     ii
                 Trapping Furbearers
            An Introduction to Responsible
                      Trapping
                                                    Table of Contents
Chapter 1 Introduction .................................................................................................................... 1

Chapter 2 History of Trapping ......................................................................................................... 3

Chapter 3 Furbearer Management ................................................................................................. 5

Chapter 4 Trapping Laws, Regulations, and Ethics .......................................................................... 9

Chapter 5 Trapping Safety and Wildlife Diseases .......................................................................... 15

Chapter 6 Equipment and Preparation ......................................................................................... 23

Chapter 7 Best Management Practices ......................................................................................... 33

Chapter 8 Selective Trapping Techniques ..................................................................................... 37

Chapter 9 Natural History of New York Furbearers ...................................................................... 41

Chapter 10 Common Water Sets ................................................................................................... 67

Chapter 11 Land Sets ..................................................................................................................... 74

Chapter 12 Running a Trapline ...................................................................................................... 80

Chapter 13 Fur Handling Equipment, Techniques, and Marketing ............................................... 86

Appendix 1 Traps, Sets, & Attractors ............................................................................................ 98

Appendix 2 Tracks of New York Furbearers ................................................................................ 100

Appendix 3 Scats of New York Furbearers .................................................................................. 102

Appendix 4 Regulations for Body‐Grip Traps Set on Land .......................................................... 104

Appendix 5 Pelt Preparation ....................................................................................................... 106


                                                                     iii
iv
Chapter 1 Introduction
You and Trapper Education


Trapping is enjoyable and it provides a variety of benefits to those with the knowledge and
ability to do it well. But, if trapping is not done right, it can cause bad feelings towards trappers
and trapping. Therefore, trapping is a serious business. The future of trapping depends on the
way you as a trapper perform.

Successful completion of a trapper education course is required of all first time trappers in New
York State. This requirement started in 1980 to increase awareness of the trapper’s
responsibilities and to introduce beginning trappers to acceptable trapping methods, ethics and
responsibilities, laws and regulations, natural history, and basic wildlife management principles.

All of these things provide a good start for new trappers. Trapping skill, however, must be
developed through experience after the course. The things you learn in this course will help
make trapping more enjoyable and help make you more successful.

Through this course, you can learn more about the tradition and adventure of trapping, increase
your environmental awareness, gain new outdoor skills, and maybe even make some money. In
addition, there is the opportunity for personal development through hard work, careful study,
and a better understanding of nature and wildlife. It is hoped the course will also encourage
beginning trappers to learn more about trapping from personal experience and the experience
of others.

You can learn even more about trapping from information you can get from your instructor,
your library, the internet, and from local, state, and national trapper organizations.




                                                  1
2
Chapter 2 History of Trapping
Since prehistoric times, human beings have used traps of various kinds to capture animals for
food, clothing, or population control. The earliest forms of traps were probably pits, deadfalls or
snares. Of these three trap types, only snares, now called cable restraints or cable traps, are still
commonly used today.

When Europeans first came to North America, they depended on the plentiful furbearer
resources. The demand for fur in Europe, especially beaver, created a large and thriving fur
trade in North America from which Native Americans and some of the new immigrants derived a
portion of their livelihood.

It was the lure of richer hunting and trapping territories, particularly for beaver, more than the
lure of rich soil or even gold that prompted westward exploration and settlement. Along the
paths opened by these pioneering trappers, first commerce and then agriculture spread across
the nation.

During the 1800s, groups of trappers and explorers known as “mountain men,” many armed
                                                      with Newhouse traps, journeyed up the
                                                      Missouri River to explore the beaver
                                                      meadows of the Rocky Mountains from
                                                      Canada to New Mexico. The “golden age
                                                      of fur” saw native people both
                                                      befriended and exploited, trappers
                                                      survived hardships to make or to lose
                                                      fortunes, and many lives lost all for the
                                                      sake of fur.

New York State has a rich history in the fur trade. In the mid‐ 1600s, the area now occupied by
Albany, our state capital, was known as Beverwyck in recognition of the volume of fur that
flowed through the region. Even today, the official seal of Albany depicts a beaver cutting down
a tree, a clear connection to the significant role trapping played in the exploration and
development of the Empire State. Also, the Newhouse traps used by the mountain men of the
1800s were manufactured in the Oneida, N.Y. area.

Thanks to sound wildlife management, large populations of furbearers still exist, and many
people depend on trapping them to supplement their income. Well‐regulated hunting and
trapping provide pleasurable and profitable means of using a renewable natural resource
without depleting animal populations or reducing opportunities for others to enjoy them.



                                                  3
4
Chapter 3 Furbearer Management
The Furbearer Resource
New York State is fortunate to have an abundance of furbearers, including muskrat, mink,
beaver, otter, opossum, skunk, raccoon, gray fox, red fox, coyote, weasel, fisher, bobcat and
marten. These animals have a number of effects upon the environment, economics, and the
quality of human life in addition to their fur value. With the exception of beaver and muskrat,
most furbearers are predators which are important to maintaining ecological balance in natural
systems.

Any discussion of the value of furbearers must
consider both their beneficial and harmful effects.
Beaver may flood valuable agricultural lands,
homes, roadways, woodlands, and in some
instances, have detrimental impacts to trout
populations. However, their ponds create valuable
habitat for animals such as mink, muskrat, and
otter and many species of birds. Muskrat eat
aquatic vegetation, often opening up portions of
marshes creating habitat for fish and wildlife. However, muskrats can be extremely destructive
to the banks and dikes of man‐made ponds and lakes. Predatory furbearers, which must kill
other animals to eat, may prey on domestic stock, game animals or other valued or rare wildlife.
In some areas, coyotes may cause losses of free‐ranging stock such as sheep or chickens.
Coyotes can play a positive role by controlling mice and other rodents. The corn and songbird
depredations of raccoon and skunk must be balanced against their controlling effects on insects
and rodents. Another negative concern is that furbearers sometimes carry diseases like rabies
and tularemia and parasites like mange mites and ticks.

These are just a few of the tangible positive and negative values of the furbearer resource. The
pleasure of seeing and studying these animals is probably the greatest of the intangible values.
When both positive and negative aspects are considered, the importance of scientifically based
wildlife management becomes apparent.

Wildlife Management Principles
Wise use of abundant natural resources includes the use of a harvestable surplus, coupled with
the conservation of the basic resource. The goal of furbearer management is to provide the
maximum harvestable surplus consistent with other factors such as habitat quality and
availability, disease risks, wildlife damage, reproductive biology and public tolerance for the


                                                5
species. The best available knowledge of ecology, behavior, current populations and habitat
conditions is integrated into management plans using the principles of wildlife management.

Generally, each wildlife population reaches its lowest level just after the breeding season,
regardless of whether it was harvested by people or not. The remaining individuals breed and
once again produce offspring. It is because of this ability of living things to rebound from annual
reductions that they are often referred to as “renewable resources.” Non‐renewable resources,
such as coal, oil, and other minerals, are present only in limited quantities.

 Within certain limits, all of the living components of the natural resource base are renewable.
Forage plants and wildlife are renewable. Entire communities are dynamic and renewable as
long as their requirements for life and reproduction are met.

Every organism has a set of required resources (food, cover, shelter, and space) which must be
supplied by its environment. Each required resource exists in some limited amount. Any
resource that exists in an inadequate amount is called a limiting factor, because it limits the
population of the organism in that time and place. For example, a marsh may have enough food,
cover, shelter, and space to support 1,000 muskrat during the spring, summer, and fall. During
the winter months, the food supply may only support 300 muskrat. Though the cover, shelter,
and space are sufficient, the remaining 700 muskrat must either avoid the food shortage by
moving elsewhere or die.

The entire set of required resources determines the carrying capacity of a particular area for
each species. The carrying capacity is the number of animals a habitat can support at any point
in time. Carrying capacity is similar to the volume of a bucket. When the bucket has been filled,
adding more to it only wastes what is added. Sometimes the best management plan dictates
that a population be held below its carrying capacity for some reason, such as when a species is
causing excessive damage. Management attempts to achieve levels above the carrying capacity
of the habitat are invitations to environmental problems and resource waste. All living things,
including human beings, share the limitations of carrying capacity.

Most organisms produce more offspring than the habitat can support. The excess individuals are
lost through predation, starvation, disease, or some other means. Loss rates are quite high in
most organisms. Muskrats, for example, frequently lose
70 percent of their population from one breeding season
to the next. This attrition (loss) rate is found whether
humans influence it or not. Increases in mortality caused
by one factor, such as predation, are often compensated
by decreases in other factors, such as starvation or
disease. Thus, the total loss rate remains fairly constant.

Wildlife cannot be stockpiled; it is a dynamic resource
with high and low populations each year. Surplus animals
                                                 6
die until the habitat that they occupy is able to support the survivors. Each year’s wildlife
population consists of two parts: breeding stock and surplus stock. Breeding stock is that portion
of the population that the habitat can support. Surplus stock is the portion the habitat cannot
support. Surplus stock will die by some means before the next year’s young are produced. Use
of the surplus provides recreation, products, food and employment without depleting the
breeding stock. The breeding stock that remains produces another surplus and provides the
other wildlife benefits that many consider essential.

If the resource is to be maintained for the use and enjoyment of future generations,
management decisions cannot be based on whim, political expediency, or emotion. In some
instances, such as disease epidemics, good management dictates drastic reductions in
populations. In others, such as the management of endangered species, complete protection is
the best management plan.



The Rationale for Trapping
Furbearers are a part of the wildlife resource. The harvest of surplus furbearing animals results
mainly in the production of durable, warm and beautiful fur clothing. Recent criticisms of
trapping and the fur industry have implied vanity demands furs instead of readily available
synthetic fibers. Beauty is only part of the usefulness of fur. One of its greatest advantages is the
renewability of the resource and the relatively low fossil fuel cost of its production. Synthetic
fibers come either from nonrenewable resources (coal or petroleum) or from energy intensive
resources (wood‐fiber). Most of the energy involved in the production of fur garments is
biological energy, the energy of growth and of human labor. As a result, fur garments have a
lower carbon footprint then their synthetic counterparts.

Sound furbearer management can attain the double goal of wisely using surplus stocks while
preserving breeding stocks for future productivity and use. Harvesting wisely, legally, efficiently,
selectively, and humanely, trappers can manage for a continued yield of furbearers, and ensure
the resource is preserved for future generations. In that way, benefits of both consumptive and
non‐consumptive use of the resource can be realized.



Use the Right Trap for the Situation
Before placing the first trap, a trapper should learn all he or she can about trapping and
furbearers. A responsible trapper uses selective sets and minimizes the time a trapped animal is
held. Trappers have spent a great deal of time designing and improving traps and types of sets
that will kill their catch as quickly and humanely as possible and designing restraining traps and
systems that hold animals alive with a minimum or no injuries. Responsible trappers carefully
select the appropriate trap for the situation.
                                                  7
Body‐gripping traps, which are designed to kill the trapped animal relatively quickly, do not
always do so and are not adaptable to all types of furbearers or all types of sets. No responsible
trapper will use a body‐gripping trap where it is possible to catch animals such as protected
wildlife, domestic stock, or house pets.

Box traps, including cage‐like wire traps which catch only one animal at a time, are appropriate
and effective in some trapping situations, although not for fox or coyote. They seldom harm
their catch and make it possible to easily release unintended catches. They are excellent choices
for areas where domestic animals or other unintended species are frequently encountered, such
as in urban or suburban areas when trapping problem raccoons, skunks, and opossums.

Foothold traps (steel traps) are the primary type of trap used. Animals taken in these are
commonly caught by the foot. When properly set and of appropriate size, the major effect of
the trap lies with restricting the animal’s movements. Some animals resist being so restricted;
others may lie down and even sleep. Unwanted animals can usually be released. Desired
animals are killed by the trapper as quickly and humanely as possible. When trapping semi‐
aquatic animals, sets are made so that the animal is quickly submerged and killed through
asphyxiation.

Enclosed foothold or foot‐encapsulating traps are a recent design that trappers developed to
increase trapping selectivity. Designed primarily for trapping raccoon (although they will also
capture skunks and opossums), these traps employ a small diameter opening and pull‐type
trigger, making them virtually dog‐proof. The use of these species‐specific devices has allowed
trappers to operate in areas that were previously avoided because of concerns about capturing
domestic stock and pets.

By law, trappers must visit their traps at least once in every 24‐hour period (48 hours in some
areas).




                                                8
Chapter 4 Trapping Laws,
Regulations, and Ethics

Trapping Laws and Regulations
Conservation laws are designed to ensure a continuing population of furbearers and to establish
ethical standards for trapping. They also aid in permitting all citizens to share the common
resource. Usually, open seasons are set to include the period when the fur is at its best or
                                  “prime.” Both the regulations on trapping and the open season
                                  for various species of furbearers are listed in the annual
                                  “Hunting & Trapping Regulations Guide” and on the
                                  Department of Environmental Conservation website at
                                  www.dec.ny.gov. The guide booklets are available wherever
                                  licenses are sold. Regulations and season dates sometimes
                                  change, so trappers should review the “Hunting & Trapping
                                  Regulations Guide” before hitting the trap line each year. When
                                  in doubt about some point on seasons or regulations, check
                                  with your local Environmental Conservation Officer or call your
                                  nearest Regional Wildlife Office and speak to a biologist
                                  familiar with trapping.

Key points to remember:

            The law requires you to visit your traps at least once in every 24‐hour period (48
            hours in some areas) and to tag all traps clearly with your name and address or your
            license ID number.

           You are required to carry your trapping license with you when you are trapping.

           You must comply with all licensing and tagging regulations.

           The law specifically prohibits disturbing lawfully placed traps or removing lawfully
            trapped animals from the traps of another person.

           Trappers should avoid harming domestic animals.

Trappers must be familiar with many other laws, such as those protecting landowners and their
property. Securing the permission of landowners before setting traps is the trapper’s
responsibility. Trappers must also be familiar with laws protecting certain species of wildlife, and
must use their expertise to reduce the risk of taking these protected species. All trappers must

                                                 9
adhere strictly to all laws and recognize their responsibilities to ensure the continued wise use
of the resource.



Trapping Ethics
The use of a public resource demands that you exercise both courtesy and personal
responsibility. Respect for oneself, landowners, other people, the furbearer resource, and
habitat summarizes this expression of that courtesy and responsibility. It is delineated in a
personal code of ethics that goes beyond legal requirements and is set forth on the inside cover
of this manual. It is your responsibility to adhere to this code. Remember that you may be the
only trapper the public may come in contact with. You should act in a way that will reflect
positively on all trappers.

Trappers must know and obey trapping laws and be willing to report violations of these laws to
their local Environmental Conservation Officer or to the Turn in Poachers and Polluters line at 1‐
800‐TIPP‐DEC. Failure to do so may result in increased public criticism of trapping and possible
limitations in opportunities for all trappers.

Responsible Trapping
The proper use of legal traps will help deflect public criticism of trapping. Using the proper size
and type of trap for the intended species minimizes or eliminates injuries to the trapped animal.
Using selective sets and baits at the proper locations reduces the chances of catching unwanted
animals. Securing a trap in a manner to hold any animal captured eliminates the possibility of
animals escaping with the trap still attached. An empty or bent trap is better than an animal
escaping with the trap.

Cover all foothold traps set on land. This will actually increase your catch and reduce any
damage caused to the animal.

Check traps daily and as early in the day as possible to minimize the time an animal spends in
the trap. This in turn reduces the likelihood of physical damage and stress to the captured
animal and decreases the chance of escape.

When trapping in the water for semi‐aquatic
species, all traps should be placed in a manner
that will submerge the captured animal. This
causes a quick and humane death. Setting the
trap in the water also reduces the likelihood of
catching unintended animals. When trapping
muskrats, using guarded foothold traps or small
body‐gripping traps is necessary wherever there is

                                                10
a possibility that the trapped muskrat will not stay submerged. Often, set locations for muskrats
are found in shallow or heavily vegetated water areas where there is either insufficient depth to
submerge the animal or the trap and anchoring system may become entangled before the
animal is submerged.

Considering the activities of others, whether they are hunting, watching birds, or harvesting
crops, is an essential part of the trapping ethic. A good trapper is a good citizen who respects
the rights and property of others. A trapping license does not entitle the trapper to free access
to private land. Get permission to trap on private land. Remember not to cut stakes, drive on
farm lands or set traps in standing crops such as
corn without specific permission from the
landowner. A trapper can cultivate a landowner’s
goodwill by offering to legally trap nuisance animals,          A New York State law
such as muskrats burrowing through dikes.                     (developed jointly by the
Avoid Trapping Unintended Species                                 Department of
Be responsible by not setting in areas where there is             Environmental
a risk of capturing a cat or dog. If a domestic animal
                                                           Conservation and the New
is captured, immediately release it and if at all
possible inform its owner, especially if any injuries          York State Trappers
have occurred.                                             Association) requires that
Trapping in urban, suburban and rural areas where
                                                            trappers use pan tension
there are free‐roaming pets requires extreme                 devices on all foothold
caution. Trap sets which may be quite selective as            traps over four inches
far as wild animals are concerned will sometimes
                                                            wide set on land. All such
catch a dog or cat. Your best option is to not trap in
such areas. Padded jaw traps are another option                 traps must also be
when land trapping for foxes or coyotes where pets           covered. Trappers can
are afield. The use of body‐gripping traps in areas        either bring pan covers or
where dogs and cats are afield is strongly
discouraged. Overall, the best option when there is
                                                           use natural materials such
a strong chance of catching a domestic animal is to             as leaves and soil.
not trap in that location.

Do not use exposed carcasses or parts of animals, meat, or fish as bait. These can attract raptors
(birds of prey) and may lead to your catching one of these protected birds. Since raptors hunt by
sight, covering bait so that it cannot be seen from above will help avoid problems and is
currently required by regulation for any set made with a foothold trap.

A good general rule for humane trapping is to always use the smallest size trap available that
will catch and hold the intended furbearer effectively. Most land furbearers in New York State

                                                 11
can be effectively trapped with traps no larger than a #1 ½ coilspring. Larger traps can cause
greater and unnecessary damage, especially to smaller animals.

The pan tension of some traps (e.g., some coil spring traps) is adjustable and can help you avoid
catching smaller animals. Accessory devices are available for adding this capability to other kinds
of traps. The ability to adjust the pan tension of a trap can be a very important factor in reducing
unintended catches. If you are trapping for foxes and raccoons, for example, adjusting your pan
tensions so that between 1 and 2 pounds of force are required to depress the pan and fire the
trap will substantially reduce the likelihood of catching birds and smaller animals.

Trap Hardware
Several recommendations regarding trap hardware can be made. These are not critical for traps
used in submersion sets, but it makes sense to have all of your traps set up the same way so
they can be used for any type set. To ensure that the trap will turn with the animal, there should
be one swivel at the trap end and one at the stake end of the trap chain, at a minimum. Both
swivels should be in good working order.

The trap chain should be as short as it can be and still allow enough freedom to make the set.
The chain swivel should be attached to the trap as close to the center of the trap frame as
possible rather than at the point where the jaws pivot on a coil spring trap or at the end of the
spring on a long spring trap. This also helps ensure that the trap can turn with the animal. For
larger animals such as coyote, trappers may want to add shock springs into their chain systems
to minimize the stress the animal can place on the chain.

Finally, the addition of extra springs to traps is not recommended. This can contribute to
excessive or unnecessary damage to the trapped animal. The mechanical advantage of the trap
design is usually more important than the speed with which the jaws close for catching and
holding animals.

The use of drags is not recommended. They can cause a trapped animal to be seriously injured
or to be lost. Every trap should be anchored firmly enough to hold any animal that could be
caught. You do not want an animal escaping with your trap attached to it.

Cover all foothold traps set on land with a layer of sifted dirt or other covering. This will increase
your catch and it is required by law in some cases. Check your traps daily and as early in the day
as possible to minimize the time an animal spends in the trap to help reduce damage, stress and
the chance of a pullout.

Keep Yourself Up to Date
Completion of a trapper training course does not mean that you are an accomplished trapper
who knows all there is to know. A good trapper realizes this and is always willing to learn. New
traps and trapping techniques are constantly being developed. Trapping organizations,
magazines, and new books can provide advice. Attending one of the frequently held trapper

                                                 12
conventions in New York or elsewhere is an excellent way to learn from seasoned expert
trappers. A good trapper stays up to date with these changes in order to be as humane,
selective, and effective as possible. Keeping yourself current is your responsibility.

A good trapper respects the resource being used. Respect in this instance includes making full
use of the animal once removed from the wild. Proper pelt preparation ensures that the fur will
not be wasted. Some carcasses can be used for food, dog food, or in lure preparation. Game
cookbooks have recipes for delicious meals from furbearers. As long as you have the meat and it
is properly handled, why not try dishes like “broiled marsh rabbit” (really muskrat) or beaver
stew? When the carcass cannot be used, dispose of it in a manner which will not offend other
people, such as burial or composting (see http://cwmi.css.cornell.edu/composting.htm for
information on how to compost animals).

The trap sets and other information in this manual are presented to guide you in becoming a
good trapper. Over the years, these sets have proven to be the most selective and humane. The
tools of trappers are important, but the proper use of these tools is what will make you become
a responsible trapper. You have a choice; you can support trapping and the future of the
resource by abiding by both the law and the standards set for an ethical trapper, or you can
ignore this information and risk harming the furbearer resource and reducing trapping
opportunities for all trappers. Let’s work together for the future of trapping and our valuable
furbearing animals.

Success in Trapping
Some beginning trappers think that a successful trapper catches a furbearer in almost every
trap, every night, which just doesn’t happen. Many professional trappers average only one fox
for each twenty traps checked. A trapper’s catch depends on many things such as the area
trapped, weather and furbearer populations. Success results from a combination of skill,
experience, proper equipment, thorough scouting, properly set traps and confidence in your
equipment and methods. Trappers should not be judged by their catch volume but rather by
how ethical and responsible they are. An important part of that responsibility is to continue
checking traps as long as they are set even when a large volume of animals may not be caught.




                                              13
14
Chapter 5 Trapping Safety and
Wildlife Diseases

Trapping is not a dangerous activity, but there are risks related to weather, drowning, animal
bites, and disease. Develop safe attitudes and make safe behavior a habit.

Hypothermia
Hypothermia is a leading cause of death among people who enjoy outdoor recreation. Cold and
wet weather, wind, and falls in water can lead to a loss of body heat. When your body
temperature starts to fall, hypothermia sets in and it can happen very quickly.

Shivering is one of the first signs of hypothermia. If this happens, go to a warm place, put on
warm and dry clothes, or build a fire. Soon after shivering starts, a hypothermic person may
become confused and clumsy. Watch for signs of hypothermia whenever you are outdoors in
cooler weather. Even when air temperatures are in the 50s, hypothermia can occur.

Trappers can prevent hypothermia by wearing warm, layered clothing. Wool clothes are a good
choice because wool insulates even if it becomes wet. Several modern fabrics would also be
good choices as they can be lighter, faster drying, and waterproof. Use hip boots or waders, plus
long‐sleeved rubber gloves when trapping in water. If you get wet, return to home, camp or
your vehicle, and put on dry clothes.

Frostbite
Frostbite occurs when ice crystals form in your body’s cells. It is a common cold weather injury
to people’s cheeks, ears, nose, toes, and fingers. Frostbite symptoms include white to grayish‐
yellow skin and an intense cold, numb feeling. Pain and blisters may also be present. Protect
frostbitten skin from further injury. Drink warm fluids, put on more clothes, or wrap up in
blankets. The frozen area can be soaked in warm, not hot, water (102 to 105 degrees F). Never
rub frostbitten skin because rubbing will cause further injury.

Trapping on Ice‐covered Lakes, Ponds, Rivers, and Streams
                          Avoid traveling on ice‐covered streams and rivers. Water
                          currents can cause weak, dangerous ice. Ice on a pond or lake is
                          usually more consistent, but you should still be cautious. Springs,
                          underwater structures, and objects above the ice surface that
                          gather heat from the sun (for example, logs, beaver lodges and
                          dams) can cause weak spots in the ice on lakes and ponds.



                                                15
Newly formed clear ice is generally the strongest. Some trappers consider three inches of ice to
be the minimum thickness needed for one person to safely cross, but four inches is better. Six
inches or more of strong ice is required for multiple people or snowmobiles.

White ice, or ice mixed with snow and slush, is weaker than clear ice. Candle ice (deteriorating
columnar or grainy ice), usually found in the early spring, occurs when good ice starts to
decompose. Candle ice may be unsafe, even if it is two feet thick. Ice cleats can help you
maintain a safe footing. Carry a walking staff to help check for ice conditions in front of you as
you travel.

Many trappers carry ice safety picks while working their
traplines. Ice safety picks have strong handles with short spikes
in the ends. The handles are tied together with rope. Thread
the rope and picks through the sleeves and back of your coat
so you will have them handy if you fall through. It is difficult to
pull yourself out of the water without ice picks.

If you do fall through the ice try to climb out by facing the
direction you came from when the ice gave way. When you get out, roll in the direction you
came from when you fell through. The ice may be even weaker if you try to go a different
direction.

If a companion falls through, lie down on the ice to distribute your weight. Reach out to the
victim with a walking staff or throw them a rope. If you approach too close you may fall in too.

After escaping from icy water build a fire immediately unless you are close to shelter or a vehicle
where you can get warm. After falling into icy water, hypothermia will set in quickly. If you have
a cell phone with you, call for help immediately.

Drowning
Trappers need to be aware of the danger of drowning. It is easy to slip and fall down a steep
bank or slip into deep water holes of rivers and streams when wading. It is difficult to swim
when wearing waders or hip boots or when your coat pockets are filled with heavy gear.

It is a good idea to wear an inflatable personal flotation device when trapping around water.
Good ones have a gas canister that can be used to inflate the vest instantly if you need it. The
vest should also have a tube you can use to inflate it by mouth if the gas canister fails.

When wading, it is best to travel upstream because the water depth generally increases
gradually. You are more likely to encounter steep drop‐offs caused by currents when walking
downstream.

Use a walking staff when wading to probe the water depth and bottom conditions. Smooth
rocks or debris in the water can cause you to slip. You may encounter soft bottoms or hazardous
                                                 16
conditions at points where two streams come together. A walking staff can also help you
maintain your balance on other slippery surfaces like ice. When crossing streams, use a walking
staff, move slowly and face into the stream current.

If you use a canoe or a boat for trapping follow all safety rules. Consider taking a boating safety
education course to improve your knowledge and skills. When using a boat always wear a
personal flotation device (PFD). Not only is it the smart thing to do but at certain times of the
year it is the law.



Wildlife Diseases
Wild animals can carry a number of infectious diseases that can cause human illness. Some
diseases are specific to one or a few species of furbearers, while other diseases affect many
species of wildlife. Wildlife diseases transmittable to humans or domestic pets should be of
concern to anyone who regularly encounters or handles wildlife.

Infectious diseases can be caused by numerous organisms and may spread by direct and/or
indirect contact with infected animals. Trappers can also be exposed to parasites associated
with wild animals. Follow the recommended precautions to protect yourself from potential
hazards. If you become ill make certain your doctor is aware of your trapping activity.

General precautions include:

       Wear latex or other protective gloves, eye protection,
        and protective coveralls when handling carcasses or
        scat.

       Wash hands and arms thoroughly with soap and water
        after handling animals.

       Clean and disinfect knives, skinning boards, cutting
        surfaces, and other equipment with a bleach solution of
        1 part bleach in 9 parts water.

       Avoid sick animals or ones that do not act normal.

       Do not drink untreated water from lakes or streams.

       Cook all wild game thoroughly.

Animal diseases and parasites that may affect humans include:

Rabies ‐ Rabies is a virus that infects the central nervous system. Left untreated, rabies is always
fatal. The rabies virus may be carried by all warm blooded mammals but it occurs most often
among wildlife species such as raccoons, bats, skunks and foxes. Rabies is usually transmitted by
                                                 17
the bite or scratch of an infected animal. Rabies can also be transmitted by contamination of a
cut or scratch when skinning an infected animal, or from contact with your eyes, nose, or
mouth.

Rabies occurs in two forms in wildlife; “dumb” and “furious”. In the dumb form the animal is
lethargic and may suffer paralysis. In the furious form the animal is restless, aggressive, and may
bite at real or imaginary objects.

If you are bitten by a wild animal wash the bite with soap and water, then seek medical
attention. If possible, capture or kill the animal without damaging the head. Health authorities
will test the brain tissue for rabies. Keep the animal refrigerated at 35 to 40 degrees F until it can
be examined. Human Diploid Cell Vaccine (HDCV) can offer protection from the rabies virus
without serious side effects. Ask your doctor for advice about HDCV, especially if you are
trapping in areas where animals are known to carry rabies.

West Nile Virus ‐ Most people who are infected with the West Nile virus will not have any type
of symptoms. About 20% of people who become infected will develop West Nile fever.
Symptoms include fever, headache, tiredness, and body aches. There may be a skin rash on the
trunk of the body and swollen lymph glands.

The symptoms of severe infection (West Nile encephalitis or meningitis) include headache, high
fever, neck stiffness, stupor, disorientation, coma, tremors, convulsions, muscle weakness, and
paralysis. It is estimated that approximately 1 in 150 persons infected with the West Nile virus
will develop a more severe form of disease. The incubation period is 3 to 14 days, and most
West Nile fever symptoms last for a few days. Severe infection symptoms may last several
weeks. Neurological symptoms or damage may be permanent.

It is best to prevent the West Nile virus by avoiding mosquito bites. Stay out of the field from
dusk to dawn during mosquito season. Wear long sleeve shirts, long pants, and socks when
outdoors. Use a mosquito repellant containing DEET on exposed skin. The Center for Disease
Control advises that you should not use DEET repellant on skin under your clothes. Do not apply
repellants containing permethrin directly to your skin.

Tularemia ‐ Tularemia is a bacterial disease most commonly associated with rabbits and hares.
Beavers and muskrats may also carry this disease.

Tularemia is most commonly transmitted by the bite of blood sucking ticks or fleas. The bacteria
enter the body, multiply, and invade internal organs. The liver and spleen enlarge and become
covered with white spots. Humans can get tularemia from skinning infected animals, drinking
contaminated water, being bitten by infected deer flies and ticks, and sometimes by eating
undercooked meat. Symptoms include fever, infected sores, swollen lymph nodes and flu‐like
feelings. These symptoms may become severe. With prompt antibiotic treatment, few cases of
tularemia are fatal.

                                                 18
Lyme Disease ‐ Lyme disease is a bacterial infection spread by the bite of a deer tick (Ixodes
dammini). When diagnosed early the disease can be treated with antibiotics.

People get Lyme disease when they are bitten by ticks carrying Borrelia burgdorferi bacteria.
Ticks that carry Lyme disease are very small and can be hard to see. If these tiny ticks bite mice
infected with Lyme disease and then bite people or other animals the disease can be passed on.
After several days or weeks the bacteria may spread throughout the body of an infected person.

Diagnosis is difficult since Lyme disease symptoms vary and are similar to other common
illnesses. One of the first symptoms may be a red circular skin lesion, but often the rash will not
appear. Other early symptoms are flu‐like and may include weakness, headaches, nausea, fever,
stiff neck, dizziness, muscle aches, sore throat, and swollen glands. In advanced stages more
serious symptoms may occur including facial paralysis, arthritis, and heart problems. Consult
your physician if you have symptoms of Lyme disease.

Prevent Lyme disease by preventing tick bites. Use a repellant containing DEET on exposed skin.
The Center for Disease Control advises that you should not use DEET repellant on skin under
your clothes. Do not apply repellants containing permethrin directly to your skin. Wear light
colored clothing when walking in tick habitat. Wear long sleeves and long pants. Check yourself
thoroughly for ticks. If bitten by a tick remove it promptly and disinfect the bite with rubbing
alcohol.

Leptospirosis ‐ Leptospirosis is a bacterial disease that infects humans and animals. Almost all
mammals can be infected, but it is more common in domestic animals than wildlife. The disease
is known to infect striped skunks, raccoons, foxes, opossums, bobcats, muskrats and
woodchucks. Leptospirosis spreads from eating infected food, contact with the urine of an
infected animal, or contact with urine‐contaminated water. The bacteria may enter the body
through skin wounds, mucous membranes, or cuts. Leptospirosis bacteria multiply in the blood
stream and may affect the kidneys. The bacteria leaves the body in the urine. Infection can
cause flu‐like symptoms in humans including headache, fever, muscle ache, vomiting, and
kidney damage. Antibiotics are very effective for treatment.

Sarcoptic Mange ‐ Mange is caused by a parasitic mite. It occurs throughout North America and
is most commonly found among red fox, coyotes, and domestic dogs. Adult female mites
burrow under the skin and deposit their eggs. This causes the animal to scratch, chew, or lick the
infected area, which leads to inflammation and infection. When the eggs hatch the condition
worsens. The animal’s hair falls out. The skin thickens, and gets crusted with scabs, and cracks.
Mange is always fatal to red foxes and sometimes to coyotes. The mite is transmitted among
animals through direct contact or by contact with contaminated areas such as dens or burrows.
People can get the mites by handling mange infested foxes, coyotes, or domestic dogs.




                                                19
Trichinosis ‐ Trichinosis is caused by eating raw or undercooked pork and wild game infected
with a roundworm parasite called trichinella. It affects people and many kinds of domestic and
wild animals. The parasite forms cysts in muscle tissue.

Cook furbearer meat thoroughly until the juices run clear. Freezing game meat, even for long
periods, may not kill all worms. Likewise, curing (salting), drying, smoking, or microwaving meat
does not consistently kill infective worms.

Giardiasis ‐ Giardiasis is caused by a parasite that can be carried by many animals, including
beaver. Beaver do not appear to be severely affected by the disease, but infected beavers can
contaminate water sources used by people. Giardiasis spreads from drinking contaminated
water or eating contaminated food. Human symptoms include diarrhea, cramping, weakness,
and mild fever. The condition can last 1‐2 weeks. Medication is usually prescribed to treat this
ailment.

Raccoon Roundworms ‐ Baylisascaris procyonis is a common intestinal roundworm parasite
found in raccoons and can cause a fatal nervous system disease in wild animals. The worms
develop to maturity in the raccoon intestine, where they produce millions of eggs that are
passed on with the feces. Released eggs take 2‐4 weeks to become infective to other animals
and humans. The eggs can survive for years. Most raccoons in New York, especially young of the
year, have raccoon roundworm infections.

Raccoons tend to defecate in specific places over a period of time. Likely places are at the base
of trees, barn lofts, sand boxes, chimneys, attics, or on high surfaces such as rocks or roofs.
People become infected when they accidentally ingest the eggs. The eggs can become airborne
as dust particles and people can inhale them. When humans eat or inhale raccoon roundworm
eggs, they hatch into larvae in the person’s intestine and travel through the body, affecting the
organs and muscles. Severity depends on how many eggs are ingested and where in the body
the larvae spread. Symptoms can include nausea, tiredness, loss of coordination, and blindness.
Infected animals may shows signs similar to rabies.

Tapeworms and Other Parasites ‐ People can get tapeworms and other parasites from contact
with furbearer or dog feces. Keep your hands clean to prevent accidental ingestion of the
microscopic eggs. Echinococcus granulosus has been confirmed in New York and its eggs may be
found on the fur and in the feces of coyotes. Trappers should wear gloves when handling
coyotes and wash their hands thoroughly after handling coyotes or their pelts.

Other Viral Diseases ‐ Pseudorabies, parvovirus, and distemper are diseases that can be carried
by furbearers and passed on to pets or livestock. Have your pets vaccinated and seek treatment
for them if you suspect these diseases.




                                                20
Trappers desiring additional information on animal diseases and parasites should speak to their
physician or search the New York State Department of Health website at
www.health.state.ny.us/diseases/.

Animal Bites and Scratches
Animal bites and scratches can cause serious injuries. Wash wounds thoroughly with soap and
water, apply bandages, and seek medical assistance. Keep the animal confined for observation if
possible. If you can’t confine the animal, kill it without damaging the head so that health
authorities can test it for rabies. If bitten, report the incident immediately to your local County
Health Department.

See the chapter on “Running a Trapline” for information on safe ways to release animals from
traps to prevent bites and scratches.

Be Safe, Be Seen
Trapping seasons usually coincide with hunting seasons for several species of game animals.
Trappers should make themselves visible to hunters by wearing hunter orange, or another
highly visible color, article of clothing. Something as simple as a hunter orange vest or cap will
suffice and greatly reduce the chance that a hunter may misidentify the trapper as a game
animal. Wearing hunter orange clothing will also make it easier to find you if you are lost,
injured, or sick.

Setting Large Body‐Gripping Traps
Some traps, such as large body‐gripping traps used for beaver, can be dangerous to a trapper
who doesn’t know how to use them properly. If you are accidentally caught in a large trap you
need to know how to release yourself, which may be difficult if you can’t use one of your arms.
Large body‐gripping traps are most often set underwater. You can drown or die from
hypothermia if you get caught in a large trap set underwater.

When using large body‐gripping traps carry setting tongs and a length of rope with a loop in the
end at all times. Keep the rope in a pocket or around your waist where you can easily reach it
with either hand. If you are caught, thread the rope through the ends of the springs. Put your
foot in the loop and use your free arm to pull the loose end. This releases the pressure on the
springs so you can free yourself.

Firearms Safety
Many trappers carry firearms to shoot animals caught in traps. Take a hunter education course
to learn about firearm safety. Practice safe habits around firearms at all times.

When trapping it is generally a good idea to keep your firearm unloaded until you need to use it.
It can be difficult to maintain control of a firearm when you are carrying gear and making sets.




                                                 21
When you shoot at an animal in a trap, be especially careful about ricochets off the trap or other
hard surfaces such as rocks or hard soils. Ricochets may also occur off from water. If you are
trapping with companions, everyone should stand behind the shooter.

Always look beyond your target when shooting a firearm and only shoot if it is safe. Keep the
muzzle under control and pointed in a safe direction at all times, even when the gun is not
loaded.

Getting Lost
It is easy to get lost if you are in unfamiliar territory. When you are looking for sign and places to
make sets you may not be paying close attention to landmarks and trails. Always carry a map of
the place you are trapping and a compass. Many people carry a global positioning system (GPS)
unit. If you carry a GPS, make certain you know how to use it and carry extra batteries but still
carry a compass for a backup in case your GPS is not functioning. You can also use a GPS to
mark the locations of your trap making them easier to relocate in areas unfamiliar to you.

Additional Safety Tips
Although many people trap alone it is best to use the buddy system for any outdoor activity.
That way if you are injured or sick your buddy can assist you or go for help.

Always tell your family exactly where you are going and when you plan to return. If you change
locations or plans, let your family know. Leave a map of your trapline at home.

Wireless or cell phones are a good safety tool for trappers. Do not rely on the phone to get you
out of all situations though. You could be out of range or find yourself with a dead battery when
you need your phone the most.

A trapper must know how to start a fire. Carry waterproof matches and fire starting materials
with you at all times. If you find yourself in a hypothermia situation it may be difficult to start a
fire without a these items.




                                                  22
Chapter 6 Equipment and Preparation

What do you need to learn and do before you go trapping? You will need to learn trapping laws
and regulations and obtain traps and other equipment. You must prepare the traps, make or
purchase baits and lures, and study the furbearers you plan to catch. Before trapping season
arrives, a wise trapper will practice making different kinds of sets and will thoroughly scout the
area he or she plans to trap. Careful and complete preparation will increase both your
enjoyment of trapping and your chances of success.



Trapping Equipment
The right equipment is essential to trapping success. In trapping, as in so many other activities,
quality equipment is the best investment in the long run. By being prepared for the most wary
and difficult‐to‐trap animals, the trapper can take advantage of all trapping opportunities. The
following is a list of the contents of a typical fox trapper’s pack basket: traps, gloves, pan covers,
dirt sifter, stakes, bait jar, digging tool, lure, hatchet, kneeling pad, wire, urine, pliers, swivels,
and extra trap tags. As you gain experience over time, you may find that you can get by with
fewer items than those listed above. On the other hand, you may develop your own list of
“essential” equipment that includes many additional items beyond this basic list.

Carrying Your Equipment
The trapper must have something in which to carry all the
equipment needed. If you trap primarily on foot, a pack
basket is the best approach for carrying your equipment.
Many trappers use a woven wood or fiberglass pack basket
rather than a canvas pack because the basket is more rigid
and more convenient to use as well as less likely to hold
odors. Lure and bait are usually carried in a separate pouch
or in a coat pocket to avoid contaminating traps with their
odors.

If you trap from a vehicle, boat, or canoe, several other
types of containers may be better options. Plastic buckets,
milk crates, and totes are particularly useful for trappers who do little walking while running
their traplines. These containers can also be used for transporting any animals that are caught
and help to keep the vehicle or boat clean by containing water, blood, and mud.



                                                  23
Gloves
If you make only dry‐land sets, a
pair of clean, odor‐free cotton
gloves may be sufficient. Many
trappers prefer rubberized gloves
to reduce human scent at the set.
Either the short rubber gloves or
arm‐length gauntlets are very
useful to water trappers. They
will more than pay for themselves
in comfort and preventing
chapped skin or frost bite. Keep gloves clean, and keep bait, lure, or other odors off the gloves.
Some trappers carry an additional pair of heavy gloves solely for handling animals.

Digging Tool
Many sets call for a bit of digging. Most trappers use
some type of long, sturdy trowel. Special trapping
trowels are available, but other options include a tile
spade, small folding shovel, garden trowel, or large
spoon. Modified hammers with digging blades welded
on are also available and good options in areas with
compact or rocky soils. Buy the best one you can
afford as it will see frequent use.

Dirt Sifter
A dirt sifter is simply a mesh‐bottomed box. Most
trappers make their own using a wooden frame about
8" x 10” x 3" and tacking in a bottom of 1/4"
hardware cloth. A sifter is extremely useful in dirt or
snow trapping. Covering the trap is required in most
cases and reduces the likelihood of damaging trapped
animals, and sifting the covering material helps to
prevent stones or twigs from jamming the trap.
Several commercial models of sifters are available.

Traps
You will need traps of the right size and type for the species you wish to target. Traps with teeth
are illegal to use in New York State. By law, all your traps must be clearly marked or tagged with
your name and address or your license ID number. Appendix 1 lists appropriate trap sizes, set
types, and effective baits and lures for each furbearer species found in New York.

Long‐spring traps have the longest history of design as steel traps but because they contain
more metal they are heavier. Single or double long‐spring traps may be the best choice in
                                                24
situations where traps can be easily concealed and the
extra weight might be an asset (such as in submersion
sets for beaver, otter, mink, and muskrat).

Guarded traps (also referred to as “stoploss” traps) are
available in several styles from several manufacturers.
They employ an additional spring‐loaded jaw or bail
that helps prevent muskrat or mink from escaping.
Many muskrat trappers use these types of traps almost
exclusively.

Under‐spring or jump traps are no longer
manufactured but are frequently found on the used
trap market. They are more compact and therefore
easier to conceal than long‐spring traps. While they are
a little more difficult to set than long‐spring traps,
jump traps are a bit faster closing. They are also
significantly lighter in weight than long‐spring traps.
Some manufacturers produced double as well as single
under‐spring traps.

Coil‐spring traps operate the fastest of the foothold
traps. Available in many sizes from a variety of
manufacturers, coil springs are often used in trapping
predators. They have all the advantages of under‐
spring traps with the addition of increased speed and
holding power.

Padded coil‐spring traps have rubber pads on the jaws.
These are another tool which can be used when
situations warrant, such as when chances of
encountering free‐roaming domestic animals are high.

Foot encapsulating traps (shown on page 26) are
designed specifically for the capture of raccoon. They
are designed to fully enclose the trapped paw of the
raccoon to prevent self‐inflicted damage. These traps
have a restricted opening to minimize the capture of
unintended animals. Some operate with a pull‐type trigger to further increase selectivity. Foot
encapsulating traps are set with bait or lure inside the trap such that a raccoon will attempt to
reach in the entry hole to grab the bait, firing the trap. These traps are more expensive than
traditional steel traps but most are simple to use and very efficient at capturing the intended
animal. They are an excellent tool for beginning trappers.

                                                25
Body‐gripping traps are the result of many years of research and design. They are designed to
catch an animal around the neck or chest or both. When properly set, these traps usually kill the
trapped animal quickly. If a chest hold occurs, the animal is killed by asphyxiation, with death
coming quite rapidly.

Body‐gripping traps are very popular with water trappers and
are quite useful in some kinds of land sets. CAUTION: BODY‐
GRIPPING TRAPS SHOULD NOT BE USED IN PLACES OR IN WAYS
THAT MAY TAKE UNINTENDED ANIMALS. Body‐gripping traps
are not adaptable to all types of furbearers, such as canines, or
to a full range of sets. Larger body‐gripping traps (more than 7 ½
inches) are illegal to use on land. Medium‐sized body‐gripping
traps set on land must adhere to special use requirements set by
regulation. Review the trapping regulations thoroughly before
using any body‐gripping traps.

Box or cage traps of various kinds are useful in trapping some
species in situations where the risk of taking domestic animals is
high, such as when trapping nuisance wildlife around farms or
homes, because unintended captures can be released
unharmed. Like body‐gripping traps, however, their use is
limited, especially for foxes and coyotes, which avoid them. The
cost and size of box traps are also disadvantages on trap lines.

Cable restraints or traps (also referred to as snares) are illegal to use in New York, even though
they may be available for sale.

Pliers and Cable Cutters
Trappers frequently use lengths of wire or cable in making sets.
A pair of pliers is very useful in cutting and twisting wire. They
may also be used for field repair of equipment and in adjusting
trap triggers. The pliers should have a cutting edge and should
be treated along with the traps to protect them and prolong


                                                 26
their life. When cutting cable, use cable cutters only. Pliers will not effectively cut cable.

Wire and Cable
Wire and/or cable have many uses on the trap line. Wire and cable can be used to repair chains,
make submersion sets, or attach traps to stakes. They also are used to hold traps, baits, or even
cubby pens in place. Many trappers prefer a dark wire for these purposes. Strong 16‐gauge wire
is recommended for muskrat and 11‐gauge wire or cable for larger furbearers. CAUTION:
Beware of kinks or nicks because they will weaken the wire or cable. Do not use wire to extend
trap chains; instead, use additional chain or cable.

Swivels
A swivel connecting the trap to the chain allows the trap to turn freely on the chain. This keeps
the chain from binding and prevents undue stress or leg damage to trapped animals. In general,
the more swivels, the better. Swivels can be rendered ineffective when tangled in vegetation or
clogged with mud, so having more than one in your anchoring system will increase the odds that
your trap will continue to turn freely after a catch. A good minimum is three; one at the trap end
of the chain, one at the stake end, and one in the middle. Swivels placed close to the trap have
the best chance of continuing to operate and allowing the trap to rotate if the chain becomes
wrapped around an object.




Trap Tags
Trap tags must be durable and easy to read. They must be firmly attached to the trap so they
will not come off. In New York, every trap must have a tag that legibly bears the name and
address or the license ID number of the trapper.

Shock springs
A shock spring can be added to the chain of restraining traps to improve the holding ability of
the trap and improve animal welfare. Shock springs can either be in‐line or off set with the
chain to provide cushioning when the animal reaches the end of the trap chain. These are most
often used on fox and coyote traps.


                                                  27
Hatchet
Every trapper needs a good hatchet on
the trap line. Staples or stakes must be
driven, and ice sometimes must be
chopped in making or checking sets.
Learn how to sharpen your hatchet and
use it safely. Carry hatchets with the
sharp edge covered.

Kneeling Pad
Some trappers use a square of cloth, rubber or plastic as an odor barrier to kneel on when
making dirt‐hole sets. Others make these sets from a squatting position, letting only their clean,
rubber footwear touch the ground. New trappers should try each way to see which they prefer.

Pan Covers
These items of wax paper, canvas, or other material are used by some trappers to prevent
materials from getting under the pan of the trap. Other trappers consider them unnecessary and
point out that they may carry human odors. Beginning trappers should determine the need for
them by trying both techniques.

Catchpole
Many trappers carry a catchpole—a pole or length of tubing
with a rope or cable attached. This highly recommended tool
can be used to control a trapped animal so it can be released
or dispatched more safely and easily. A catchpole can be
made by running a loop of plastic‐coated cable through a
three‐ to four‐foot piece of rigid aluminum pipe or conduit.
Attaching one end of the cable to the pipe makes use easier. High‐quality catch poles used in the
nuisance wildlife trapping industry may also be purchased.

Another alternative to using a catch pole is to use a large piece of plywood with a v‐notch cut
into the bottom. Attaching a handle to the trapper side of the plywood will make it much easier
to use. To release an animal, the trapper places the board between himself and the animal and
slowly approaches the trap. Once the trap is reached, the v‐notch is placed over the animal’s
foot that is being held by the trap, allowing the trapper to open the trap jaws and release the
animal while being protected by the board. This is the preferred method for releasing bobcats
and house cats as it is possible to over tighten a catchpole on a cat.




                                                28
Trap Setter
Larger body‐gripping and foothold traps often require
considerable effort to set. Some trappers carry a trap setter
(levers attached like scissors) to help handle these powerful
traps. Large body‐gripping traps may also be set by using a
length of strong small‐diameter rope with a loop on one end.
The trapper’s foot is placed in the loop. The free end is then fed
through the “eyes” of the trap springs twice. By pulling up on
the free end, the trapper can compress the spring and engage
the safety latch.

Safety Gripper
Whenever setting large body‐gripping traps, the trapper should
use a safety gripper tool. Several types are available but all
perform the same function of keeping the trap jaws from fully
closing should the trap fire during setting.

Anchoring Devices
Trap stakes for dry land sets can be hardwood, metal, or–more
recently–earth anchors. The stake must be adequate to hold
the largest animal the trap may catch. Under most conditions,
stakes should be about 12 to 18 inches in length. In sandy soils,
even longer stakes are needed. In very loose soils, or when
trapping animal like coyotes that push anchoring systems to
their limits, it may be necessary to use two metal or wood
stakes driven into the ground at such an angle that they form an
X. This method is known as cross‐staking and trappers can
purchase commercially available swivels for this purpose or
make their own. Metal stakes should be treated to remove
foreign odors in the same manner as the traps themselves. The
trap chain should be attached to the stake so it swivels on the
stake. Be sure the trap and chain swivels are functioning properly because swivels protect
trapped animals from unnecessary injury.

Stakes can also be used to anchor traps set in water for
muskrats and other animals associated with water. As always,
stakes must be large enough to hold any animal which might be
captured. Do not use fresh willow or other branches as stakes.
Willow sticks can take root and clog waterways, and recently cut
pieces of any tree or brush may be chewed by beavers,
rendering your stakes useless. If you do cut your own stakes
from trees or brush, cut them well in advance of the season so
they have a chance to dry and age. These will be much less
                                                29
attractive to any beavers in the area. Wood lath, which can be purchased at most hardware
stores, is a handy way for muskrat trappers to stake small body‐grip traps.

Drags
Where stakes are not practical or desirable, as in very rocky soils, drags are sometimes used;
however you should avoid using drags whenever possible because animals can escape and take
your traps with them. Good sign reading and tracking skills are important when using drags as
you’ll have to locate the animal after making a catch. Drags must be large enough to keep the
animal from escaping with the trap. Some trappers use metal drags resembling 2‐ or 3‐pronged
hooks. A few trappers use a heavy section of seasoned hardwood. A wood drag about 4 feet
long and at least 3 inches in diameter is usually adequate for raccoon trapping. When drags are
used, extended chains at least 6 feet long connect the trap and drag. In general, the longer the
chain used, the quicker the animal will become entangled and therefore be easier to find.

Bait, Lure, and Urine
Bait and lures are used to attract animals to the set. Baits,
lures, and urines are used in various combinations according to
each trapper’s individual preference. With experience, each
trapper develops techniques that work best for him or her.

Lures and baits are used to draw the animal into the area and
to get the animal to work (explore) the set, thus stepping into
the trap. The odors of baits and lures should be kept off the
traps themselves because lure‐ contaminated traps may cause
some furbearers, like foxes, to dig the traps out of the set. Baits
and lures should be carried outside the pack basket to prevent
trap contamination.

Bait and lure combinations abound. Most trapping books
contain information on lure preparation, and many trappers
prepare their own baits and lures. Only experimentation will
tell which baits and lures are best for a particular set.
Experienced trappers are always trying new things. Beginning
trappers would be wise to use commercial lures until they
develop their own. A new bait or lure should be used on only a
few sets until it has proven successful.

Responsible trappers try to use the most selective baits and lures possible. Some trappers use
animal urine as an attractant and suspicion remover when trapping fox, coyote, or bobcat. In
general, gland lures and urines are very selective furbearer attractants. Never use cat or dog
food for bait. Never use exposed carcasses as bait, as they may attract birds of prey. Cover all
carcasses with a layer of soil, grass, leaves, or other vegetation so they are not visible from

                                                 30
above or enclose them within a cubby. Refer to the natural history section about the species you
are trapping to help determine the best bait and lures.



Trapping Equipment Preparation
All equipment used in land trapping should be clean and free of foreign odors. When traps come
from the manufacturer, they are coated with oil. Before they can be treated, the oil must be
removed, which can be accomplished by washing in detergent or boiling in wood ashes or
caustic soda solution. Traps can also be soaked in a solution of vinegar and water for a few days
to remove the oil coating. After one of these cleaning processes, leave new traps outside to get
a light coating of rust, which will help whatever treatment is used to adhere to the metal

All traps should be checked and adjusted so that the pans sit level when set. Make sure each
trap has a readable tag as required by law. Remove all sharp edges and burrs. Check chains,
stakes, and drags for weak spots before treating and after each catch. Replace worn or broken
parts immediately.

The traps, chains, drags, and stakes, along with any other metal or equipment, can now be
treated. Place a small piece of wood or wire between the jaws of the traps to hold them open
during treatment.

Many coloring or dyeing agents are used for treating traps. Logwood powder or chips, sumac
berries, walnut hulls, hemlock bark, and maple bark are some of the commonly used agents. A
strong, hot solution of the material is kept at a simmer, and the traps are left in it until they
become black. This dye coat prevents or slows rusting, makes the trap easier to conceal, and
helps remove undesired odors. New traps are much more difficult to dye than traps that already
have a dye coat or a fine film of rust.

Traps that are to be used in land sets are often waxed to prevent further rust. You can buy trap
wax or make it with paraffin mixed with a small amount of beeswax and a pea‐sized piece of
pine resin. Some trappers coat the traps with a thin wax film by carefully placing hot, dry traps in
a smoking hot wax solution. The objective is to coat all parts of the trap with a very thin layer of
wax. USE EXTREME CAUTION! The wax is flammable. Traps should only be waxed outdoors and
away from buildings. Keep fire control devices such as a garbage can cover nearby to smother
any fires. Having a fire extinguisher on hand is a very good idea.

Do not wax body‐gripping traps. Waxed body‐gripping traps become very difficult to set,
frequently springing unexpectedly. They cannot be depended on to stay set, and they may be
dangerously sensitive while being set.




                                                31
After being dyed and waxed, hang the traps in the open air away from foreign odors, handling
them only with clean gloves. Traps that pick up foreign odors or food odors should be re‐treated
before being used again for land sets.

Some trappers use commercial dips to treat their traps. These dyes are mixed with lantern fuel,
gasoline, or even water depending on the type. Be extra cautious and stay clear of any possible
ignition sources. Once mixed, the trapper simply dips the cleaned traps and hardware into the
solution and hangs them up to dry. This results in a hard, durable finish on the metal. At first,
the finish will be shiny but it will become dull with time and use. To get the best finish, trappers
should dip their traps only on warm, sunny days with low humidity. Humid conditions may cause
the finish to feel sticky. After dipping body‐grip traps, particularly those to be used in water, you
may wish to remove the dip from parts of the trigger assembly because the dipped finish can
cause the trap to become difficult to set, much the same as when waxed. Use sandpaper or a
small file to remove the finish from those areas.

Another alternative to dipping or dyeing and waxing your traps is to paint them with a coat of
flat or matte spray paint. Be sure the trap is cleaned first and allowed to fully dry. Some trappers
even use multiple paint colors to create a camouflage effect on their body‐grip traps to better
conceal them from furbearers and trap thieves alike. This popular treatment is done less often
with foothold traps intended for use in land trapping.

Every effort should be made not to contaminate the traps with lure, bait, human scent, smoke,
or blood from previously trapped animals. Similar precautions should be used with all the other
items that are left at a set and tools that are used at the set (e.g. trowel, pliers). Clean traps
won’t help if there are odors on a stake or chain which give the set away.

Metal box traps may be treated like other traps, but wooden box traps should be permitted to
weather before being used. Painting is an excellent option for treating these traps as well.




                                                 32
Chapter 7 Best Management Practices

Trapping “best management practices,” or BMPs, are actions, equipment, and techniques that
improve animal welfare, help avoid the unintended capture of other animals, and increase
public support for trapping.

DEC strongly encourages trappers to use trapping BMPs at all
times because these will help sustain regulated trapping as a
wildlife management tool and maintain the integrity of wildlife
conservation programs throughout the United States. Trapping
BMPs are based on the most extensive research effort of
animal traps ever conducted in the United States, including
research conducted in New York. Traps tested were selected
based on knowledge of commonly used traps, previous
research, and input from expert trappers.

Where to find detailed BMP information for each furbearer
Trappers can find all current information on trapping BMPs at the following web site:

http://jjcdev.com/~fishwild/?section=best_management_practices

On this site, trappers can find summary BMP documents for all species of furbearers found in
New York.

The Furbearer Management web site is maintained by the Association of Fish and Wildlife
Agencies (AFWA) on behalf of state fish and wildlife agencies, trappers, and trapping
organizations.

Background information
In 1996, the then International Association of Fish and Wildlife
Agencies (this organization is now known as the Association of
Fish and Wildlife Agencies) began a program to develop Best
Management Practices (BMPs) for trapping as a way to improve
the welfare of captured animals and to document
improvements in trapping technology. This project is one of the
most ambitious in the history of the conservation movement.

AFWA coordinates the development of BMPs for trapping.
AFWA’s membership includes all 50 state fish and wildlife
management agencies, federal agencies, and conservation organizations. Biologists from New

                                               33
York have been heavily involved in this effort via a multi‐state committee of fish and wildlife
agency biologists.

State furbearer biologists, veterinarians, trappers, and scientists from the University of Georgia
and the University of Wyoming cooperated on the development of BMPs. The United States
Department of Agriculture provided most of the funding for trapping BMP research and
development.

BMPs are based on the most extensive research effort of animal traps ever conducted in the
United States. Traps tested were selected based on knowledge of commonly used traps,
previous research, and input from expert trappers.

Trapping BMPs were developed to give wildlife professionals information they need to improve
animal welfare. State fish and wildlife agencies will use BMPs to continue the improvement of
trapping systems throughout the United States.

Trapping BMPs include suggestions on practices, equipment, and techniques that will provide
trappers and wildlife biologists with practical information to use in the field.

BMP Evaluation Criteria
BMP traps were evaluated using criteria to measure the effects on animal welfare as well as
trapping efficiency, selectivity, practicality, and safety.

Animal Welfare ‐ Researchers used live restraining traps to test for injuries to furbearers using
two methods. One system evaluated specific injuries, and the other grouped the injuries into
categories from mild to severe. BMP‐approved traps must have a low rate of injuries to the
furbearing animals being studied. Recommended traps resulted in moderate, low, or no injury
to at least 70% of the animals trapped.

Efficiency ‐ Traps meeting BMP criteria must be able to capture and hold at least 60% of the
furbearers that spring the trap.

Selectivity ‐ Traps must be set and used in a fashion that limits the risk of capturing non‐
furbearing species while increasing the chances of capturing the desired furbearer.

Practicality ‐ Each recommended live restraining trap was evaluated by experienced trappers
and wildlife biologists for practicality. Criteria used to measure practicality include cost, ease of
use, ease of transport, storage, weight and size, reliability, versatility, and the expected life‐span
of the trap.

Safety ‐ Each recommended live restraining trap was evaluated for safety to the user and other
people who might come into contact with the trap.




                                                 34
BMP Results
While BMPs do not specifically recommend which brand of trap should be used (though they do
note the particular brand that was tested and passed the criteria listed above), they do list
specifications of those traps that performed the best. For example, for coyote (eastern United
States), coilspring traps with plain jaws and a 5 to 5 ½ inch jawspread performed best. The
Woodstream TM Victor No. 1.75 and No. 2 traps were tested for this category.

See http://jjcdev.com/~fishwild/?section=best_management_practices for the full set of BMP
publications, including detailed listings of all traps that passed the rigorous BMP research
criteria.




                                              35
36
Chapter 8 Selective Trapping
Techniques

Selective trapping is a challenging activity. Each time you set a trap, you should make the set to
catch a specific furbearer or small group of furbearers (i.e. mink and muskrat, beaver and otter,
fisher and raccoon). You should also take steps to prevent catching pets or other unintended
animals. The information in this chapter will give you an introduction to selective trapping
techniques in preparation for understanding the chapters on making sets.

Location, Location, Location
The location of your set is the first
consideration for selective trapping. Each
species of furbearer lives in a certain kind
of habitat, eats certain kinds of food, and
follows certain habits. Use this knowledge
to find the best places to set your traps.
Pre‐season scouting will reveal which
locations are best for your intended
furbearer. However, abundant sign of the desired animal is not the only determining factor in
whether or not you have found a good location for a set. Other factors must be considered:

           Is the location near a trail that is heavily used by people and their pets?

           Do hunters using dogs use the same area?

           If you catch an animal, will it be visible to people passing by?

You should be able to answer “no” to each of these questions. If you answered “yes” to any of
these questions, do not set traps in this location.

Once a suitable location has been found, there are several additional techniques that can be
employed to increase the selectivity of your set. For example:

           If you make a muskrat set at the edge of a stream, you can avoid trapping ducks and
            other water birds by sticking branches out of the stream bank above the trap.
            Muskrats can pass below the branches, but ducks will be hesitant to do so.

           You can make a cubby for raccoons that will keep most dogs from springing the trap
            by placing the trap inside the cubby and by narrowing the height of the opening.


                                                37
Attractants
The proper use of bait, lure, and urine is a key factor in selective trapping. Each furbearing
animal responds to certain food smells. Glandular lures can appeal to a specific animal’s
curiosity or territorial urges. Never use pet food for bait. Avoid other baits that might attract
dogs or cats. For example, fish might attract cats if you are trapping near homes that have pets.
For some species like raccoon, consider using sweet baits (baits that use fruit as a base) instead
of meat or fish to minimize the chances of attracting dogs or cats. While the use of selective
attractants will minimize the chances of unintended catches, they are not foolproof. Therefore,
the trapper must continue to employ all other techniques to avoid catching domestic and other
unintended animals.

If large baits such as animal carcasses are used, be sure to cover them so that they are not
visible from above. This will protect against the accidental capture of birds of prey, which hunt
by sight. The scent coming from the covered bait makes your set attractive to many furbearers
that forage primarily through their sense of smell.

You’ve got the location, now what?
Choosing the proper size and type of trap for the situation and species being sought is also a key
component of trapping selectively. The size of the jaw spread and strength of the spring can
help catch and hold a specific furbearer. Pan tension is an important consideration as well. Try
two pounds for fox or bobcats and four pounds for coyotes. Trigger length and placement in
body‐grip traps can help you to target certain furbearers like beaver, while avoiding the capture
of others like otter or muskrat.

Trappers can use the BMPs developed by AFWA to aid in the selection of the proper traps for
various furbearer species. Recall from Chapter 7 that two criteria of the BMP trap testing
process were selectivity and efficiency. The BMP trap‐testing process has saved today’s trappers
a lot of trial and error by scientifically evaluating many of the traps available today and
highlighting which trap types and specifications are best for a particular species. BMPs can be
found on the AFWA website at:
http://jjcdev.com/~fishwild/?section=best_management_practices.

Trap placement is another factor in selective trapping. At a dirt‐hole set, for example, try placing
the trap so the pan is closer to the bait hole for fox and farther away for larger coyotes. Give
thought to the physical characteristics and habits of the animal you are trying to catch and let
them guide the placement of your trap.




                                                38
Talk to the landowner
Responsible trappers make every effort to learn all they can about the
property they trap and who might be using the property for other
activities. Find out who else has permission to be on the property and
when they will be there. This will help you avoid problems, and you
may make some new friends in the process. Try to talk to the other
users of the property so you can work out a plan that will allow
everyone to use the property to your enjoyment while avoiding
potential conflicts.

Public areas provide millions of acres of land and water where trapping is permitted. During
times of heavy public use for upland bird hunting, it is a good idea to focus on water trapping to
avoid the possibility of catching dogs. Since most furbearers are nocturnal, you can make sets in
the evening and pull them or trip them the next morning. Local wildlife biologists, rangers, or
conservation officers can tell you about the most heavily used hunting areas so that you can
avoid them when hunters are running dogs.

These are just a few examples of the ways you can make your sets more selective and avoid
unintended catches. To learn more, study BMP documents and the natural history of the species
you trap.




                                                39
40
Chapter 9 Natural History of New
York Furbearers

It is very important for trappers to know furbearer natural history. Understanding each species’
habits and habitat helps you select good set locations. Set location is much more important than
set construction. Landowners may be able to supply some information about the animals on
their land, particularly problem animals, but pre‐season scouting will help you determine if the
location is good for your intended species.

Scouting includes observations of animal tracks, scats, droppings and other signs. The ability to
read sign is an acquired skill, and the information included in this chapter can help you develop
this skill.

Sets mentioned in this section are more fully described in Chapters 10 and 11. Examples of
furbearer tracks are located in Appendix 2. Drawings of the scat of each of these animals are
found in Appendix 3. Up‐to‐date range maps for each species in the northeastern United States
and Canada can be found at www.conservewildlife.org




                                                41
Muskrat (Ondatra zibethicus)
Muskrats resemble large rats with long,
vertically flattened tails. They reach a total
length of about 26 inches, including the tail,
which is about as long as the body. The
maximum weight is 3 to 4 ½ pounds. Their
pelts are usually a rich, glossy brown with
brown‐tipped, dark gray underfur, but the
pelts may range from tan to black. The belly
is silvery gray to light rusty tan. Although
they are small, muskrats are abundant, and
their annual dollar value probably exceeds
all other North American furbearers.

Reproduction
Muskrats breed through the spring and summer and are capable of producing many offspring.
While the usual number of young per litter is 5 to 6, as many as 11 have been recorded.
Muskrats may have 2 to 3 litters per year, and their gestation period (length of development
inside the mother) is 22‐30 days. Dens may be bank burrows or small dome‐shaped huts in
relatively shallow water.

Habitat
Muskrats are largely aquatic. They are found in fresh and brackish water marshes, swamps,
streams, lakes, and ponds. Nearly every older farm pond has muskrats, and nearly any semi‐
permanent watercourse has at least a few. Beaver ponds, both active and inactive, are suitable
muskrat habitat.

Habits
Like most other furbearers, muskrats are most active at night (nocturnal) or around dawn and
dusk (crepuscular). They are frequently seen during the day, however. They travel extensively
along watercourses, even small spring runs, or over land. These travels are most frequent during
the fall and right after ice‐out in the spring.

Trails, channels, plant cuttings, tracks along banks, and scats are all signs of muskrat activity.
Muskrats develop habitual travel routes on land and in water, which they keep open with
constant traffic and pruning. These trails are readily evident to the experienced eye. Active bank
burrows about 4 to 8 inches in diameter, feed beds of cut grasses or cattails, and huts are also
positive muskrat signs.

When muskrat populations are dense, adult males tend to fight, leaving a large number of cut
and injured animals in some populations during March and April.

                                                 42
Although their teeth, like those of other rodents, are adapted to feeding on vegetation,
muskrats will eat clams, mussels, frogs, and fish as well as cattails, rushes, water lilies, and other
aquatic plants. They are also fond of fruit and grains, if available near water.

Disease
Muskrats suffer from several diseases, including tularemia and hemorrhagic septicemia. Since
humans can be infected with tularemia, avoid any contact with muskrats found dead or dying of
no apparent cause. Wearing rubber or plastic gloves while skinning trapped muskrat can
minimize the risk of contracting tularemia.

Trapping Tactics
Muskrat pelts are best in winter or early spring before biting occurs. However, pelts taken in late
fall are also marketable.

Muskrats are not trap shy. In most instances, well‐darkened traps set under water need no
covering at all. Muskrats may be taken in bait sets, runway or channel sets, and float sets. Some
of the most productive blind sets are those placed in narrow waterways, along stream or pond
banks where recent muskrat signs are present, or at feed beds. Whenever possible, use small
body‐gripping traps for muskrats. Foothold or guarded foothold traps in sizes 1 and 1½ are also
appropriate, and the sets should be made to ensure the animal is submerged. Where the water
is not deep enough to ensure submersion (about a foot), a guarded foothold trap on a slide wire
to deeper water or a body‐gripping trap must be used. This is necessary because if a standard
foothold trap is used and the muskrat isn’t submerged, it may twist and pull until it escapes,
leaving its foot in the trap. This is called “wring‐off,” and is to be avoided at any cost. Using
recommended techniques and state of the art traps, this can be completely avoided.
Submersion sets and body‐gripping traps will eliminate this problem. If a trapper is not
absolutely sure that he or she can submerge a muskrat at a particular site, the trapper must use
either a body‐gripping trap or a guarded trap, or move the set to another location where the
catch can be submerged. Trappers who finds evidence of wring‐off, or find live muskrat in their
traps, should immediately re‐evaluate their trapping methods to prevent this from happening
again.

Baits and Lures
Muskrat lures and baits are numerous. Muskrat musk is frequently used in spring trapping. In
the fall and winter, trappers use oil of sweet flag, spearmint, anise or some other sweet‐smelling
oil as an attractant. Fish oil is also attractive to muskrats. Apples, parsnips, and carrots are all
used successfully as muskrat baits. Exercise caution when using baits and lures containing anise
or fish oil during spring muskrat seasons to minimize the chances of catching raccoons.




                                                 43
Mink (Mustela vison)
Mink are medium‐sized members of
the weasel family. Like others in the
weasel family, they have long,
slender bodies and short legs. Large
males reach lengths in excess of 26
inches, with tails about 9 inches long
and weights up to 3 ½ pounds.
Females are smaller than males.

Mink pelts are usually rich, glossy
brown, but pale brown or nearly
black mink occur. Mink can be
distinguished from weasel by their white chin patch and brown belly. While weasel are light
underneath, mink will only occasionally have white on their bellies. The bushy tail is usually a bit
darker than the body. The mink’s short, dense underfur is pale brown.

Reproduction
Mink mate in late winter from January through March. Litters of 2 to 6 young are born in April or
May after a variable gestation period averaging about 42 days. Only a single litter is born each
year.

Dens may be in debris piles, hollow logs, rock piles, or abandoned muskrat houses or burrows
near water. Females usually remain near dens, while males wander over considerable distances.

Habitat
Mink are most often found near streams, lakes, marshes, or swamps, but they may travel
considerable distances from those wetlands.

Habits
Mink are primarily nocturnal but will often hunt during the day. Feeding mainly on fish, frogs,
birds and small mammals, these predators hunt primarily along watercourses. They are equally
at home on land and water, but most of their traveling is done along stream or lake edges. Like
raccoon, they enter the water readily to avoid obstructions. Mink are curious and thorough in
their search for food. Nearly any hole, brush pile, hollow log, or other potential food‐producing
cover along their route will be visited. They are creatures of habit, visiting the same places on
each trip through an area.

Males visit small feeder streams, spring runs, and even drainage tiles in their rounds; usually
travelling longer distances than females. Headwater areas are frequently the denning areas of
resident females. Mink scats are generally abundant in such areas. During the winter, mink
travel extensively under the ice.
                                                 44
Disease
Generally, mink have few diseases. However, they are susceptible to distemper and pollutants
such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).

Trapping Tactics
Mink fur is best from about mid‐November until the beginning of January. Fur from animals
taken later in the season is likely to be “singed” (curling of guard hair) or discolored.

Mink are taken in a wide variety of sets. Water sets for mink are easier to make than are dry‐
land sets. Blind sets where mink tracks enter or leave the water, at bank holes (pocket sets) or in
small spring runs or drainage tiles are all effective methods . Cubby sets, particularly artificial
bank‐hole cubbies using mink lure, are good mink sets. Dirt‐hole sets for fox or raccoon
occasionally take mink.

Mink are strong and quick, so traps for them should be strong and fast. Coil‐spring or under‐
spring traps in sizes 1 or 1½ are preferred. Longspring traps can be used successfully with the
added weight advantage for submersion sets. Small body‐gripping traps (especially with double
springs) will take mink. Submersion sets should always be used with foothold traps. Pan tension
should be very light for mink. Just enough to keep the trap set until stepped on.

Baits and Lures
Muskrat or mink musk, scats, urine and beaver castor are all attractive to mink. Fish oil alone or
in combination with the above ingredients is also a good lure. There are many commercial lures
on the market as well.

Good lures and blind sets are usually the most successful techniques with mink, but fresh fish,
poultry, or muskrat flesh also work well as mink baits as long as special care is taken not to
attract domestic animals.




                                                45
Beaver (Castor canadensis)
The beaver is a large, aquatic rodent with
webbed rear feet and a horizontally
flattened, paddle‐shaped tail. The largest
North American rodent, beaver may be more
than 45 inches long, including the tail, and
reach weights of more than 60 pounds. With
soft, dense underfur ranging from pale to
chocolate brown and rich brown guard hairs,
their glossy, durable coat is a valuable fur.


Reproduction
Beaver are apparently monogamous (have only one mate). They breed from January to March,
with the young born about 128 days later. Litters range in size from 1 to 8 young, but 2 to 4 are
usual. The young remain with the parents for about two years, maturing at 1 to 2 years of age.
Beaver have one litter per year.

Dens are in either large bank holes (burrows) or large, dome‐shaped, stick‐and‐mud lodges.
Entrances and exits are generally below the surface of the water.

Habitat
Beaver are semi‐aquatic mammals, generally found near water. Young adults looking for a new
area to live may travel considerable distances along very small water courses. Suitable habitat
may be natural, or dams may be constructed by the beaver where other conditions are
favorable.

Beaver are the one animal in New York (other than humans) which actively alters it’s
environments to suit its needs.

Habits
Beaver are mainly nocturnal or crepuscular. They prefer rather deep water and will construct
mud‐and‐stick dams to create those preferred conditions. Typically, each adult beaver pair
constructs a lodge that they occupy with their kits and yearlings.

Beaver feed on both bark and aquatic vegetation, and winter food stores (feed piles) are
composed of quantities of branches lodged in the bottom of the pond. Their preferred foods
include aspen (poplar), alder, and willow, but several other types of trees and aquatic plants are
also used.




                                                46
Generally, beaver use habitual runways in their travels. In late winter, they go considerable
distances to areas of open water. Secretions from the castors (scent glands) are deposited on
scent mounds made of mud along the banks as a means of communication.

Active beaver colonies can be identified by the presence of dams, channels, lodges, freshly cut
trees or brush, tracks, and mud scent mounds.

Disease
Beaver are susceptible to tularemia, so trappers should follow the same precautions mentioned
for muskrat (avoid any contact with beaver found dead or dying of no apparent cause and wear
rubber or plastic gloves while skinning).

Trapping Tactics
Beaver pelts are most prime in winter and early spring though like muskrats, fall caught pelts are
also marketable.

Trail, bait, spillway, scent mound, and channel sets are effective in trapping in open water.
Channel sets are also effective in under‐ice trapping. Several kinds of bait sets using fresh twigs
or other vegetation are also used under the ice. Slanted‐pole sets and bait‐pen sets (basically
underwater cubbies) are two popular types. Most trappers prefer large body‐gripping traps or
strong size 3 or 4 traps for beaver. All sets should be placed in the water. When using foothold
traps for beaver, submersion wires or cables equipped with one‐way sliding locks must be used,
unless the trap is anchored to prevent the beaver from reaching the surface. At least three feet
of water is needed to submerge beaver consistently. Placing traps on or within a certain
distance of dams or lodges may be illegal in some areas. In addition, some areas that do not
have an open otter trapping season may require the use of offset triggers on body gripping
traps. Check the regulation in the New York Hunting and Trapping Guide or DEC’s website
http://www.dec.ny.gov. Ask your local Environmental Conservation Officer (ECO) if in doubt
about regulations.

Baits and Lures
Castoreum (the secretion of the castors) and oil glands located under the skin between the
beaver’s hind legs are the most frequently used beaver lures. Twigs or sections of branches from
poplar, alder, willow, maple, or other trees are frequently used for bait.




                                                47
River Otter (Lontra canadensis)
Otter are large aquatic
members of the weasel
family. They have the typical
weasel shape, reach up to 43
inches long (including a
heavy, tapered tail up to 17
inches long), and weigh up to
24 pounds. Otter are brown
above and gray below with
very glossy pelts. Otter fur is
highly durable.

Otter have webbed feet which make them very well adapted for life in the water. Their scats are
highly variable, but usually they contain masses of fish scales and bones. Otter slides and
twisted tufts of grass (scent posts) are other signs of this highly prized furbearer.

Reproduction
Young otter are born in April and May, with average litter sizes of 1 to 5 young. The family group
remains together for about a year. Otter dens are frequently located in bank holes, hollow logs,
or abandoned beaver lodges. Like other mustelids, otter are delayed implanters.

Habitat
Otter are primarily aquatic, but they travel overland for considerable distances when moving
between streams. They may visit any wetland area, including rivers, lakes, beaver ponds,
streams, ponds and even small brooks within their range.

Habits
Otter are almost entirely carnivorous (flesh eating). Food items include fish, crayfish, clams,
snakes, frogs, tadpoles, salamanders, and a variety of water insects. At times of food
scarcity otters may prey on muskrats and small birds and eat such things as blueberries and
corn. Active at any time of day or night, otter cover a large hunting area, as much as 62 linear
miles or more along water courses. Otter frequently travel in pairs or family groups as they
make the rounds of their hunting territories.

Even though young otter must be taught to swim, they are soon able to catch fish. They will eat
the most easily caught species. Although otter reportedly take trout, they eat rough fish such as
bullheads and suckers more frequently than the more elusive trout.

Otter use slides and “rolling places” along their routes. Often, tufts of grass in these areas will be
twisted and scent‐marked by anal gland secretions. Abundant droppings are often found in large
toilet/latrine areas.
                                                 48
Trapping Tactics
Otter pelts are best in late fall or early winter. Like mink, otter pelts may exhibit singe if taken in
late winter or spring.

Otter are extremely wary and trap shy. They are also quick and very powerful. Traps for otter
must be heavy, fast, and strong. Most trappers use size 3 or 4 foothold traps or large or medium
body‐gripping traps. In all cases, they must be very carefully concealed. All sets should be placed
in the water. Sets using foothold traps should use a submersion wire or cable with a one‐way
sliding lock. Care should be taken with trap placement in order to get a proper hold using
foothold traps. Traps that are sprung by the otter’s body will result in a trap‐wise otter.

Water sets at the base of trails leading to the top of a slide are much more effective than are
sets at the base of the slide. Carefully hidden sets at an otter toilet/latrine can also be
productive. Bait sets are sometimes successful, but lure alone often works better for these
elusive animals. Blind sets in narrow spring runs, channels, or spillways will also take otter.

Baits and Lures
Otter musk, used sparingly, is the best lure for otter. Beaver castor will also attract them. Other
furbearers such as raccoon and beaver are also attracted by these lures. Some trappers use
fresh, whole fish when baiting otter sets.




                                                  49
Opossum (Didelphis virginiana)
The opossum is about the size of a fat house
cat. Resembling a large, shaggy, cream‐to‐
gray colored rat with a pointed snout full of
teeth, this animal can reach lengths
(including tail) of 35‐40 inches and weights up
to about 10 pounds. With sparse, coarse,
white guard hairs over black‐tipped creamy
underfur, the opossum has a light to dark
gray body with black legs. The ears and tail
are naked, and both are black at the base and
lighter at the tips. Opossum pelts must be
handled carefully to be worth showing to a
fur buyer.

Reproduction
Opossum breed during the spring and summer, producing 1 or 2 litters each year. The young are
born after a two‐week gestation and up to 18 may enter the female’s pouch (the opossum is the
only North American marsupial). Generally only 7 to 8 young survive to leave the pouch about
two months later.

Habitat
Opossum are found in brush, hedgerows, and orchards. Woodland edges, croplands,
bottomlands, and even buildings are also likely areas. Dens are most often located in hollow
trees, fallen logs, or burrows abandoned by woodchucks or skunks.

Habits
These rather primitive animals are mainly nocturnal. They feed on nearly anything, animal or
vegetable, fresh or rotten. Opossum are not at all trap shy and may be taken in most any kind of
set. Having relatively small brains dominated by the olfactory (smell) regions, they are easily
attracted by sweet or foul odors. Rather slow and unwary, opossum often employ threats or
play dead to avoid predation. Their tracks resemble many tiny, overlapping hand prints with a
central drag mark made by the tail. The scats are variable, depending on the type of food eaten.
Opossum tend to remain in a relatively restricted area.

Trapping Tactics
Opossum pelts are at their best from November to March.

Very few trappers actually set traps for opossum. Most are taken in sets made for more valuable
species, particularly fox, raccoon, or mink. Dirt‐hole sets and cubby sets are among the more
effective opossum catchers.

                                                  50
Most trappers prefer size 1 or 1½ traps for opossum. Medium‐sized body‐gripping traps are
effective where catching domestic animals is not a danger. Since opossum are not trap shy, they
can be trapped effectively using box traps.

Baits and Lures
Nearly any bait or lure will attract opossum. Poultry entrails and tainted baits (e.g. rotting fish,
meat, or eggs, or rank cheese) are all quite effective. Using expensive or elaborate baits or lures
in trapping opossum is unnecessary.




                                                 51
Striped Skunk (Mephitis mephitis)
The striped skunk needs
little introduction. Skunks
are black and white,
ranging from nearly all
black to black with a
single broad white band
from crown to tail tip.
Large skunk may reach
lengths up to 28 inches including about 10 inches of heavily furred tail. Weights up to 13
pounds have been recorded. Skunks have glossy guard hairs and dense underfur. Their musk
glands have a very strong odor.

Reproduction
Skunk mate during the first warm weather in February and March. Litters of up to 10 young
(usually about 5) are born in May after a 63‐day gestation period. The young remain with the
adult female until midsummer.

Dens are found under buildings, rock piles, sawmill slab piles, hollow logs, or abandoned
woodchuck burrows. Winter dens are usually some form of ground burrow.

Habitat
Skunks prefer rather open country. Farmland with a mixture of brush, woodlands, pastures and
cropland is ideal skunk habitat.

Habits
Skunks are mainly nocturnal, but their activity period includes both dawn and dusk. They eat
large numbers of insects and small rodents as well as frogs, snakes, eggs, birds, berries, fruits,
and carrion(animals found dead). Skunks become inactive during cold winter weather, but they
emerge to feed during warm periods. Males wander widely during the breeding season. Skunks
depend on their scent glands for defense. As a result of this effective tactic, skunks are relatively
unwary and easily observed.

Diseases
Skunk are susceptible to distemper and rabies. The symptoms for these diseases are very
similar. In the final stages, the animal might be indifferent to the trapper’s approach, have
crusty eyes, shake or quiver, and drool or foam at the mouth. Rabies can infect humans, while
distemper can be caught by dogs and pets.

The trapper should avoid being bitten and always use rubber gloves when handling skunk. Any
contact with skunks found dead or dying of no apparent cause should be avoided. Be sure to use
the precautions mentioned later in skinning any animal. If the trapper is bitten, the animal
                                              52
should be killed without damaging the brain. Wearing rubber gloves, the trapper should remove
the animal from the trap and place it in a sturdy plastic bag, which is then securely fastened. The
trapper should immediately wash the wound and go to a local doctor. Then, the suspected
animal should be delivered to the county health office for a rabies test.

Trapping Tactics
Skunk pelts are best from November to January. Their habit of denning during cold weather
means that they must be trapped most intensely during the early part of the November to
January period or during warm spells.

Skunks are not trap shy, and they can be taken in a wide variety of sets. Many are caught in dirt‐
hole sets for fox or raccoon. Cubby sets, dirt‐hole sets and sets near dens account for large
numbers of skunk. Size 1 to 1½ foothold traps are most frequently used. Medium‐sized body‐
gripping traps are effective for skunk, but they must be used very carefully to avoid catching and
killing domestic animals. Box traps also may be used effectively for trapping skunk.

Baits and Lures
Fish oil and skunk musk are good skunk lures. Sweet‐smelling lures such as oil of anise or honey
can also draw skunk to your sets. The best lure for skunks is your favorite fox or coyote lure!
Fresh or rotten flesh is good for skunk as well as opossum. Because of their broad food
preferences, skunks are easily baited.




                                                53
Raccoon (Procyon lotor)
Raccoon are heavy‐bodied animals
with relatively long legs, a pointed
snout, and a moderately long,
ringed tail. The coat has a grizzled
or stippled appearance with
overall color ranging from gray to
chocolate brown. The black mask
and the tail ringed with dark and
light bands are distinctive.
Raccoon reach lengths of more
than 41 inches including a tail
about 12 inches long. They may
weigh in excess of 33 pounds. The
banded guard hairs mix with silky underfur, which ranges from pale tan to chocolate brown.
Raccoon tracks resemble tiny human hand and foot prints, with the relatively long toes visible in
soft surfaces.

Reproduction
The young are born in April or May after a 63‐day gestation period. Litters of 2 to 7 are common,
with four being average. Raccoon have one litter per year, and the young remain with the
female into the fall.

Habitat
Raccoon are highly adaptable animals found over most of North America. They are often
observed along wooded streams, lake shores, marshes, and swamps. They also live in upland
areas where their favorite foods are found. Raccoon are well adapted to farm buildings or
human dwellings, and populations within towns and suburban areas can be surprisingly high.

Raccoon den in hollow trees, logs, rocky ledges, and even in burrows made by other animals.
Den trees can be recognized readily by smoothed bark, scratches, hair, and possible scats. A
wise trapper will not disturb dens since they are often used year after year by the raccoons in
that area. Caution should be used in setting traps near dens during the hunting season since
coon dogs may go to such sites.

Habits
Raccoon eat almost anything that is available. They are efficient predators, feeding on nestling
birds, eggs, fish, frogs, crayfish, mussels and insects. During the late summer and fall, their diet
contains large amounts of fruits and grain. Black cherries, apples, grapes, corn, beechnuts, and
acorns attract them to higher elevations.


                                                 54
Although raccoon are good swimmers, they confine most of their activities to the banks and
shallow‐water sections of lakes and streams. They will detour into water to avoid obstructions,
and they use crossing logs when available. Raccoon are natural explorers with curiosity that can
be used to a trapper’s advantage.

Although raccoon become inactive during the winter, they are active during warm spells and
thaws. Good catches can be taken throughout the winter during these periods of activity.

Disease
Raccoon are hosts to distemper and dermatophilus as well as rabies. Contact with raccoon
found dead or dying without apparent cause should be avoided. Since dermatophilus can infect
humans, trappers should wear rubber gloves when handling any raccoon that has flaky skin or
patches of missing fur. The same precautions described for skunk should be followed (refer to
the disease section under skunk for additional information). As mentioned on page 20, raccoon
roundworm is a concern and trappers should take appropriate precautions to guard against it.

Trapping Tactics
Raccoon pelts are best from about mid‐November to January. Depending on the weather, high
quality fur may be taken as late as February. Raccoon fur is quite prone to rubbing damage,
singeing or springiness later in the season, and will be worth much less.

Many raccoons are taken in dirt‐hole or spring‐hole sets for foxes. Cubby, obstruction, and blind
sets where they enter or leave the water are all good raccoon takers. Sets in spring runs or
irrigation ditches often are productive. Raccoon may also be caught in leaning pole sets.

Raccoon are strong, with rather slender legs and feet. Strong sized 1 foothold traps or double
jawed 1 ½ traps are used for raccoon. A good foot trap for raccoon catches them on the paw,
not the wrist or leg, and is small enough to prevent the raccoon from getting its snout under the
trap jaws. Foot encapsulating traps work exceptionally well for raccoon and almost eliminate
unintended catches Medium‐sized body‐gripping traps are good for raccoon, but they must be
used very carefully to avoid catching free‐ranging domestic animals. Large box traps can be
quite effective in taking raccoon. Some trappers prefer to use longer trap chains with drags.
However, if drags are used, they should be of sufficient size (four feet long and three inches
across) and made of hardwood because these animals tend to chew at the drag.

Baits and Lures
Raccoon are attracted to a wide variety of lures, including sweet‐smelling lures such as oil of
anise and foul‐smelling lures like fish oil. Fresh or rotten flesh, marshmallows, grape jelly, honey,
fish, apples, singed (burned) corn, and mussels are all good raccoon baits. Raccoon gland lures
may be very attractive to hunting dogs, so they should be used very carefully at selective set
locations that dogs are not likely to frequent. Other baits and lures may be more selective.


                                                 55
Red Fox (Vulpes fulva)
The red fox resembles a small
shepherd dog with a bushy tail,
erect ears, pointed snout, and
long legs. It is usually reddish‐
yellow to rusty‐orange with a
white‐tipped tail, and black legs,
feet and ears. Darker color
variations known as cross and
silver fox occur in some areas. Fox
look larger than they really are. Larger specimens reach lengths of about 42 inches, including a
bushy tail about three‐fifths as long as the body. Maximum weights are 13 to 15 pounds. The
pelt features long, glossy guard hairs with dense underfur ranging from nearly white to medium
gray‐brown in the reddish individuals.

Reproduction
Red fox breed in late winter with the pups born about 53 days later. Both adults may take part
in rearing the litter, which usually includes 4 to 9 young. Fox have only one litter per year.

Fox den in abandoned woodchuck burrows, old slab piles, under abandoned buildings, or in
small rock caves. They may dig their own dens in porous soils.

Habitat
Red fox prefer a mixture of mature, open forest and open fields. Farming country often supports
excellent fox populations.

Habits
Red fox are mainly nocturnal, but they are frequently active during the day. Fond of winter
sunbathing, they can often be seen on slopes with a southern exposure. Fox feed mainly on
insects, rodents, some carrion, and fruits, nuts, and berries when those foods are available.

Red fox often hunt and travel along field edges, game trails, wood roads, and cleared rights‐of‐
way. They tend to hunt along hedgerows and other strips of cover rather than the central parts
of open areas. Red fox are wary and have excellent hearing, good eyesight, and finely tuned
scenting abilities. They come to baits cautiously, tending to scan the area carefully from an
elevated spot such as a log or ant hill before moving to a trap site.

Red fox range over a rather large area (up to one square mile), marking their travels much like
domestic dogs by urinating on prominent objects.




                                               56
Diseases
Red fox are susceptible to sarcoptic mange, distemper, and rabies. The precautions mentioned
earlier with respect to being bitten or handling dead or dying animals also apply here. The
symptoms of mange on a fox are: flaky skin, missing fur (especially on the tail), crusty patches or
squinting eyes. Any fox that may have mange should be handled with caution using rubber
gloves, since mange mites can infect humans and domestic animals. Be especially careful when
killing the fox and try not to stand on the fox because that might expose you to the disease. If
the fox has only a little mange (such as just a little flaky skin on the lower legs), the fox can be
carried with rubber gloves and frozen in a plastic bag. After two weeks, the mange mites will be
dead, and the fox can be skinned. If the fox has more mange, the pelt will probably be
worthless, and the trapper should place the entire fox carcass in a plastic bag for disposal or
bury it deep enough to prevent dogs or fox from digging it up. Many trappers also remove the
trap and keep it in a plastic bag until it can be re‐dyed, along with any other equipment
involved. Never release a fox with mange because this disease is always fatal to red fox.

Trapping Tactics
Fox pelts are best from about November through the beginning of January. After that time, the
color of the pelts may begin to fade.

Because fox are cautious and have excellent noses, traps and sets must be well hidden and free
from foreign odors. Good fox trappers are careful trap handlers and set makers.

The dirt‐hole set and variations of it have taken more fox than all other sets combined. Dirt‐hole
sets can be made more dog‐proof by keeping a size 1½ coilspring trap as close to the bait‐hole
as possible, placing the trap so the fox comes across the jaw, and using a selective bait, fox
urine, and gland lure. Because fox do not like to get wet, spring‐hole sets will yield a number of
animals each year. The scent post set takes advantage of a fox’s home range marking system.
Flat sets are also effective.

Baits and Lures
Fox urine is an excellent fox lure. Fox are also attracted to a variety of rotten flesh baits, fish oil,
and skunk or mink musk. Many commercial lures are available, but many trappers make their
own. A wise trapper will test the lure on a few sets before using it on the rest of the line. Red fox
gland lures are also among the most effective and selective lures for fox. Baits are generally
made from fresh or partially decomposed red meats. Some trappers use pieces of honeycomb
or even mouse nests as bait.




                                                  57
Gray Fox (Urocyon cinereoargenteus)
The gray fox is much like the red fox in
general shape and is up to 42 inches long
(including the tail) with a bushy, black‐
tipped tail about one half the length of the
body. Gray fox are generally somewhat
smaller than reds with weights up to about
13 pounds. The gray’s pelt is made up of
mixed dark and light guard hairs over a
light gray‐brown underfur. The gray fox’s
flanks, neck, and legs are a rusty tan to
orange.

Reproduction
Gray fox breed in January and February with the young born about 50 to 60 days later. Litters of
1 to 7 young are normal. In many respects, the reproductive behavior and denning habits of gray
fox are similar to those listed for red fox.

Habitat
Gray fox seem to prefer denser and moister cover than do red fox. They are found in overgrown
fields, swamps, and cut‐over woodland.

Habits
The gray fox is chiefly a nocturnal predator. As omnivores, gray fox consume insects, rodents,
fruits, and berries. Like the red fox, the gray fox is an excellent mouser. Gray fox are quite similar
to their red relatives in behavior. Gray fox and red fox are rather intolerant of one another, but
their habitat preferences tend to keep them from having a great amount of interaction.

Diseases
Gray fox are susceptible to both distemper and rabies. The precautions mentioned earlier
regarding being bitten or handling animals found dead or dying should be followed with gray fox
as well.

Trapping Tactics
The same trapping techniques used for red fox may be used in trapping grays.

Baits and Lures
The same baits and lures used for red fox trapping can be used in trapping gray fox. Gray fox
urine will attract gray fox. Commercial lures are made for gray fox, but lures made for red fox
will also work quite effectively. As with red fox, gland lures are among the most effective and
selective fox lures.

                                                 58
Coyote (Canis latrans)
The Eastern
coyote is quite
similar to a large,
pale gray fox in
coloration and
shape. They have
gray to reddish‐
gray fur with
slightly rusty legs,
feet, and ears.
Large specimens
may weigh up to
65 pounds with a
total length of about 55 inches. Average weights are between 30 and 45 pounds. The bushy tail,
about 18 inches long, is carried low when the animal is running. Its ears are erect and its tail is
not curled.

Reproduction
Coyote breed in January through early March, with a gestation period of about 60 days. The
young are born in March, April, and May. A litter of 6 pups is common. Dens occur in loose soil,
rock ledges or other good cover.

Habitat
Large areas of open woodland, brushy wetlands and rough, broken areas are the best areas to
seek coyote in eastern Northern America. Occurring over much of North America, coyote have
adapted to many types of habitat.

Habits
Like the other members of the dog family, coyote are mainly nocturnal predators. They eat a
wide variety of both animal and plant foods. Although small mammals make up a large part of
their diet, they also prey on larger animals under some conditions.

Coyote are travelers, covering a hunting route of 3 to 15 square miles depending on habitat
quality. They are quite fast, reaching speeds up to about 40 miles per hour in short bursts.
Sometimes hunting in pairs or family units, they have the endurance to run down larger prey.
They will feed on winter‐killed game or other carrion when such food is available.

Coyote are extremely wary. With excellent scenting capabilities, they can easily detect poorly
treated traps or sets. Like fox, they approach new objects with caution. Because of their wide


                                                59
ranging habits, coyote may not pass through a particular area for several days to weeks. Thus,
sets that are not immediately successful should not be abandoned too soon.

Diseases
Coyote are susceptible to sarcoptic mange, distemper and rabies. Follow the precautions
mentioned earlier for skunk and fox.

Trapping Tactics
Coyote pelts are best during the November through January period. Dirt‐hole sets as well as
other fox sets using size 1.75 or 2 traps are excellent fall coyote sets. When using #2 traps, use
only those with thick jaws to avoid cutting the coyote’s foot.

Baits and Lures
Many commercial lures are available to coyote trappers. Coyote urine and gland lures are
effective. A strong‐smelling oil is a good base for the lure. Mink or skunk musk can improve the
cold weather performance of the lure. Baits mentioned for use with fox can also be used in
trapping coyote.




                                                60
Weasels: Long‐tailed (Mustela frenata), and Short‐tailed (Mustela
erminea)
Weasels are long‐bodied animals with short legs. During most of
the year, they are brown with a white throat and belly. In the
winter, most become all white with only a black‐tipped tail. The
larger, long‐tailed weasel reaches a length of about 18 inches
total with a tail about 6 inches long and a weight of about 13
ounces for males. Male short‐tailed weasels, or ermine, reach a
length of about 13 inches with a tail about 3 inches long and a
weight of about six ounces. Females of both species are smaller
than males. Weasel pelts feature short, dense underfur and
abundant, short, glossy guard hairs. Color ranges from white to
cream in winter specimens.

Reproduction
Weasel mate during the summer, but the young do not begin to
develop until the late winter or early spring. The single yearly
litters of both species are born in April or May. Litters of 4 to 8
young are normal for both species. Female long‐tailed weasel breed during their first summer,
but males do not mature until the next season.

Both types of weasel den in rock piles, old buildings, burrows, and hollow logs or stumps. Ermine
dens are often lined with the fur of mice they have eaten.

Habitat
Weasels seem to need standing water, but they are found in almost all habitats. Brushy fields,
hedgerows or stone walls are excellent places to look for signs. Weasels are tireless in hunting
mainly small mammals and a few birds. Weasels are very efficient killers, using their canine
teeth to pierce the skulls of their prey. Prey up to the size of rabbits is most commonly taken,
but larger animals are sometimes attacked either as potential prey or in defense of young.

Where abundant prey is found, weasel will sometimes kill in large numbers. Excess prey items
are sometimes hidden (cached) for later use. Weasel depredations of entire chicken flocks are a
result of that instinctive killing and caching behavior. Weasels eat the entire prey. They do not
merely suck the blood of their prey as many people believe.

Weasels are not wary of humans. Larger predators take weasel on occasion but these little
predators, equipped with needle teeth, a shrill scream, and foul‐smelling musk, are formidable
defenders.




                                                61
Trapping Tactics
Weasel pelts are best in late fall or winter after they have turned white. Early caught weasel
that are brown or just turning to white are of less value.

Weasels are not very trap shy. Cubby sets, including weasel boxes using bloody baits, and dirt‐
hole sets along stone walls or logs, make good weasel sets. Size 0 and 1 foothold traps with very
light pan action should be used. Small body‐gripping traps, set properly, can be used effectively
for weasel (household rat‐sized “snap” traps can be used). Large foothold traps can be used as
body‐gripping traps, particularly if one jaw is propped up. Small box traps are also effective.

Baits and Lures
Weasels are interested in fresh, bloody baits. Baits need not be large; a chicken head or rabbit
head is enough. Weasel musk is an excellent weasel lure that is very useful for other animals as
well. Weasel scats are also good lures. Fish oil or another foul‐smelling oil will attract them. A
box baited with grain will attract mice that will in turn attract weasel.




                                                62
Fisher (Pekania pennanti)
Fisher are large dark‐brown to black
weasel‐like animals. They resemble a
large, short‐legged black cat or a
very large, heavy, dark mink. The
guard hairs are frequently light‐
tipped, giving the animal a frosted
appearance. Males reach lengths of
more than 40 inches including a
dark‐tipped bushy tail about 14
inches long. Large males may weigh as much as 18 pounds, but females seldom reach 6 ½
pounds. Small fisher may be distinguished from large marten (Martes americana) by the
absence of a buff throat patch.

Reproduction
Fisher produce single litters of 1 to 5 young in late March or early April. They breed immediately
after having their young, but they experience delayed implantation like several other members
of the weasel family. The young remain with the female through the summer.

Fisher dens are usually in hollow trees with a fairly large, high opening. At times, rock crevices
may also be used. Fisher frequently have several dens in their territory.

Habitat
Fisher habitat is varied, but they seem to prefer forested regions. They also occur in agricultural
areas and, in recent years, suburban areas. Fisher are expanding their range into central and
western New York where they were rarely or never seen even a few short years ago.

Habits
Fisher are extremely agile and active predators. Very much at home in trees, they prey on red
squirrels and occasionally pine marten and raccoon. Fisher are one of the few predators that
regularly prey on porcupine. They also eat berries, nuts, mice, birds, and other vertebrates.
When abundant food is located, such as a dead deer, fisher will den nearby until the supply is
gone.

These tireless hunters range over a large area, traveling at any time of day or night, frequently
using well‐established hunting trails. They are solitary except during the breeding season and
when young are with the females. The fisher gives off a foul musk when disturbed.

Trapping Tactics
Fisher pelts are best in November and December.



                                                 63
Leaning pole sets, cubby sets and dirt‐hole sets are generally considered best for fisher, and size
1½ or 2 foothold traps are adequate. Medium‐sized, body‐gripping traps are effective for fisher,
but they must be used cautiously to avoid killing domestic animals. Box traps can also be used
effectively.

Baits and Lures
Fisher musk, fish oil, beaver castor, and skunk essence are attractive to fisher whether used
alone or in combinations. These lures can be used with bait such as fresh beaver flesh to
increase the drawing power of the bait. Several commercial lures are also available.




                                                64
Bobcat (Lynx rufus)
Reaching lengths to about 36
inches with a tail about five inches
long and a weight of up to about 33
pounds, bobcats resemble very
large, short‐tailed housecats.
Bobcats are tawny to rusty with
black spots, especially on their light
undersides.

Reproduction
Bobcat may breed at any time of
the year, but spring mating is most
common. A litter of 2 to 4 young
are born about 50 days later.
Bobcat dens are usually in rock crevices, hollow logs, or dense windfalls.

Habitat
In eastern North America, bobcat are usually found in brush lots, heavily forested areas or in
dense woodland swamps. They also occur in some agricultural areas. Like fisher, bobcat have
been expanding their range into central and western New York.

Habits
Bobcats are primarily nocturnal, solitary predators. Small mammals, birds, and occasional larger
animals like beaver or deer are hunted by stalking. Rodents and rabbits are the most frequent
prey. Large prey animals and fresh carrion are usually covered between feeding periods.

Bobcat wander widely within a moderately large home area visiting traditional trails around
rocky ledges, stream banks, beaver ponds, or bogs. They also follow old logging roads and deer
trails.

Trapping Tactics
Bobcats pelts are at their best from late November to February.

Dirt‐hole sets, cubby sets, and leaning pole sets will take bobcat. Most trappers prefer size 2 and
3 foothold traps (with a jaw spread of five and three‐quarters inches or less) for bobcat.

Baits and Lures
Lures can be more effective than are baits for bobcat. Fish oil, bobcat anal glands or urine, oil of
catnip, skunk essence, and beaver castor are all used as bobcat lure ingredients. Several
commercial lures and baits are available.


                                                 65
American (Pine) Marten (Martes americana)
Marten are medium‐sized, light‐ to dark‐brown
weasel‐like animals. Buff to yellow‐orange fur
covers the underside of the throat and the
upper chest, making them easy to distinguish
from similar species. Males may be up to 35
inches long, reaching weights of up to 3 pounds.
Females are smaller, averaging 22 inches long
and weighing about 2 pounds.

Reproduction
Marten produce single litters of 1 to 5 (average 2 to 3) young annually. The young are born in
late March or early April. The adults breed soon after the young are born, but they experience
delayed implantation like several other members of the weasel family.

Marten dens are usually in hollow logs or trees, but occasionally they may use a ground burrow.

Habitat
Marten habitat varies, but they seem to prefer heavily forested areas.

Habits
Marten are extremely agile and active predators, spending much time in the tree tops. They
feed on chipmunks, squirrels, mice, rabbits, shrews, moles, small birds, berries and nuts.
Amphibians, reptiles, and insects are also eaten occasionally.

Although they are often considered nocturnal, marten may be active at any time of the day.
They are solitary except during the breeding season and while young are with the female.
Marten are active throughout the year, but they may den during periods of severe weather.
They may give off a foul musk when disturbed.

Trapping Tactics
Marten pelts are most prime at the same time as fisher, in November and December.

In general, marten sets are similar to those used for fisher. Cubby sets and leaning pole sets are
most frequently used. Size 1½ foothold traps and medium or small (double spring) body‐gripping
traps may be used effectively. Box traps also can be useful in trapping marten.

Baits and Lures
Marten musk and urine, fish oil, skunk essence, jam, sardines, and beaver castor are attractive
to marten. A good lure can increase the drawing power of baited sets, particularly during cold
weather.


                                               66
Chapter 10 Common Water Sets
Many new trappers start by trapping semi‐aquatic furbearers such as muskrat and mink.
Raccoon, which are less aquatic, can also be taken in water sets. The sets presented in this
chapter are useful for those species as well as for beaver and otter. Body‐gripping traps or
submersion sets should be used whenever possible for water trapping. Where body‐gripping
traps are not useable and the water is not deep enough to submerge muskrat and mink, always
use guarded foothold traps to prevent animals from escaping. Be certain your traps are
anchored or staked solidly enough to hold the strongest animal you may catch, in this case,
beaver or otter.

The depth of water that covers a trap is dependent on the species being targeted. For muskrat,
mink, otter and raccoon, one to two inches of water covering the trap is usually sufficient. For
beaver, the trap may need to be placed in much deeper water, especially if the trapper is trying
to catch the beaver by a back foot.

Submersion sets for muskrat and mink need not be
elaborate. Stake the trap in deep water (12 to 18
inches) or use a sliding wire or cable to let the
animal reach deep water. Make sure the trap is
firmly anchored since raccoon are often taken in
sets made for muskrat and mink. Beaver and otter
require the use of a one‐way sliding lock on a strong
wire or cable. Sliding locks can be made using angle
iron, bent washers, or double swivel bodies.
Commercial “drowning locks” and cables are also
available.

Feedbed Sets
Muskrats create feedbeds which actually are piles of
food cuttings. These piles can be easily distinguished
from muskrat lodges because the feedbed is barely
above the waters surface whereas lodges are
several feet in height. Muskrats are caught at these
feedbeds by foothold traps set in 1 to 2 inches of
water in front of the pile. The trap should be
attached to a submersion wire if the water is more
than a foot deep. If the water is less than 1 foot
deep, use a guarded foothold trap on a slide wire to
deeper water.

                                                67
Float Set
Muskrat and some other
aquatic animals tend to climb
up on floating logs or other
surface objects. The trapper
can take advantage of that
behavior by using existing
floating logs or by building a
small floating platform and
concealing traps where the
animal will trigger them.
Several designs are
illustrated. When such sets
are used in a foot or more of water, the weight of the trap will submerge the muskrat. The
trapper can avoid catching waterfowl by placing a crossed pair of branch hoops about 6 inches
over the float as illustrated. Consider using only one trap at each float set to lessen the chance
of birds of prey being captured accidentally if attracted by a catch.

Channel Set
Most semi‐aquatic furbearers follow well‐defined trails under water. Since the animal
commonly goes through restricted spaces, body‐gripping traps of adequate sizes are ideal for
                                                       trapping these channels. Where the
                                                       channel is too wide to guide the animal
                                                       into the trap, it may be fenced or
                                                       otherwise constricted using brush and
                                                       similar natural materials. The trap is
                                                       usually more effective if placed at the
                                                       bottom of the channel. Mink will be
                                                       taken occasionally in channel sets for
                                                       muskrat. Beaver are effectively trapped
                                                       in their channels, and otter may be
                                                       caught in those sets as well.




                                                68
Bank Hole Set
Muskrat dig bank dens along streams, rivers, ponds
and lakes. These dens may look like small
underwater woodchuck burrows. Foothold traps can
be used to capture muskrat at bank den entrances,
but body‐gripping traps are usually easier to use at
the set location. No bait or lure is needed.

Trail Sets
Many water animals travel the same trail each time they pass over a given spot. Blind, unbaited
sets in these trails are often very productive. They are also selective if properly placed. Muskrats
can be taken by concealing a foothold trap underwater where their trails are evident. The trap
should be placed so that the animal’s foot comes between rather than over the jaws as it
                                                            approaches. Muskrat lure can be placed
                                                            above the trap to enhance the set, but
                                                            it is not necessary. Be sure to follow the
                                                            precautions for submerging the animal
                                                            or use a guarded trap or small body‐
                                                            gripping trap if deep water is not
                                                            available.

                                                           Beaver and otter can be taken at trails
                                                           using a strong foothold trap carefully
                                                           concealed in 3 to 4 inches of water at
                                                           the base of the trail. The use of a sliding
                                                           lock and submerging wire is essential
                                                           for beaver and otter trapping.




                                                 69
Pocket Set
The pocket set will take mink, muskrat,
and raccoon quite effectively. An
upward‐sloping hole is dug into the
stream bank such that the back of the
hole is above the waterline and the base
of the hole at the entrance is 2 to 3
inches below the waterline. For mink and
muskrat, the hole should be about 6
inches in diameter and 12 inches deep.
Pockets for raccoon can be made as
much as twice that size, but it is not
necessary. For mink and muskrat, either
body‐gripping or foothold traps of appropriate size may be used. Foothold traps should be set to
ensure submersion of the trapped animal. For raccoon, appropriately sized foothold traps
should be used. The pocket is baited with fish or a honey‐based bait and an appropriate lure. In
areas where free‐ranging dogs may occur, the trapper should avoid meat baits and raccoon
gland lures. Locating the set under low‐hanging cover, like branches or exposed tree roots, and
keeping the trap well inside the pocket is also helpful in keeping dogs out of these sets. Muskrat
musk and beaver castor are excellent lures for pocket sets. Traps at pocket sets can either be
placed within the hole as shown in the accompanying drawing or, more effectively, at the
entrance but outside the hole. And remember to anchor your traps solidly.

Spring Run Set
Spring runs or small streams entering
larger bodies of water are natural
channels for muskrat, mink, and otter.
Because raccoon frequently move along
or across them, at the edge of the larger
body of water, spring run sets should be
made secure for raccoon as well as mink
and muskrat. Foothold traps of
appropriate size and submerging wires
should be used. In some cases,
appropriately sized body‐gripping traps
also may be used effectively, provided
they are set in the water.




                                               70
Obstruction Set
                                                   Another type of trail set makes use of the
                                                   way furbearers behave when they
                                                   encounter an obstruction. Raccoon and
                                                   mink tend to enter the water at the same
                                                   place each time they encounter an
                                                   obstruction on the bank, often forming a
                                                   visible trail. Water sets at these points can
                                                   be quite productive. The trap should be well
                                                   bedded and may be covered with water‐
                                                   soaked leaves or mud. A submersion set
                                                   should be used. No bait or lure is needed.

Scent Mound Set
Beaver create mud mounds and mark them with
castor, much like fox and coyote mark prominent
objects with urine. Use a well‐concealed trap in 3 to 4
inches of water, with a sliding lock submersion wire.
In situations where there is no risk of domestic
animals encountering the trap, large body‐grip traps
may also be used. Placing the trap at either a natural
or artificial scent mound is a common set for beaver in
open water trapping. Trappers who create artificial
scent mounds often use commercially available
castor‐based lures or homemade lures using the
castors of previously caught beaver from other colonies.

                                                   A variation of the scent mound set is the
                                                   open‐water baited beaver set. Instead of
                                                   using a scent mound to attract beaver, the
                                                   trapper places bait such as fresh poplar
                                                   sticks to entice the animal into or over the
                                                   trap. The same traps mentioned for scent
                                                   mound sets may be used (follow the same
                                                   precautions to avoid trapping domestic
                                                   animals when using large body‐grip traps).
                                                   The addition of a good lure may be helpful
                                                   but is often unnecessary with a well‐
                                                   constructed bait set.



                                              71
Spillway Set
Beaver, muskrat, and otter often use the same path or spillway to cross a beaver dam. Where
legal, traps can be set in such places (refer to regulations in the New York State Hunting and
Trapping Guide for specifics on setting on or near a beaver dam). Foothold traps should be set as
described previously for trail sets. If body‐gripping traps are used, they must be set in the water
(generally below the dam in the spillway).




Under‐ Ice Baited Beaver Set
Many beaver are trapped under the ice by using
fresh bait such as poplar. Either foothold or body‐
gripping traps may be used. A hole is chopped
into the ice near where the beaver lives or feeds,
but not within 15 feet of a beaver den/house or
beaver dam in some areas (refer to your trapping
regulations guide for specifics). Then a trap and
bait are fastened on a dry pole, placed through
the hole in the ice, and pushed deep into the muddy bottom. The top of the pole is anchored
above the ice to a cross pole that cannot be pulled through the hole in the ice. If a foothold trap
is used, it should be secured to the lower portion of the pole in a manner that prevents the
beaver from reaching the hole in the ice and getting air, thus killing the beaver faster. Where
stable ice conditions occur, under‐ice baited sets are an excellent and highly selective method
for trapping beaver.




                                                72
Otter Toilet Set
                        Otters create and regularly use certain
                        spots for toilets. These spots are generally
                        near the water and contain numerous
                        piles of fish scales and bones. A foothold
                        trap can be set in 3 to 4 inches of water
                        where the otter leaves the water to visit
                        the toilet. It should be attached with a
                        one‐way sliding lock to a submersion wire
                        that leads to deep water. Provided
                        domestic animals cannot encounter the
                        trap and the trap can be set in water,
                        body‐gripping traps may also be used.




                   73
Chapter 11 Land Sets

A precautionary note on the use of body‐grip traps on land.
Body‐gripping traps are designed to kill the animals they catch. Due to this, trappers must
exercise extreme caution when using them on land to avoid the unintentional capture of
domestic animals or other wildlife species. Beginning trappers should seek help from an
experienced trapper when using body‐gripping traps on land for the first time.

As a result of several incidents involving the unintentional capture of dogs, the Department of
Environmental Conservation enacted strict regulations governing the use of body‐grip traps on
land. These regulations are very specific and complex, therefore, descriptions of the
specifications of the regulation, with graphics, can be found in Appendix 4. If after reviewing
these materials, you still have questions, contact your local Environmental Conservation Officer,
Regional Wildlife office, or talk to a trapper experienced in the use of body‐grip traps on land for
clarification.

Trappers should further note that it is illegal to use body‐grip traps larger than 7 ½ inches (“220”
sized) on land. Learn how to properly measure the size of body‐grip traps to be sure your
equipment is legal to use. Your adherence to these regulations and responsible use of these
traps will help to ensure their continued use on the trap line.

Cubby Sets
Cubbies can be used effectively for land species that will enter a closed space (shown on page
75). They work well for weasel, skunk, raccoon, opossum, fisher, marten, mink and even bobcat.
They are not effective for fox or coyote. Cubbies are containers or boxes that prevent the animal
from approaching a bait or lure from any side except that guarded by the trap. Hollow logs or
trees, stumps and drain tiles are natural cubbies. A trapper may construct others of sticks, logs,
bark or rocks. Cubby sets can be made using body‐gripping or foothold traps. If using body‐grip
traps, set them only in the manner prescribed in the regulations found in Appendix 4.




                                                74
Weasel Box Set
A small wooden box with holes cut in the
ends is an excellent weasel cubby. The
holes should be about 2½ to 3 inches in
diameter. The box can be baited with
grain (to attract mice), bloody bait,
weasel scent, or a combination of those
baits. Solidly staked under‐spring or long
spring traps in sizes 0 to 1 ½ with a very
light pan tension are appropriate. Small body‐grip traps may also be used. A large rock placed on
top of the box will prevent other animals from getting into the set.




                                               75
Raccoon Boxes
                                     Another type of cubby can be used effectively for raccoon.
                                     An open‐ended wooden box about 9 x 9 inches, with its
                                     opening guarded by a medium‐sized body‐gripping trap, is
                                     placed vertically on a tree no more than 6 inches above
                                     the ground (see Appendix 4). The cubby can be held in
                                     place by staples or light wire. Bending the springs puts
                                     tension against the notches holding the trap in place. The
                                     trap must be at least 4 inches up inside the box. Baits of
                                     fish, beaver castor, or honey with anise can be used. This
                                     set can take domestic cats, so it should not be used where
                                     there is danger of catching them. Be sure the box is
securely fastened to a tree.

Box or Cage Traps
Box traps are self‐contained cubbies. Thus they can be
used effectively for the animals that will enter an
enclosed space. In many cases, carefully covering the
box trap will make the set more effective and also may
help in hiding it from thieves. In most instances, the
bait should be placed behind the treadle or trigger.
Single‐door traps may work better than those with double doors, particularly for raccoon,
marten, and fisher. Though expensive, box or cage traps are good options in areas where there
is risk of an unintentional capture as the animal will be alive and can be released.

Scent Post Set
                                     Like domestic dogs, coyote and fox urinate on prominent
                                     objects along their lines of travel. Trappers can take
                                     advantage of that habit to catch these furbearers.
                                     Raccoon, skunk and opossum also may investigate scent
                                     post sets for fox. A small prominent object, like a
                                     protruding stone, grass tuft, or stick serves as the post. A
                                     liberal amount of fox urine and a few drops of gland lure
                                     are placed on it. The trap is carefully bedded and
                                     concealed a few inches away from the post, so that the
                                     animal will step on it while urinating. Traps should be
                                     covered and staked as with the dirt‐hole set.




                                              76
Flat Set
The flat set is quite similar to the scent post set. No bait
hole or post is used, but the set is lured and liberally
sprayed with fox urine. The flat set is an excellent choice
where fox are acting shy of dirt‐hole sets.

Dirt‐Hole Sets
The dirt‐hole set is an extremely good producer for nearly
all predatory furbearers. Making dirt‐hole sets for fox and
coyote is challenging, and the instructions below are
written for that type of set. Site selection is all important.
The set should be made in a relatively open spot where
visibility is good on all sides. Naturally, fox activity should be evident in the area.

After selecting the site, all equipment should be prepared, and
the trapper should go directly to the spot. The bait hole should
be dug near a clump of weeds, a rock, a small stump, or some
similar backstop. It should be about 2‐1/2 to 4inches in
diameter, 6 to 8 inches deep, sloping back about 60 degrees
under the backstop. All dirt removed should be placed in the
sifter.

Next, a triangle of sod about 8 to 10 inches on each side is removed in front of the hole. The
point of the triangle should touch the hole, giving it the appearance of a fox‐dug food cache. Dirt
is removed from the triangle until the trap bed is sufficient for the trap to sit below the surface.

The trap is staked so that the stake and chain will be directly
under it. After the stake is driven, pull hard on the chain. If the
stake moves, the trap is inadequately anchored. Either add an
additional stake, use an earth anchor, or move the set to a
location where the stake will hold adequately. Cover the stake
                                  and excess chain with a smooth
                                  layer of earth and bed the trap
                                  carefully but firmly. The trap
                                  should not rock or shift position. In wet or freezing weather, the
                                  trap should be bedded in dry sand, ant‐hill dirt, or an anti‐freeze
                                  may be used. Anti‐freezes which are used include salt, calcium
                                  chloride, or commercial products. When using salt or calcium
                                  chloride, make sure traps are waxed to prevent rusting.




                                                   77
After adding the pan cover (if used), the trapper can cover the
trap with sifted soil. The soil should be level, and the trap should
be buried about 1/2 inch below the surface. The trap pan should
be as close to the front of the bait hole as possible.

The set is completed by placing bait in the hole and adding a few
drops of lure on the backstop (often a clump of grass or stump).
Fox urine is then squirted behind the hole and the trapper leaves
the area as undisturbed as possible.




                                                                  For coyote and bobcat, the set
is made a bit larger with larger traps and the trapper may wish to position the trap farther away
from the hole. When trapping strictly for raccoon, raccoon lure may be used, and fox urine is
unnecessary. Skunk and opossum may also be caught in these sets. Mink are sometimes taken
at dirt‐hole sets. They are also effective for fisher and marten.

Spring‐Hole Set
The spring‐hole set is
effective for raccoon and fox.
It takes advantage of the
habit of the            fox to
avoid wet feet. A site with
permanent water (preferably
a non‐freezing spring), several
inches deep and 3' or more
wide is selected. A large piece
of moss‐covered rock or sod is
placed about 12" out from the
bank. A second, smaller rock or sod, fitted to the inside of the trap jaws, is placed about halfway
from the bank edge to the bait sod. The trap and drag should be concealed below the surface,
but the “stepping stone” should be above the water and stable on the pan. The trap should be
adjusted so that the pan is level and rather stiff in action. Bait and lure placed on the bait sod
should be carefully hidden to prevent birds from stealing the bait or getting into the set. Spring‐
hole sets work best in late fall and winter in most areas.



                                                 78
Leaning‐Pole or Running Pole Set
A second “dog‐resistant” set for raccoon, fisher,
marten, and gray fox is the leaning‐pole set. A bait
(fish or beaver or raccoon meat are good choices)
and lure (generally something with skunk essence
in it) are placed at the top end of the pole. The trap
is placed lower on the pole, but at least 4' above
the ground (see Appendix 4). Medium body‐
gripping traps can be stapled (the jaw nearest the
bait) to the pole or placed on a trap holder. You
may wish to move the trigger to the side to
prevent small mammals such as squirrels from
springing the trap. A pan‐type trigger is
commercially available, and very useful in this set.
The trapper must be sure the animal will not be
suspended above the ground by extending the
anchoring system (typically a chain, cable, and/or
wire) enough to allow the captured animal to fall
to the ground or by directly and firmly attaching the trap to the tree or pole.

Cover the bait such that it is not visible from above to avoid the risk of attracting birds to the
set. This set can catch domestic cats so the trapper should avoid using it where they may be
found.

The sets described in this chapter cover the basics for land trapping. Variations on these sets
abound. Trappers can learn more about other land sets by reading trapping magazines and
books, tagging along with experienced trappers, or by watching demonstrations at trappers
conventions and rendezvous.




                                                 79
Chapter 12 Running a Trapline

Trapping is a serious responsibility that takes hard work and dedication on the part of the
trapper. Once the traps are set, the trapper cannot take a day off. Remember, by law, traps
must be checked daily (48 hours in some areas) and besides, it’s the ethical thing to do. Trapping
with a partner can help to alleviate the demands of running the trapline by allowing you to
alternate trap check days.

Don’t bite off more than you can chew. If you only have to time to effectively operate 10 traps,
don’t set 12! If you are only capable of skinning and fleshing two or three animals each night,
don’t set so many traps that you end up catching five or six. Finally, don’t over trap an area. Your
pre‐season scouting will give you a sense of the numbers of your intended animals on your trap
line. Setting goals for each species can be fun and a big aid in keeping you focused and
energized, but you must be realistic when establishing your goals. If you only have access to one
small pond, hoping to catch 100 muskrats is unrealistic.

Obtain Permission
If you’re planning to trap on private lands, getting landowner permission is a must. This is best
done well in advance of the trapping season during the spring and summer months. Part of the
process is marketing yourself, so dress neatly when asking for permission. Be polite even if you
are denied access to a property.

If you are granted permission to access the property, ask the
landowner about possible problems with certain furbearers
such as beavers flooding fields or access roads, raccoons
damaging corn crops, or coyotes and fox preying on livestock.
Ask if neighboring properties are also experiencing these
problems. Make certain you know which portions of the
property you have permission to access and see if there are
periods during the season when your permission may not
apply.

Work out an agreed‐upon schedule with the landowner for pre‐season scouting and actual
trapping. Let the landowner know which vehicle you will be driving and provide your contact
information so the landowner can alert you to changes or maybe even if your traps have made a
catch. Finally, contact the landowner again shortly before the season begins to check for things
that may require an adjustment to your agreement.


                                                80
Pre‐season Scouting
                                After you have obtained landowner permission, pre‐season
                                scouting should be completed. Taking a tour of your trapping
                                properties will give you a sense of what animals are available for
                                you to trap and how many you can reasonably expect to catch.
                                Taking the time now to identify primary travel areas of your
                                intended species will save you countless hours on the trapline
                                while you are setting traps.

The Checking Schedule
After the traps are set, the trapper waits in eager anticipation. Since most furbearers are active
at night, the responsible trapper checks traps early each morning for several important reasons:

           The time an animal is held in a trap is kept to a
            minimum which could reduce any stress on the part
            of the trapped animal.

           A trapped animal is less likely to escape.

           A trapped animal is less likely to be stolen.

If a trapper is going to school, he or she should try to quickly
check all of their sets in the morning before school and remove
their catch. After school, revisit the trapline and reset traps that
had a catch in the morning, scout for new sets and try to recheck
as many other sets as time allows. This checking schedule is
good for all three reasons listed above, plus it gives advantages
over someone who just checked traps once a day. The trapper who checks traps before and
after school will have more time to make better and more selective sets, which should result in
a larger catch of intended furbearers and reduce the chance of catching unintended animals.

Before checking a trapline, the trapper should have the necessary equipment and knowledge to
properly handle any captured animal. If using foothold traps on land, the trapper should have
the proper equipment for killing a intended animal and for releasing unintended animals, and
the knowledge to properly use these tools.

When actually checking a trap, the trapper should always approach close enough to the set to
see the trap. The smart trapper also checks the bait, the trap covering (if it is a land set) and

                                                 81
especially the area around the set for signs of a visit. A trapper can often learn a lot by studying
such visits. If a dog, cat, or human is visiting the set, the trapper would probably want to move
the trap to a new location. If a fox visited the set, the trapper might want to use another type of
bait or lure. These tips can be valuable to a beginning trapper to reduce the catch of unintended
animals and increase the catch of intended animals.

Releasing Unintended Animals
Occasionally, unintended animals are captured. When this occurs, the trapper must release the
creature quickly but without danger to himself. There are
several different methods of releasing these unintended
animals. A catchpole can be placed around the animal’s
neck to control it while the trap is removed. Make the
loop snug but be careful not to choke the animal. One
suggestion to avoid this problem is to position the loop so
that a free front leg and shoulder is included in the loop.
Firm pressure will keep the animal from biting you while
you release its leg from the trap. A sturdy forked stick may
also be used in place of the loop to hold the animal’s head securely while it is being released.
Some trappers use a large piece of fabric (such as a heavy square of canvas or a heavy coat, etc.)
to place over the trapped animal, leaving the trapped foot exposed. Then the fabric is held
down along the trapped limb by kneeling or standing on the fabric (of course, being careful not
to step on the animal). Finally, the trap is quickly removed and the animal is released. As
mentioned previously in Chapter 6, a board with a V‐notch cut into it may also be used to
release unintended and other unwanted animals.

Releasing animals is always easier with a partner. Young trappers should always get help before
releasing unintended animals.

The trapper should carefully evaluate the set type and placement to avoid catching domestic
animals. The ethics of trapping insist on this, and it is always wise to place sets where no dogs or
cats are seen close by. However, accidents can still happen and if you do catch a dog or cat, you
should make every effort to contact the owner of the pet to make them aware of the situation.

By learning proper techniques and methods trappers can become extremely selective and the
capture of unintended animals can virtually be eliminated.

Killing Trapped Animals
Editor’s Note: This section was written to introduce the reader to methods of killing furbearers.
No attempt has been made to make this seem easier, nicer, or more difficult than it really is. If
the reader finds this section disturbing, then perhaps the reader should not attempt to trap land
furbearers. The reader could use submersion sets and body‐gripping traps for water furbearers

                                                82
until he or she felt that they could kill a furbearer by striking it on the head or until they were
old enough to use a firearm. Just as trapping is not for everyone, land trapping may not be for
every trapper.

New or young trappers should only pursue animals which they can easily and safely kill. If you
catch any animal that you cannot safely handle, GET HELP. Asking for the help of an experienced
trapper or parent is the smart thing to do. It will help you harvest the animal humanely, prevent
wounding it, and avoid risking injury.

There are several humane ways to kill trapped furbearers. It should be done as quickly and
humanely as possible while not endangering yourself with the animal’s teeth, claws, or scent
glands. The best way to kill a trapped furbearer depends on several different factors such as the
species of furbearer, the type of trap used, and the trapper. The use of body‐gripping traps and
submersion sets can keep the need for killing water animals to a minimum. If a live furbearer is
encountered, it may be quickly and humanely killed by striking sharply on the head or by
shooting.

Shooting is a very effective way to kill furbearers if the trapper is old enough to legally carry a
firearm. A well placed shot using a .22 rim‐fire cartridge aimed to pass through the front of the
brain into the body of the animal is fatal and quick. Opossum have a very small brain placed low
in the head, so they should be shot at the base of the ear or down through the midline of the
skull. Skunk may be prevented from spraying their musk if they are shot through the lungs in the
chest region. Head and spine shots usually result in their releasing musk. Furbearers held in both
foothold and cage traps may be safely shot.

Always be careful that the bullet does not strike the ground, a rock, or the trap and ricochet. If
more than one person is present, they should all stand behind the shooter.

If using a firearm to dispatch furbearers is not an option for you, another method will have to be
used. Most furbearers can be quickly and humanely killed by first sharply striking them at the
base of the skull with a heavy wooden or metal tool. It is highly recommended that the animal
be struck two times, once to render it unconscious and again to render it either dead or
comatose. To ensure death, pin the head with one foot and stand on the chest (area near the
heart) of the animal with the other foot for several minutes. The trapper should never attempt
to stand on a conscious animal and should not step off of an unconscious animal until it is dead.
To be sure the furbearer is dead, the trapper can touch the eye or mouth of the animal with the
striking tool and watch for any reaction. If there is no reaction and then if the trapper does not
detect any breathing or heart beats, the animal can be assumed dead. The trapper must be
especially careful with opossum because it is often difficult to detect its reactions, breathing or
heart beats. The larger furbearers such as raccoon, coyote, and bobcat may be too large for
some beginners to safely kill using this method. If this is the case, seek assistance in killing larger
animals.

                                                  83
Skunk should be approached quietly with the wind blowing from you to the skunk. Many
trappers talk softly to the skunk and stop approaching when it raises its tail. When close enough,
strike the skunk as mentioned earlier. However, its tail will twitch and the skunk will spray its
musk. The power of this musk and the ability of skunk to spray it should not be taken lightly.
Skunk musk is very strong and can cause vomiting, burning of the eyes or at the very least,
smelly clothes.

If releasing unintended or killing intended animals seems challenging to you, do not set traps on
land. Focus your efforts on trapping water animals with body‐grip traps and submersion sets
until you gain the experience needed to properly handle animals trapped on land.




                                               84
85
Chapter 13 Fur Handling Equipment,
Techniques, and Marketing

Equipment
If you have properly prepared your traps, secured landowner permission, been thorough in your
pre‐season scouting, and made selective trap sets in the right locations, you’ll soon have need
for your fur handling equipment. The equipment you will need will depend upon how you plan
to sell your catch, whether in the round (whole and un‐skinned), green (skinned but not fleshed,
stretched and dried) or fleshed, stretched, and dried.

Assuming you plan to sell your catch other than in the round
(whole and unskinned), you will need some good quality knives
and means of keeping them sharp. While nearly any knife will
do, there are many good options available for handling
furbearers. You may find it useful to have more than one knife
while skinning, using one knife for beginning cuts and another
for finishing cuts around the head where the blade frequently
contacts bone. Two important factors are that the knife has a
blade that can take and hold a sharp edge and that is has a comfortable grip that fits your hand
                                well.

                               There are also several options available for knife‐sharpening
                               equipment, from simple whet stones to diamond‐impregnated
                               stones, even powered knife sharpeners. Over time, you’ll figure
                               out which type will best suit your needs.



You may find it easier to skin the animal while it is hanging. A gambrel is
designed for this purpose. The gambrel will have two loops into which the
hind feet of the animal are placed. A piece of wood or metal between the
loops keeps the legs spread wide enough to make skinning around them
easier. Commercial models are available, or the trapper may choose to
make one using rope, chain, or cable. A swivel in the line the gambrel
hangs from allows the trapper to spin the animal while skinning to get at
all sides.



                                               86
Brushes, combs, and even a fork are useful in removing burrs and dirt from the pelt prior to
skinning. Animals with furred tails must have the bone removed (for beaver, muskrat, and
opossum, the tail is simply removed) and the tail split open on some species (refer to Appendix
5 for specifics for each furbearer). Commercial tail stripping tools are available, or the trapper
may choose to use a clothespin or a couple of nails. Specially designed tail‐slitting knives and
guides are also available (the guide ensures a straight cut).




Once the pelt is free from the carcass, it can be double bagged and frozen or it will need to be
fleshed to remove excess fat and muscle before being placed on the stretcher. For many
species, a fleshing beam will make this process easier while for some species, like muskrat, a
small tapered board that can be cradled in the trapper’s lap will be sufficient. With either the
beam or simple board, the pelt is turned inside out and placed over the device so the fat and
meat may be scraped off. The trapper may choose either a single‐handled scraper or a double‐
handled draw knife. For easily fleshed species like muskrat, an old kitchen spoon will work fine.




Once the pelt is properly fleshed, it will need to be placed on a stretcher. Both solid wood and
metal wire stretchers are available. Some species end up looking better if stretched on one
rather than the other, but which type of stretcher to use is really a matter of trapper and fur
buyer or fur market preference. A smart trapper will consult the fur buyer for the preferred way
to put up different                    animals
before getting                         started.




                                                87
Unlike most furbearers, beaver require special “stretchers.” The
trapper can choose from flat plywood boards with various‐sized
patterns traced onto them or adjustable metal hoop stretchers
that can be made larger or smaller to accommodate different‐
sized beaver. Again, trapper preference will be the determining
factor in which type is used. If you have the chance, try both and
work with the one that best suits you.



Techniques
Proper fur handling is very important. It can bring much more
personal satisfaction from doing a job well, and it can also result in a better price from the fur
buyer. Fur handling starts at the trap site. If trapped in the water, the dead furbearer should be
rinsed clean of any mud or vegetation. This can usually be accomplished by moving the
furbearer head first through the cleanest water available. Attempt to remove as much excess
water as possible. Muskrat can be held by the head and shaken or gently whipped to remove
much of the water. Furbearers can also be stroked with your hand from the head to the tail to
squeeze out water or rolled in the snow to clean and soak up excess water. If they are carried in
a vehicle, they can be placed on newspaper or small furbearers such as muskrat can be wrapped
in newspapers to help absorb moisture. A clean burlap bag helps clean and dry any furbearer as
it is being carried from the set.

If the animal’s fur is still wet later, it should be hung up by the head or forelegs in a cool place to
finish drying. Be sure not to hang too long since the pelt may spoil in warm weather. All pelts
must be dry before being placed on a drying frame. Directing an oscillating fan onto the animal
can aid greatly in the fur drying process.

If the furbearer is not trapped in the water, it should not be rinsed unless the fur is very wet and
muddy. If rinsing is necessary, be sure to dry the fur as mentioned above. Keep the fur dry and
brush or comb it to remove any burrs or dirt before skinning. A missed burr or clump of dirt can
lead to a torn pelt during fleshing.

Watch out for parasites such as fleas, ticks and mites that may be on the animal’s fur (especially
land furbearers). It is advisable to wear plastic gloves when skinning.

Furbearers should be skinned as soon as possible after they are killed. The skin is easier to
remove when the animal is fresh, and damage to the pelt is less likely. For practice, it is a good
idea to carefully skin animals which do not have valuable fur, such as squirrels and woodchucks.
                                                  88
Skinning Cased Fur
There are two recognized ways of skinning animals, and these are called “cased” and “open.” All
fur except beaver are prepared cased. Cased furs are removed from the animal by slitting the fur
across from one hind foot pad to the other and pulling it down over the animal’s head the way
we take off a pullover sweater. Animals with furred tails have the tail split on the underside and
left on the pelt. Hairless tails, like those of muskrat, beaver and opossum, are removed at the
hair line.

A good example of skinning a cased fur is the raccoon. The first
step in skinning a raccoon is to cut the pelt around the ankles
and wrists where the long fur ends. Next, the pelt is cut from the
heel of each hind foot to the vent and around the vent. Finally, a
cut is made from the vent straight down the tail about one‐
quarter of the way. Start peeling the pelt down the hind legs by
pulling the pelt and by cutting connective tissue where
necessary. After the pelt is removed from the hind legs, the
carcass can be hung at a convenient height by its hind feet. Peel
                                    the pelt off the carcass around
                                    the vent. If the raccoon is a male,
                                    reproductive organs will be
                                    connected to the pelt. These are cut off as close to the pelt as
                                    possible. Now peel the pelt from around the base of the tail
                                    exposing a couple of inches of the tail bone. Clamp a tail stripper
                                    around the tail bone with one hand and hold the base of the tail
                                    with your other hand and
                                    attempt to pull the tail bone out
of the tail by moving your hands apart. If the tail bone does not
pull out, extend the cut from the base of the tail several more
inches towards the tip of the tail. Free part of the tail bone from
the pelt by cutting the connective tissue and then try to pull the
tail bone out as described before. If tail bone still refuses to pull out, extend the cut on the tail
to the tip and finish skinning the tail out. Even if the tail pulls out, still extend the cut on the tail
straight to the tip. A tail‐slitting guide may be helpful. The pelt
should now be pulled down the carcass as far as it will go,
exposing the forelegs. Further expose the foreleg by cutting the
connective tissue.

Wrap fingers from both of your hands around the raccoon’s
foreleg. With the hand closest to the raccoon’s wrist, push the
pelt down the foreleg while supporting the foreleg with the


                                                   89
other hand. Keep pushing until the raccoon’s forefoot passes thru the pelt and the pelt is free.
Repeat this process with the other foreleg.

When both forelegs are free, pull the pelt down the carcass past the neck until it won’t readily
proceed any further. The head of the carcass should now be partly exposed above the pelt. Start
looking for the cartilage on each side of the head that attaches the ears to the skull while
continuing to free the pelt by cutting any connective tissues. Once found, the ear cartilage
should be cut as close as possible to the skull. Pull the pelt lower and the connective tissue




around the eyes should become apparent. This tissue should also be cut close to the skull. (If
either the ears or the eyes are difficult to locate, you can clean off your gloves, to keep the fur
clean, and feel the head inside the pelt to determine the correct location for the cut.). If done
properly, no fur should be left on the carcass around the ears or eyes. The pelt is pulled down
again, finally exposing the loose flesh around the lips. Now free the pelt from the carcass by
cutting around the lips and through the nose cartilage near the pelt. The pelt is now ready to be
fleshed or rolled fur side out and frozen in a plastic bag.

Fleshing Cased Furs
Fleshing is the act of removing the muscle and fat from the skin. Check with your fur buyer
before the season; some buyers prefer to buy un‐fleshed pelts to be fleshed by a professional.

Before the pelt is ready to be fleshed, its fur should be dry and free of any mud or burrs. If the
pelt is frozen, it should be removed from the plastic bag and thawed completely but slowly
(don’t leave it next to a stove or heater). Unfrozen pelts with a lot of fat, such as raccoon, skunk
or opossum pelts, should be allowed to hang fur side in to cool until the fat stiffens or hardens.

The fleshing job is made easier by using a fleshing beam or fleshing board as described
previously. The trapper should try to match the shape of the beam or board with the type of
fleshing tool used. One‐handed scrapers, hog scrapers and two‐handed scrapers with a straight
blade work well on the flatter beams and boards. A two‐handed scraper with a curved blade
works well on a rounder beam or board. Regardless of the equipment used, care should be
taken not to apply too much pressure on the pelt. This could cut the hide or the roots of the fur
and lower the value of the pelt.

                                                 90
To start fleshing, the pelt is slipped over the fleshing beam or board with the fur side in. If the
animal has a tail that is left on the pelt, the tail is usually fleshed first. It is important that all the
fat be cleaned from the tail because if any is left on it may spoil or get into the fur.

Many trappers like to flesh a narrow strip around the bottom of the pelt after fleshing the tail.
Next, start at the head and flesh a strip down the length of the pelt. The pelt is turned or rotated




on the beam or board so that the trapper can flesh another strip alongside the first strip. The
pelt is turned until all of it has been fleshed. A sharp knife can be used to trim around the lips,
eyes and ears. Forelegs should also be checked for fat and fleshed if necessary. A clean dry rag,
feed bag, hardwood sawdust, or a paper towel can be used to soak up extra grease or loose fat.
Some furbearers, especially red fox and weasel, will only have a small amount of flesh or fat on
the pelt and it will only be necessary to scrape where the trapper sees flesh or fat.

Stretching or Boarding Cased Furs
After a pelt is fleshed, it must be held in the proper shape by a drying board or stretcher until
the flesh side of the pelt is dry. There are several different types of stretchers. For many species
such as muskrat, raccoon, opossum, skunk and fox, wire stretchers are highly preferred by
trappers and fur buyers. Wooden stretchers are also used. However,
they should have smooth, tapered and nicely curved edges except
for their base. Remember to use a belly board or wedge with any
non‐adjustable wooden stretcher or the pelt may not come off the
stretcher without being ripped or cut.

The desired shape and dimensions of stretchers can change over
time depending on demands of the fur market.

Wire Stretchers
Cased furs are always arranged on stretchers in such a way that the
forelegs and belly will be centered on one side of the stretcher and
                                                    91
the eyes, ears and back will be centered on the other side. Place the pelt fur side in on the
stretcher, centered as described, and pull the pelt down the stretcher until snug. Wire stretchers
usually have two or more arms that move up and down the stretcher. These arms are attached
(pronged) into the edge of the hide in the center of the stretcher. Muskrat pelts are attached at
the tail and belly portions of the pelt, each on a separate arm. All other cased pelts have the tail
portion of the pelt attached to one arm and the two hind feet attached to the other arm. The
arms are pulled towards the bottom of the stretcher until snug. The pelt is then wiped clean
again and is ready to dry.

Wooden Stretchers
Place the pelt on the board fur side in. Starting below the front legs, push the belly of the pelt
slightly toward the head with your thumbs and at the same time pull the back of it slightly down
towards the tail with your fingers. Keep doing this all the way down to the bottom of the pelt.
This will make the belly shorter and lengthen the back making a better inspection‐area window
yet not thinning the fur

Now, turn the board over with the back of the pelt facing up. With the board sitting this way,
start at the root of the tail to stretch the tail wide and, at the same time, push it towards the
rump to shorten the tail. Do this all the way to the tip of the tail, then work back again. This
makes a better‐looking job of the inspection‐area window and thickens the fur instead of
thinning it, which happens when the tail is stretched out lengthwise.

Now with the pelt placed smoothly and evenly on the board with the tail well cleaned and
opened, it can be fastened to the board with a few tacks or push pins around the skirt and a few
along the edge of the tail. Cut off the lower lip. Let the skin of the front legs stick out free from
the pelt. Do not fold the front legs together nor turn them back inside the pelt as either way can
cause rot and the hair to slip. The back legs of the pelt can be fastened with one or two tacks.

Create an inspection window by trimming away some of the belly fur starting just below the
penis opening (or same general area on females). Trim cautiously and minimally and do not
extend the cut into the flanks.

A belly board should be used with the one‐
piece drying board. The belly board is 5/16"
by 5/16" by 30" and sloped or tapered from
one end to the other so it can be removed
after the pelt is dry. Place the smallest end
between the drying board and the pelt on
the belly side and push it ahead until the
belly board goes up to the head of the pelt.
Again wipe the pelt clean. The pelt is now ready for drying.


                                                 92
Drying Cased Furs
After the pelt has been boarded, it should be hung to dry in a place away from the stove,
sunlight or strong hot winds. If it is dried too fast, the leather will be ruined. A temperature of 55
to 60 degrees F (13 to 15 degrees C) is about right. Protect drying pelts from pests such as mice.

The pelts will dry in 24 to 60 hours, depending on the amount of air movement passing through
the drying place. They should be wiped with a dry, clean rag occasionally to take off sweat and
any fat that might work out of the leather. When the pelts have been on the drying board long
enough to dry, they should be taken off and hung by the nose until the head and legs are fully
dry before selling. Cased pelts should not be folded, but should be packed flat, one on top of the
other. Folding makes a crease and takes away some of the good appearance.

Pelts of foxes, coyotes, fisher, marten and bobcat should be turned fur‐side out before final
drying. This is best done after the pelts have been on the stretchers for 24 hours or less and the
leather is dry to the touch but still pliable. Check on the drying pelt repeatedly well in advance of
the 24 hours to ensure the pelt does not become too dry prior to turning. If you wait too long,
turning the pelt will be difficult and could result in damaged or torn leather. If this happens,
moisten the leather with damp rags until it becomes pliable again. Be careful to not over‐
moisten the leather as this could encourage the growth of mold on the leather and reduce the
overall value of the pelt.

Appendix 5 contains specifics for how the fur of each species is prepared, including appropriate
stretcher sizes.

Skinning Open Fur (Beaver)
                             The beaver is the only furbearer in New York that is skinned open.
                             The fur handling process up to skinning is the same as for other
                             furbearers, that is, the animal should be clean and dry. Lay the
                             beaver on its back and stroke the fur from its chin to its tail. Then,
                             use an index finger to mark a straight line from the base of the
                             beaver’s tail
                             to its chin.
                             Be sure the
                             line is
                             straight. Cut
                             along the
                             line from tail
to chin being careful to cut only
through the skin, particularly around
the vent and in the vicinity of the
castors. Then cut off the feet at the fur


                                                  93
line. The tail can be removed in a similar fashion; but most trappers simply cut the skin around
the base of the tail, since it makes an excellent handle.

Start pulling and cutting the skin free from the carcass along the midline cut. Take care not to
cut the castors located on either side of the midline just above the vent (these may be removed
and dried for sale or used in making lures). When the fat layer gives way to a layer of flesh, cut
deeper, leaving the flesh on the pelt. Take care around the legs so that the skin is not cut, and
continue to cut and pull the pelt free. When the skin is loose from the underside of the animal,
flip it over and complete the skinning job. Take care around the lips, nose, eyes, and ears. On
beaver, the ears are connected to the skull by a cartilage and a boney canal. Carefully cut at the
base of the cartilage. Then skin out the rest of the upper jaw and nose. After the pelt is free, it is
ready to be fleshed and dried or frozen. To freeze a beaver pelt, fold the pelt in half (leather side
to leather side), roll the pelt up, place in a heavy plastic bag and freeze.

Fleshing Beaver Pelts
As mentioned earlier, the fur of beaver pelts should be dry and free of mud and burrs and the
fat should be cooled until it stiffens or hardens. Since beaver pelts are skinned open, they can’t
be placed on a fleshing beam or board like other pelts. However, a leg hole can be slipped over
the tip of the fleshing beam or board. Then the area around each leg hole can be fleshed strip by
strip as mentioned in fleshing cased furs. Next, place the pelt on a beaver stretching board by
first fastening the nose with a nail (close to the edge of the pelt), then draw the tail tight and
fasten it with another nail. The pelt is stretched as wide as it will go and fastened with two more
nails. Finally, draw the pelt tight and fasten with four more nails, each halfway between the first
four.

Using a two‐bladed fleshing knife (one blade is dull, the other sharp), flesh a strip around the
sides of the beaver. The remaining muscle, grizzle and fat can be fleshed either from the tail,
head and sides to the center of the pelt, or if the muscle, grizzle and fat can be separated from
the center of the pelt, it can be fleshed in strips from the center. On some sections of the pelt,
fat will be easily fleshed; however, in many areas fat and flesh may have to be cut free from the
pelt with a sharp knife (especially around the tail and head). As mentioned earlier, a clean dry
rag, feedbag or a paper towel can be used as needed to soak up extra grease or loose fat.

Boarding Beaver Pelts
Beaver pelts are dried in an oval shape on a large sheet of heavy plywood or a board made from
smooth lumber. Templates are available to give the basic shapes of various sized beaver.
Commercially available, adjustable metal wire hoops may also be used.

It is usually better to try to estimate the best length and width of the beaver pelt before nailing
it to the board. In order to do this, hang the pelt by the nose and measure its length (don’t pull
on the pelt when measuring). Take this initial measurement and divide by ten. This smaller
number plus one inch is then subtracted from the initial measurement to determine the length

                                                 94
of the pelt, and the smaller number is again subtracted from the length to determine the width
of the pelt. For example, if the pelt measures 30" from the tip of its nose to the tip of its tail
when it is hanging, then 30 divided by 10 is 3. Therefore, the pelt’s length would be 26" [30‐
(3+1)] and the width would be 23" (26‐3).

To correctly dry the beaver
pelt, first remove the nose
and lips from the pelt. Center
it on the drying board. Then
fasten the head end of the
pelt by driving a nail through
the pelt (about 1/8 inch from
its edge) into the board.
Next, fasten the edge of the
tail portion of the pelt the
length distance from the
nose. The middle of both
sides is then fastened the
width distance apart. The
pelt should still be a little
loose and not stretched tight.
Draw the pelt out and fasten
with four more nails, each
halfway between two of the
first four nails. These first
eight nails should now form
the outline for the pelt’s
round or oval shape.
Continue fastening the pelt
onto the board by nailing one
side midway between two
existing nails, then going to
the opposite side of the pelt
for the next nail. Maintain this pattern until there is no space between nails greater than four
inches. Then fill in these spaces with nails about an inch apart. Leave the nails sticking up at least
one inch. The leg holes of the beaver should not be left hanging open. They give the pelt a
rough look and could cause a loss in value. Pull the sides of each leg hole together and close
them with two to four nails.




                                                 95
Now the nailing is completed and should look like the illustration. The pelt should be wiped or
washed clean of any bits of fat, grease or blood still on the leather. The pelt can be raised on the
nails to let air underneath for more complete drying.

Drying Beaver Pelts
As with all other types of pelts, beaver should be dried slowly in a cool place away from the
stove, hot sunlight or hot, strong winds. As it dries, it should be wiped from time to time with a
clean, dry rag, to take off any fat coming out of the leather. When the pelt is thoroughly dry,
carefully pull out the nails and take the pelt off the board. Brush out the fur until it is clean and
shiny. Some trappers leave pelts on boards until just before selling since they have a tendency
to shrink after being taken off the board.

Storing Pelts
After the pelt is completely dried, it can be removed from the stretcher and stored. Most
trappers try to hang their pelts in a dry place away from excessive heat and where they cannot
be damaged by animals. Be sure to wipe off any grease that might sweat out of a hide and don’t
let grease get on the fur of any hide. Store fur to fur or leather to leather. They may be rolled up
end to end for shipping, but, if at all possible, it is best to keep them flat.

Marketing
The trapper has several options for how to sell furs. If you are lacking in fur handling skill or
don’t have the space or time to do it properly, animals can be sold un‐skinned or in the round.
Check with your local fur buyer before using this approach to ensure that he or she will purchase
animals in this condition. Selling in the round generally means you will be paid less money for
your furs as they will require considerable work on the part of the fur buyer to process for
further sale.

Selling the hides “green” is another option. With this approach, the trapper skins the animals
that are caught but does not flesh or stretch them. The green furs are sold as they are caught or
rolled up fur side out, placed in plastic bags and frozen. When the trapper is ready to sell, the
furs are removed from the freezer and thawed prior to being brought to the buyer or auction.
Again, lower prices will be paid for green fur as they will need to fleshed and stretched before
they are sold again.

Most trappers prefer to sell their furs fleshed and stretched, taking as much pride in their ability
to properly prepare a pelt as they do in catching the animal it came from. This method offers the
trapper the most flexibility in selling the pelt as properly dried furs can be stored for longer
periods of time. This allows the trapper to sell the pelts at the time of his or her choosing.
Properly handled pelts are the final step to becoming a responsible and successful trapper.

Furs can be sold to local or “country” fur buyers, at local auctions organized by various trapper
organizations or at larger auctions with buyers from around the world.
                                                  96
Country buyers are still found in many areas of the state. An advantage of country buyers is that
the trapper gets to deal with the buyer personally. Most will work closely with beginning
trappers and make suggestions on how to produce a better finished pelt.

Local auctions are another good option. Generally held in the late fall and early spring, these
sales tend to attract a number of fur buyers. Most local auctions charge a small commission on
the sale of the pelts. An advantage of this approach is that buyers compete with one another,
often increasing the price the trapper can receive for his furs. Another advantage is the option
to “no sale” the furs if the trapper is not happy with the offered price. At a local auction, the
beginning trapper gets to see a large volume of furs handled by other trappers. This allows the
beginner to compare different pelts, how they were handled, and the prices offered for these
different pelts. Local auctions are a great venue for beginners to meet and talk to other
trappers, furthering their knowledge.

Finally, larger international auction houses are another option. These outfits typically employ
agents who travel routes around the state with several stops where they pick up furs from
trappers. Though these auction houses generally charge a higher commission, this is often offset
by higher prices being paid for the furs due to the intense competition between buyers from
several different countries. Information about these options is often available in magazines that
cater to the fur harvesting community. Upon sale of the furs and in addition to a check, the
trapper is given a detailed accounting of each pelt, how it was graded, and what price it sold for.
This can be a great learning tool for the beginning trapper who generally ships few pelts and can
match the sale information to the individual animal. The international auction house also
provide a wealth of fur handling and grading resources for free on their respective websites.




                                                97
         Appendix 1 Traps, Sets, & Attractors
    Furbearer               Traps                           Sets                          Bait & Lure

Coyote          Review BMP materials and       Dirt‐hole, flat, post            Bait: Covered meat or fish
                Chapter 9 for preferred trap                                    Lure: Fox or coyote lure,
                types and sizes                                                 urine
Red Fox         Review BMP materials and       Dirt‐hole, flat, post            Bait: Covered meat or fish
                Chapter 9 for preferred trap                                    Lure: Fox lure, urine
                types and sizes

Gray Fox        Review BMP materials and       Dirt‐hole, flat, post, cable     Bait: Covered meat, eggs,
                Chapter 9 for preferred trap   restraints                       fish
                types and sizes                                                 Lure: Fox lure, urine
Beaver          Review BMP materials and       Climb out, scent mound,          Bait: Small sticks of poplar,
                Chapter 9 for preferred trap   channel, open water beaver       willow, cottonwood
                types and sizes                set, under‐ice                   Lure: Commercial or home‐
                                                                                made castor scents
Muskrat         Review BMP materials and       Feedbed, trail, pocket,          Bait: Apples, carrots, ear
                Chapter 9 for preferred trap   runway, float                    corn, turnip, orange peels
                types and sizes                                                 Lure: Musk glands from
                                                                                male muskrats
Bobcat          Review BMP materials and       Dirt‐hole or cubby               Bait: Fish, beaver or rabbit
                Chapter 9 for preferred trap                                    meat
                types and sizes                                                 Lure: Anise, catnip, fish, oil
                                                                                beaver castor, other glands
Mink            Review BMP materials and       Pocket, trail, cubby, channel,   Bait: Chunks of fish or fresh
                Chapter 9 for preferred trap   obstruction                      Muskrat
                types and sizes                                                 Lure: Mink/muskrat musk,
                                                                                Scat, urine, fish oil
River Otter     Review BMP materials and       Otter toilet/latrine or          Bait: Fresh fish or muskrat
                Chapter 9 for preferred trap   channel sets                     Lure: None recommended
                types and sizes

Fisher          Review BMP materials and       Dirt‐hole, cubby,                Bait: Raccoon or porcupine
                Chapter 9 for preferred trap   leaning/running pole             meat, fish
                types and sizes                                                 Lure: Fisher musk & urine,
                                                                                beaver castor, skunk essence
Marten          Review BMP materials and       Cubby, leaning/running pole      Bait: Chunks of meat or fish,
                Chapter 9 for preferred trap                                    strawberry jam
                types and sizes                                                 Lure: Skunk essence



                                                98
    Furbearer               Traps                          Sets                       Bait & Lure

Weasels         Review BMP materials and       Cubby, traps in boxes or     Bait: Bloody meat or rabbit
                Chapter 9 for preferred trap   hollow logs                  Lure: Weasel gland scent
                types and sizes

Striped Skunk   Review BMP materials and       Dirt‐hole, cubby             Bait: Fresh or tainted meat,
                Chapter 9 for preferred trap                                fish, or eggs
                types and sizes                                             Lure: Fish oil, skunk musk,
                                                                            Anise, honey
Opossum         Review BMP materials and       Dirt‐hole, cubby             Bait: jelly, jam fruit, meat,
                Chapter 9 for preferred trap                                eggs, cheese, fish
                types and sizes                                             Lure: Not necessary
Raccoon         Review BMP materials and       Pocket, cubby, spring run,   Bait: Chunks of fish or
                Chapter 9 for preferred trap   cage, dirt‐hole              muskrat
                types and sizes                                             Lure: Fish oil, anise, honey,
                                                                            hard candy




                                                99
         Appendix 2 Tracks of New York
         Furbearers




         Beaver                     Bobcat                          Coyote                           Fisher
Front-2”W 2”L, Rear-4”W 6”L   Front/Rear-1.75”W 2”L      Front-2”W 2.5”L, Rear-1.5”W 2”L       Front/Rear-2.5”W 2”L




        Gray Fox                    Marten                           Mink                           Muskrat
   Front/Rear-1”W 1.5”L       Front/Rear-1.5”W 1.5”L         Front/Rear-1.5”W 1.25”L       Front-1”W 1”L, Rear-1”W 2.5”L




                                                       100
          Opossum                             Raccoon                                    Red Fox                River Otter
Front-1.5”W 1.5”L, Rear-1.5”W 2”L   Front-1.5”L 2”W, Rear 1.5”W 3”L         Front-2”W 2.5”L, Rear 2”W 2”L   Front/Rear-2.25”W 2”L




                                               Skunk                                     Weasel

                                     Front-1”W 1”L, Rear 1”W 1.5”L               Front/Rear-.5”W .75”L




                                                             Image Credits - Mary
                                                          Wentz, Silvertip Productions




                                                                      101
       Appendix 3 Scats of New York
       Furbearers




Beaver             Bobcat           Coyote




Fisher                              Marten
                   Gray Fox




Mink                                Opossum
                   Muskrat

                              102
Red Fox                      Raccoon
              Skunk




              Weasel
River Otter




                       103
Appendix 4 Regulations for Body‐Grip
Traps Set on Land
Body‐gripping traps set on land shall not be within 100 feet of a public trail except on Wildlife
Management Areas.

                                                  A body‐gripping trap measuring less than 5 ½
                                                  inches may be set in any manner with or
                                                  without the use of bait. Body‐gripping traps
                                                  measuring 5 ½ inches to 6 inches, set without
                                                  the use of bait, must be set so that no part of
                                                  the trap is 8 inches or more above the ground.




Body‐gripping traps 5 ½ inches to 7 ½ inches set with the use of bait, lure, or other attractants
may only be used as follows:

Four or more feet off the ground




In a container of the following design:
‐trap recessed minimum of 18 inches
‐opening height and width of 10 inches or less




                                                 104
In a container of the following design:
‐opening height 6 inches or less
‐8 inch minimum spring notches
‐trap recessed minimum of 4 inches




You may also build and enclosure of natural materials (e.g. logs or rocks)
‐opening height 6 inches or less
‐trap recessed minimum of 8 inches



In a container of the following design:
‐only one entrance, facing the ground
‐container set so entrance is no more than 6 inches from ground
‐trap recessed minimum of 4 inches




Trappers are reminded to review their “Hunting & Trapping Regulations Guide” annually for
potential changes to these and other regulations and season dates.




                                               105
   Appendix 5 Pelt Preparation
Furbearer     Pelt Preparation                              Stretcher Size ‐ Inches
                                                            Size             Length Base Shoulder Neck
Coyote        Skin cased, split tail. Remove fat and        Large            75      13      9.5         14
               flesh. Pelt immediately. Turn pelt fur Average                70      12      9           13
              side out when skin is dry to the touch Small                   65      11      8           12
Red Fox       Skin cased, split tail. Remove fat and        Large            56      8       6           11.5
              flesh. Pelt immediately. Turn pelt fur        Average          54      7       5           11
              side out when skin is dry to the touch Small                   50      6.5     4.5         10
Gray Fox      Skin cased, split tail, Gray fox have         Large            56      9       6           11.5
              more to flesh than red fox which should Average                54      7       5           11
              be removed. Pelt immediately. Turn            Small            50      6.5     4.5         10
              pelt fur side out when skin is dry to the
              touch
Beaver        Skinned open, flesh well, dried in oval shape by nailing on pattern board, or sewn to
              hoop. If nailed, lift pelt on nails a short time after boarding. This allows air to circulate
              between pelt and board.
Muskrat       Skin cased with tail removed, don’t           Large            22     8        6.5         6
              Over flesh, market fur in                     Average          21     7.5      6           5.5
                                                            Small            20     7        5.5         5
Bobcat        Skin cased, remove claws, remove all          Large            70     10       7           12
              flesh and fat, market fur out                 Average          60     9        6.5         11
                                                            Small            48     7        5           10
Mink          Skin cased, split tail, remove all fat but Large male          40     5        3.25        8.5
              leave saddle, market fur side in              Large female 36         4        3           8

River Otter   Skin cased, flesh well, cut front legs     Large            65       8        6.75       15
              short and sew closed, pin tail in V        Average          58       7.5      6          13.5
              shape, market fur in                       Small            32       7        5          9
Fisher        Skin cased, flesh well, market fur out     Large male       50       8        6          10
                                                         Large female     48       7        5          9.5
Marten        Cased, split tail, market fur side out,    Large male       40       5        3.25       8.5
              little or no fleshing needed               Large female     36       4.5      3          7
Weasels       Skin cased, market fur in, remove          Large            22       3        2.5        5.5
              tail bone but do not split the tail        Average          16       2.5      1.75       4
                                                         Small            12       1.75     1.25       3



                                                   106
    Furbearer       Pelt Preparation                                  Stretcher Size ‐ Inches
                                                                Size         Length Base Shoulder   Neck
    Opossum         Skin cased, tail off, fur side in; because Large         38         8     6     10.5
                    the skin is especially thin, flesh         Average       36         7.5   5.5   10
                    carefully to avoid tears                   Small         32         7     5     9
    Raccoon         Skin cased, tail split scraped. Remove Large             48         10    7.5   12.5
                    all flesh & fat. Market fur in             Average       42         9     6.5   12
                                                               Small         34         8     5.5   11.5

    Striped Skunk Skin cased, flesh well, market fur in       Large      40      8      6           10.5
                                                              Average    38      7.5    5.5         10
                                                              Small      34      7      5           9




Additional information on pelt preparation can be found at:

http://www.furharvesters.com/pelthandling.html

http://www.nafa.ca/wild‐fur/resources




                                                      107
